B003
B003 is 28 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX B003 is in good health with no other major medical problems. B003 states that her TMJ problems began she believes when she was about 18 years of age shortly after she completed her orthodontic treatment of unknown etiology. She gets headaches about a level of 7 in the temporal and posterior head areas. The headaches occur 3 to 4 times per week in the temporal and posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 9, jaw function at 9, diet at 6, disability at 3. She gets left-sided earaches, no tinnitus, occasional vertigo, and no hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her elbows and her wrists. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime. She has had no treatment to date for her jaw problems.

In frontal view, B003 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship appears to be about 3 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline. The chin may be just a little bit off towards the right side of about 2 mm. On profile view, the maxilla appears to be about 3 to 4 mm AP deficient. The chin appears to be about 15 mm AP deficient. The chin neckline is extremely short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined, but the submental area is full. Intraorally, B003 has all of her lower teeth back through the third molars and she has all her teeth in the upper arch back through the third molar on the left side and second molar on the left side. She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side, but just slight Class III on the left side by 1 to 2 mm. She has about a zero over bite relationship. She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. To palpation, she has high moderate to low severe pain over the posterior neck and shoulder areas and moderate pain over the TMJs, retromandibular area, and milder pain over the SCMs. The maximal incisal opening is 45 mm and opening without pain 23 mm. The excursion movement to the right is 5 mm and to the left 3 mm. There is a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 mm higher than the left side. The maxillary and mandibular dental midlines may be about 0.5 mm off to the right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy except the posterior fascial pillars are attached in a little bit of a medial curtain kind of effect causing at least moderate constricture of the oropharyngeal airway. Intranasally, the septum appears to be deviated off towards the right side. The left turbinate is fairly large and the right side appears a little bit more normal at least anteriorly.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except for the maxillary right third molar. She has root canals on the maxillary left second or third molars. The sinuses look reasonably clear and the turbinates appear moderately enlarged. The bony septum looks straight.

Coronal view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side. The left turbinate is hyperplastic and the right one to a lesser extent. The sinuses appear clear.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. There is some deviation of the nasal septum off towards the right side particularly in the cartilage portion of the septum. The left turbinate is moderately enlarged with a decreased airway space. The left side is relatively normal in size.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little anterior beaking. There is decreased vertical and posterior joint space. The articular eminence is relatively shallow. There is a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little bit more arthritic on this side with significantly stronger anterior beaking with a little sclerosis in that beaking. There is decreased vertical and posterior joint space. The articular eminence is moderately shallow.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has moderately good mediolateral width. There are a couple of little pseudocystic areas in the condyle. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly only about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle where the lateral pole is significantly lower than the medial pole. There is decreased joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B003 has a high occlusal plane angle. The oropharyngeal airway does not look too bad, but it appears she is perhaps posturing her tongue forward when this x-ray was taken. The tongue does not look relaxed. The soft palate appears elongated. The maxilla and mandible appear to be retruded.

Basic diagnoses for B003 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction with severe deformation and degeneration.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Class I occlusion. Mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.
Over angulation of lower incisors.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
High occlusal plane.
Hypertrophied turbinates with nasal airway obstruction.
Snoring.
Daytime somnolence.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward.
2.	CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Bilateral coronoidotomies. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft it posteriorly and create a slight anterior open bite to facilitate the restorative dentistry. e.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy. f.	Turbinectomies.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
5.	Restorative dentistry placing veneers or crowns on the anterior 6 teeth to improve length and breadth of the anterior 6 teeth.

