B004
The patient presents for follow-up evaluation. The patient is doing fairly well. She has a splint that she wears and with that she is completely comfortable with no headaches or TMJ pain and has good jaw function. Incisal opening is 45 mm. Excursive movement to the right 5 mm, left 4 mm. With this splint she has no headaches. Without the splint if she goes for about 2 to 3 hours she gets headaches at about a level of 3. If she goes all day without it she develops migraine headaches. To palpation she has some mild tenderness over the shoulders, posterior neck and styloid areas. She has no tenderness over the TMJs nor any tenderness over the temporalis or masseter muscles. She has no earaches, tinnitus or vertigo. Other joints that bother her currently are her knees and her elbows. Her joints are significantly improved since she was placed on Enbrel. She also is taking etodolac. The splint that Dr. XXXX has constructed has significantly improved her. She is seeing a rheumatologist in NY. He has done testing but cannot find any specific disease processes causing her multiple joint involvements. However, she does have multiple joint involvements but it is significantly improved with the current medication regimen. Today I answered all the questions she had. We will see if we can get her set up for an MRI so we can evaluate her TMJ situation.

TREATMENT PLAN: of TMJs.
Update x-rays and evaluate for stability. Consider orthodontic treatment.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. Consider orthognathic surgery.

We might consider total joint prosthesis if there is further deterioration of the TMJs.
Analysis of her cephalometric x-rays from last year, four months ago, and yesterday. With rotation and so forth of the mandible, there is really no significant change in the AP position of the mandible. There is no growth that has occurred in the past year. There is a downward and backward rotation of the mandible about 2 to 3 mm at menton. The bite has opened anteriorly. However, AP-wise the mandible appears to be in the same position. She now is 15 years old and I certainly would not expect any significant growth at this time. However, she does have some significant pathology ongoing in her joints even though her discs are in place. I am concerned that she has an undetermined connective tissue autoimmune disease that is causing slow destruction of her TMJs. It is quite possible that she may require total joint prosthesis to correct her situation.

