B007
B007is 23 years old.
When B007 was 14, he was in school and one day noticed that his jaw locked on him of unknown etiology. He kept it to himself and did not tell anybody about it. He had had previous orthodontics from about the age of 9 through 12 and had a really good bite relationship. Following this incident over time, his bite began to shift and change. He started wearing a splint two years ago but stopped last year without significant relief of his symptoms. Primary concerns that B007 has include the following:

Right condylar resorption.
Bilateral facial muscle pain.
Headaches. Neck muscle pain.
Uneven bite. Difficulties eating and chewing.
B007gets headaches probably 5 out of 7 days during the week at average level of 6 in the temporal and posterior head area bilaterally. He does not have any overt TMJ pain, but has myofascial pain through the jaws that he rates at about a level of 5. He rates his jaw function at 3, diet at 2, disability at 1. He has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo and has questionable hearing loss. The only other joints that really concern him are his knees. He is not aware of clenching or bruxism, but occasionally during the daytime finds he may occasionally clench some. B007 feels that his speech is affected because of his bite relationship.

In frontal view, B007 has a good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. He has some slight asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. The maxillary and mandibular midline are fairly well aligned with each other. The chin may be just slightly to the right about 2 to 3 mm. In profile, he has probably about 4 or 5 mm AP maxillary deficiency and probably about 12 to 15 mm AP mandibular deficiency. The chin neckline is decreased in length, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined. Intraorally, B007 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. The teeth appear nicely aligned and leveled. In the upper arch, B007 has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has just a slight Class II tendency on the right side of about 1 mm in the cuspid area and probably about the same on the left side. He has about a 1 mm vertical over bite relationship. He has a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right cuspid in the maxilla being about 1 mm higher than the left side and in the mandible, the right cuspid is 2 mm higher than left cuspid. As B007bites his teeth together, he hits prematurely on the right side compared to the left side. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy except the uvula is slightly elongated. Intranasally, the right turbinate appears moderately enlarged and the left one appears a little bit more normal at least in the anterior aspect of the nose. The septum may be just slightly off to the right side. On opening, he had an audible pop at about 45 to 50 mm of opening on the right side, but the left side was smooth. He has a closing click at about 40 mm. On excursion, he also had a click in the right joint, but not in the left side. B007 tends to feel more comfortable if he keeps his teeth apart and postures his lower jaw forward slightly.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars. The condyle particularly on the right side appears smaller than the left side. The sinuses look relatively clear. The left turbinate actually appears enlarged compared to the right side. He has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch.

Coronal view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side. The left turbinate actually is quite large and appears to block most of the airway on that side. The right turbinate appears a little bit smaller in size, although the airway is a little bit constricted there as well. The sinuses look clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology with a little sclerosis on top. The articular eminence is moderately steep. There appears to be reasonably good joint space around the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is smaller in size anteroposteriorly and vertically, although there appears to be good cortical bone across the top of the condyle. The articular eminence is moderately steep, but not quite as steep as the opposite side. The joint space may be slightly decreased posteriorly.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good mediolateral width. The joint space looks reasonably good, although could be just slightly decreased at the lateral aspect of the joint. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with just a minimal downward curvature of about 1 mm or so.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost some vertical volume and may be just slightly narrow mediolaterally compared to the opposite side. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. There appears to be greater decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint as compared to the mid portion. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B007's maxilla and mandible both appear to be somewhat retruded. Oropharyngeal airway is about 8 mm at the base of the tongue and about 6 to 7 mm at the soft palate level.

Basic diagnoses for B007 would be as follows:
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with very late reduction.
Rule out left TMJ pathology.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Transverse cant in occlusion with the right maxilla being 1 mm higher than the left side with the mandible being 2 mm on the right compared to the left side. Chin is shifted to the right 2 to 3 mm.
Bilateral myofascial pain affecting predominantly the temporalis and masseter muscles.
Bilateral headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1.5 mm of tooth structure and retract.
3.	Surgery. a.	Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction and level it transversely. c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward in a counterclockwise direction, down grafting it posteriorly, and uprighting the incisors.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

