B009
B009 is 33 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. Dr. XXXX has been treating B009 for psoriasis for the last 9 years. B009 was diagnosed with psoriasis at the age of 13. Primary joint involvement includes her TMJs and perhaps her elbows and possibly her hip joint space. She became aware of having TMJ problems at about the age of 19 of unknown etiology, although likely this is associated with the psoriasis. Primary concerns B009 has at this time include the following:

Severe jaw pain and TMJ pain. Difficulties with jaw function. Difficulties eating.
B009 rates her headaches at a level of 7 that occur bilaterally in the temporal areas. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 7, diet at 4, disability at 6. She had previous orthodontics at the age of 11 through the age of 14. She had head gear, lip bumpers, and full braces. She had her wisdom teeth removed when she was a teenager. At age 29, she had maxillary and mandibular left second molars extracted. She did have physical therapy at the age of 19 for about 4 months. She wore a splint that she received about 4 or 5 years ago that she wore for 5 years. More recently 2 months ago, she received a new splint but this has not seemed to help her.

She takes the following medications:
Cyclosporin.
Birth control pills. Adderall 30 mg q.d.
Sertraline 200 mg q.d.
Synthroid 0.175 mg.
Advil p.r.n. pain.

She gets occasional earaches, but no tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. She is aware of clenching her teeth during the day. During the day, she does tend to hold her lower jaw forward as this seems to probably take some pressure off the joints and decrease some of her discomfort.

In frontal view, B009 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face, but some asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm. The maxillary midline and mandibular dental midline are pretty much on the facial midline. The chin is a little bit deviated off towards the left side probably about 2 to 3 mm.
On profile, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably a couple of millimeters. The maxilla is AP deficient by probably 4 mm. Chin is AP deficient by probably 15 mm. Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not defined. Intraorally, B009 is missing the mandibular left second molar, maxillary left second molar, and all four third molars. She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch, but she does have adequate attached gingiva, although it is quite thin around the centrals and the cuspids. She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. However, in centric relation, as her teeth come together, she tends to shift just slightly towards to the right side into a better occlusion. She has just a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being probably 1 to 1.5 mm higher than the right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. Intranasally, the turbinates are normal in size and the septum is reasonably straight. No evidence of nasal airway obstruction. To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the TMJs, retromandibular area, and moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters, SCMs, and shoulder areas. She has crepitation in both joints. Maximal incisal opening is 42 mm, but opening without pain and discomfort 5 mm. Excursion movements to the right 8 mm, to the left 6 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars and the left maxillary and mandibular second molars. She has significant arthritis in both joints with a greater amount of resorption in the left condyle as compared to the right side.

Coronal view shows that she has small turbinates and bony septum is reasonably straight. Sinuses are clear.
Axial view shows that she has an excellent airway with a straight septum and small turbinates. The maxillary sinuses are clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows severe arthritic changes with significant loss of vertical and anteroposterior dimension of the condyle. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. There is anterior beaking and a pseudocyst in the condylar head. There is decreased vertical joint space.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has erosions and cysts in it with anterior beaking. There are also degenerative changes within the fossa that are evident. There is decreased vertical joint space.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with severe condylar resorption. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with a downward curvature of only 1 to 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic with cryptic formation in the condylar head. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm. There is significantly decreased vertical joint space.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B009has a retruded maxilla and mandible. However, the oropharyngeal airway is reasonable with an AP dimension of about 7 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue. She has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ psoriatic arthritis with severe condylar resorption. Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side 1.5 mm higher than the right side. High occlusal plane angulation.
Crowding in the lower anterior arch.
Over angulation of lower incisors. AP microgenia.
TMJ pain. Headaches. Myofascial pain.
Missing all four third molars and the maxillary and mandibular left second molars.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Keep lateral incisors tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally in case interdental osteotomies are required. b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise rotation. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies. e.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I discussed with her an alternative treatment that would have involved the total joint prostheses to reconstruct the joints, but without correcting the jaw deformity but doing a genioplasty instead.

