B014
B014 is 37 years old and referred by XXXX. Her TMJ problems began when she was about 25 years of age of unknown etiology. Treatments to date include receiving a mago splint by XXXX four months ago that helped a little bit, but did not relieve all of her symptoms. She started orthodontic treatment beginning this month.

B014's primary concerns are as follows:
Sore and stiff jaw.
Right ear pain.
Neck and right shoulder pain. Pain in right TMJ.
Headaches.
B014 gets headaches predominantly on the right side in the frontal, temporal, and top of the head at an average daily level of 6. She rate her TMJ pain at 7, average pain at 7, jaw function at 6, diet at 8, disability at 4. The pain is all on the right side. Other joints that bother her include her right shoulder and left hip. She is aware of clenching at nighttime.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Frontal view shows that the upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm. The mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The maxillary midline is shifted about 2 mm to the left. Chin is pretty much on the facial midline. In profile view, she has fairly good facial balance. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has crowns on the left second bicuspid and molars and on the right molars. She has some mild crowding on the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has crowns in the upper arch and on the right side she has what appears to be a 3 to 4 unit bridge replacing the first molar. She is a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the left side by about 2 to 3 mm. On the right side, she has just a slight Class III occlusal relationship also, but she has a cross bite. She has about a 2.5 mm anterior overbite. Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level. The maxillary left cuspid is about 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. Likewise, in the lower arch, the left cuspid is 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. The upper arch appears to be narrow transversely, more so on the right side, with the posterior teeth being maybe 2 to 3 mm medial compared to the left side, particularly in the cuspid, bicuspid, and first molar area. Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderate in size and the septum is deviated significantly off to the left side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. She has crowns on most of the molar teeth and some of the bicuspids. Turbinates may be moderate in size. The sinuses appear reasonably clear.

Coronal view shows the sinuses are clear, but she has quite large turbinates.
Axial view shows that she has large turbinates and the septum is deviated off to the left side in the cartilaginous portion.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows anterior beaking and some slight decreased posterior joint space, but the vertical joint space looks good. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has anterior beaking and a little flattening on the anterior head in some views. There is some decreased posterior joint space and the vertical joint space appears to be decreased at the lateral aspect of the joint. There appear to be some mild arthritic changes at the lateral aspect of the joint.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. There is some slight decreased lateral joint space, but otherwise it looks fairly good.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good width with a little degenerative changes perhaps at the lateral aspect of the joint and a little bit sclerosis on the top of the condyle. Joint space may be slightly decreased compared to the opposite side and there is some decreased joint space at the lateral rim of the fossa. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B014 has a good skeletal Class I occlusal and skeletal relationship.
Dental model analysis shows that the maxillary midline is shifted about 2 mm to the left of the mandible dental midline. There is an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch and a slight accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. She has a Class III cuspid relationship on the left side being about 2 to 3 mm Class III, but the molars are about 4 mm Class III. On the right side, she is closer to being Class I cuspid, but is about 2 or 3 mm Class III in the molar area but she has a right-sided posterior cross bite.

B014 does have a history of MRSA staph infections.
Basic diagnoses for B014 would be as follows:
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction. Transverse maxillary hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Mandibular right relative hyperplasia. Macroglossia.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Deviated nasal septum.
External nasal deformity.
Right TMJ pain. Right-sided headaches. Right-sided earaches.
Maxillary left and right cuspids are 2 mm posterior to the left cuspids.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Tip the lateral roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for internal osteotomies. Try to rotate the maxillary right second molar palatally to get it better aligned with the first molar. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Consider using a TAD on the right side to try to distalize the teeth in that arch approximately 2 mm to improve lower arch symmetry.
2.	Surgery. a.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla and correct the asymmetry. b.	Right mandibular ramus osteotomy to rotate the right side posteriorly slightly and to make room within the joint to accommodate the articular disc. c.	Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. e.	Nasal septoplasty. f.	Reduction glossectomy. g.	External rhinoplasty.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

