B015
B015 is 15 years and is an self-referral from her mother. B015's TMJ problems may have begun sometime around the age of 13 or even before of unknown etiology. She had headache problems and was referred to XXXX. XXXX made an occlusal splint for her one year and four months ago. He sees B015 about every 3 months and does adjustments. The splint has reduced her headaches somewhat, but she still continues to have some significant issues. She has a significant malocclusion as well. Primary concerns that B015 has at this time include the following:

Clicking in the jaws.
Pain in the ear, right greater than the left.
Teeth do not fit together.
Unable to eat and chew normally.
B015 was diagnosed with neurofibromatosis type 1 at the age of 3 years. Apparently, she has enlargement of her head and may eventually require a stent to drain the area.

B015 gets headaches at about a level of 4 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. About every 2 weeks, she gets more severe headaches at a level of 8. She gets TMJ pain at least two times per week with the right side greater than the left side at about of 3, although it can escalate higher. Average daily pain is 2. She rates her jaw function, diet at 4, disability at 3. She gets earaches, right side greater than left side, occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her knees and her right ankle. B015's headaches are usually worse in the afternoons. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime. The occlusal splint she wears covers all of her teeth back through the first molars, but the second molars are not covered by the splint. The bite is open with the splint.

In frontal view, B015 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is zero. The maxillary midline is a little bit off towards the left side about 1.5 mm. The mandibular dental midline and chin are pretty much on the facial midline. In profile, upper lip is retruded about 2 to 3 mm and chin is retruded probably around 12 mm. Chin neckline is somewhat short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined, but she had some fullness in the submental area. Intraorally, B015 has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. She has adequate attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch, but it is quite thin. She probably has about 3 mm of crowding in the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has an anterior open bite of about 4 mm. She has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the left side by probably at least 2 to 3 mm, but on the right side she may be just about 1 mm Class III. The maxillary left cuspid is about 1 mm or 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. She appears to have an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. She has a cross bite tendency in the bicuspid areas. There is a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 1 mm higher than the left side. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. Intranasally, she has mild enlargement of the turbinates, but the septum appears reasonably straight. I do not see any obvious airway obstruction. She has some mild snoring and mild daytime somnolence. She is not aware of any sleep apnea issues. When she sleeps, she breathes predominantly through her mouth. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the left TMJ but no where else around the head and neck area. The maximal incisal opening is 36 mm, opening without discomfort 26 mm. Excursion movement to the right is 8 mm and to the left 6 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars. The turbinates appear enlarged. Joints may be somewhat arthritic but difficult to tell in these views. She has an anterior open bite. She appears to occlude only on her second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion.

Coronal view shows that she has hypertrophied turbinates, but the bony septum at least appears fairly straight.
Axial view shows that she has some fluid in the right sinus and some thickening of the membrane in the left sinus. The septum is fairly straight. Turbinates are moderately enlarged and may obstruct the airway somewhat.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic. There appears to be loss of vertical volume. The articular eminence is moderately shallow. The posterior joint space is decreased. The condyle looks as though it has significant degenerative changes associated with it. The condyle appears as though there are areas of erosion present.

Right TMJ sagittal view likewise shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes. The articular eminence is slightly steeper on this side compared to the opposite side. There is decreased vertical and posterior joint space. The top of the condyle appears to have areas of erosion associated with it.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost vertical volume. The mediolateral width may be somewhat constricted. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa extends out well beyond the head of the condyle and the inferior curvature is about 3 to 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that also has significant arthritic changes. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa appears fairly broad and it curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. On the condylar head, there are some areas where it looks like there is erosion going on in the condylar elements.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a high mandibular occlusal plane angle. The tongue seems to fill the entire oral cavity. The oropharyngeal airway dimension is about 7 mm at the soft palate area and probably about 8 to 9 mm at the base of the tongue. She does have a little adenoid tissue remaining in the nasopharynx.

Basic diagnoses for B015 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis with articular discs dislocated without reduction (compatible with AICR).
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary slight AP but transverse hypoplasia. Slight Class III cuspid relationship.
Anterior open bite of 4 mm.
Occludes only on the maxillary first molars with all other teeth out of occlusion.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction with prominent mouth breathing. Impacted third molars x4.
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Surgery Stage 1: Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Align the anterior 4 teeth at an elevated occlusal plane level compared to the posterior teeth. Place a step in the arch wire between the cuspids and lateral incisors. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Place brackets on the 2nd second molars, but do not engage the second molars with the arch wire. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them too far forward.
3.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand, advance it forward, and level the occlusal plane. c.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomy. d.	Surgical removal of impacted molars x4.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B015 MRI AGE:	15/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost some vertical volume. The condyle appears a little bit narrow mediolaterally. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. There may be some discal tissue anterior and medial to the condyle. The joint space appears a little bit narrow vertically.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is narrow mediolaterally. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. It is difficult to identify discal tissue, but there may be some anterior to the condyle. The joint space appears a little bit narrow vertically.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is arthritic. There appears to be loss of vertical volume. There is anterior beaking present. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting almost beneath the articular eminence. The disc is short anteroposteriorly. The top of the condyle appears a little bit uneven and the cortical bone is thin. There does not appear to be any significant inflammatory process present. On opening, there is some restricted translation of the condyle and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. In one view, it seems like there may be some degenerative changes on the articular eminence as well.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. It may have lost some condylar volume. There is some anterior beaking present. The joint space may be a little bit decreased. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. There may be a little degenerative change in one area on the posterior slope of the articular eminence. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. There is significant inflammatory response present in the joint. On opening, there is restriction in translation and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction. It could be compatible with AICR. Discs may yet be salvageable, but approaching significant degenerative changes.

