B016
B016 is 38 years old. He had a bone graft to his maxillary sinuses on the upper right side for preparation for an osseointegrated implant. Otherwise, he is in good health with no major medical problems. He takes Lipitor 5 mg daily and also ASA 81 mg daily. He has had an adverse reaction to penicillin. B016 believes his jaw problems began when he was about 17 years old of unknown etiology. He has had previous orthodontics from ages 34 to 38 by XXXX. One year and 10 months ago, is when he had the bone graft to the right maxilla performed by XXXX. He gets headaches about every two weeks about a level of 4 in the frontal and temporal area and on the top of the head. He has pain in the left joint about a level of 2, average daily pain and discomfort at 1, jaw function at 1, diet at 0, disability at 3. To palpation he had some very minimal tenderness over the masseter muscles and the styloid areas. He has no earaches, vertigo or hearing loss but he has a little bit tenderness on the left side. Other joints that bother him include his back and his neck. He is aware of clenching at nighttime and then sometimes during the day. On opening, he has a click in the left joint at about 10 to 15 mm and a closing about 5 to 10 mm. Right joint functions relatively smoothly. Incisal opening is 53 mm. Excursive movement to the right about 5 and to the left 8 mm.

Upper lip length is 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1 mm. There is transverse cant in the occlusion with the right cuspids being about 2 mm higher than the left side and the posterior teeth on the right side being about 4 mm higher than the left side. Maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are pretty much on the facial midline but chin is deviated off to the right side about 10 mm. He is missing the maxillary right second bicuspid and all four third molars. In profile view, the maxilla is retruded about 3 to 4 mm and chin is retruded about 8 mm. He has an end-on Class III occlusion being about 3 mm Class III. He has a vertical overbite of about 1 to 2 mm. He has a left posterior crossbite. The uvula is moderately enlarged but the soft palate is normal. The faucial pillars are moderately constricted but the tonsils are normal. He has moderately hypertrophied turbinates and mild nasal airway obstruction. There is moderate to severe snoring, moderate daytime somnolence and mild to moderate sleep apnea. He has a mild sleep disorder and is predominately a mouth breather.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
There is the presence of all the teeth except he is missing the four third molars and the maxillary right second bicuspid although the space is retained. He has significant alveolar atrophy in the area. Joints look relatively reasonable. He has some prominence of the antegonial notches. The left sinus maybe a little bit cloudy but difficult to tell.

Waters view shows that the sinuses actually do appear quite clear. The bony septum is relatively straight. The turbinates are moderate in size and there may be some decreased airway passage.

Left TMJ tomogram shows some flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of anterior beaking tendency. There is some decreased joint space posteriorly.

B016 Page 2
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that may have a little bit of flattening on top and a little bit of anterior beaking perhaps. The joint space may be a little bit narrow posterior. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Opening view shows good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is some AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency. Occlusal plane is moderately high. Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level of probably only about 4 mm. Somewhat of a decreased airway at the base of the tongue as well. He does carry his tongue low in his mouth. The lower incisors appear to be significantly in lingual inclination.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction. AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency. AP mandibular deficiency. Lingual inclination of lower incisors. High occlusal plane angle.
Class III end-on occlusion.
Missing maxillary right second bicuspid but space remaining. Decreased oropharyngeal airway. Sleep apnea symptoms. TMJ pain. Headaches. Hypertrophied turbinates. Maxillary right alveolar atrophy.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to be sure there is room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level mandibular arch. Try to increase the inclination of the lower incisors. Discs may result in an end-on incisor relationship.
Surgery.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, down graft it posteriorly, level the occlusal plane and expand.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Bone graft to maxillary right second bicuspid alveolar area. Bilateral inferior partial turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. Dental reconstruction with an osseointegrated implant and crown.

B016 MRI EVALUATION AGE: 38/M
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. The lateral pole of the condyle is higher than the medial pole. Articular disc is medially displaced. Decreased lateral joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. The disc appears to cover the condylar head. Joint space appears a little bit better balanced. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little flattening on the superior surface. There is some slight anterior beaking but not too significant. Articular eminence has relatively normal inclination. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint but more medially the disc is in more normal position. A little bit of fluid in the joint spaces. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the articular disc does reduce.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle a with some slight anterior beaking. Articular eminence is relatively normal in inclination. The disc appears to be in position in all view. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the articular disc.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint and medially displaced with reduction on opening. Relatively normal right TMJ architecture.

