B020
B020 is 60 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. B020 believes that her TMJ problems began at about the age of 36 when she had some orthodontics and orthognathic surgery to advance her mandible. She started with orthodontics 27 years and 3 months and finished about two years later. She had the orthognathic surgery 27 years ago and had her jaws wired together for 6 weeks. She developed the joint symptoms following that surgery. She has been in a splint for 24 years. She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 5, jaw function, diet and disability at 7. She rates her headaches at 8 that occur predominantly in the left frontal and temple areas. She has no earaches, tinnitus, but gets some mild vertigo. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime. She has mild snoring and mild daytime somnolence, but is not aware of any sleep apnea issues. She feels that she is predominantly a nasal breather.

She takes the following medications:
Synthroid 0.075 mg q.d.
Clonazepam 0.5 mg q.h.s.
Maxalt p.r.n. migraine.
Menostar Patch ().
Aleve.
Calcium, multivitamins, vitamin D.

She did take Fosamax on and off for about 2years, but has been off it for six months. She only took the oral form. The vitamin D that she is taking is a prescription vitamin D and is 50,000 units every other week.

B020's primary concerns are as follows:
TMJ pain.
Tearing sounds in the joint.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Difficulties swallowing.
Decreased jaw opening.
Snoring and daytime tiredness.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B020 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 25 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the left and the mandible dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned. In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale. The maxilla is AP deficient by probably 3-4 mm. The chin appears deficient by about 8-10 mm. Chin neckline is fairly well defined, although somewhat short in length. Intraorally, B020 is missing a mandibular left bicuspid, but has the rest of the teeth back to the second molars. She has some moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch. She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch. In upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars. She is a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by probably 2 mm and on the left side by probably 4 mm. She has a vertical overbite of about 1 mm. She has a Class III molar relationship on the left side. Transversely, it appears the right maxillary cuspid may be a 1 mm posterior to the left. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the masseter muscles and TMJs. She has crepitation in both jaw joints on opening. Maximum opening is 38 mm, opening without much pain is about 18 mm. Excursion movements are 3.5 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of mandibular left second bicuspid and all four third molars. She has crowns on the left maxillary and mandibular molars and the right mandibular second molar second bicuspid, maxillary first molar second bicuspid. Condyles look arthritic. Sinuses appear relatively clear. There are interosseus wires in the sagittal split areas. Coronal view shows that there is some fluid or a mucous retention cyst in the left maxillary sinus on the floor. Turbinates are moderately enlarged, occupying the main area of the nasal airway. Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the right side. Left TMJ coronal tomograms show that there is sclerosis and arthritis in the joint with a significantly decreased vertical joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 2-3 mm. The condyle appears somewhat narrow in mediolateral width. Right TMJ coronal tomogram shows significant arthritic changes involving the fossa and the condyle. There is decreased vertical joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. The head of the condyle is sclerotic. Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle with severe arthritis. There is significant anterior beaking present. There is decreased vertical joint space. The articular eminence is flatter than normal. Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows that the condyle is arthritic and sclerotic. There is decreased joint space. The articular eminence is relatively shallow. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B020 has AP maxillary deficiency as well as significant AP mandibular deficiency. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5.5 mm at the soft palatal level, but about 7 mm at the base of the tongue.

Basic diagnoses for B020 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with displaced, nonreducing, and nonsalvageable articular discs. Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia. Class II occlusion.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
TMJ pain. Headaches. Myofascial pain. High occlusal plane angle of 17 mm (normal 8 mm).
Sleep apnea symptoms including snoring and daytime somnolence. Probable tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of probably 3 to 4 mm (no models were available as she had a temporary crown on that she was concerned would come loose with impression taking).

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Open 1 mm of space between the upper lateral incisors and cuspids. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies, if they are necessary.
Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward and help correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concept total joint prostheses. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral coronoidotomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B020 MRI AGE: 60/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears small in size with narrow mediolateral width. The condyle appears somewhat sclerotic. Joint space may be somewhat compromised. Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that likewise looks sclerotic and somewhat narrow. Joint space may be somewhat increased on this side. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint, the condyle is not seen and it is not until you get to the mid part that the condyle is obvious. The disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is thickened and quite short anteroposteriorly. There is some anterior beaking on the condyle. The articular eminence is relatively shallow. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. Her fossa is quite broad in width. On opening, there is actually fairly good translation of the condyle with the condyle coming out beneath the articular eminence, but the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic and sclerotic. There is anterior beaking present. There is decreased vertical joint space. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is thickened and quite short anteroposteriorly. There is a little bit of fluid in the joint spaces. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. There appears to bone-on-bone contact.
IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular discs anteriorly displaced without reduction with severe deformation of the articular disc.

