B022
B022 is 22 years old and referred by XXXX. B022's problems began when she was about 16 years old. She was under orthodontic treatment. She had developed some clicking and popping in the jaw joints and headaches and joint pain. She has orthodontics from the age of 14 to 18 and then again they were reinitiated when she was 20 to 21 years old. She currently gets headaches in the posterior head area at about a level of 6. She does not get the headaches very often now as long as she wears her retainers. Without her retainers, the headaches return. Prior to her last round of orthodontics and the current retainers, her headaches were at a level of 8 and were fairly constant at that time. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 6, diet at 4, and disability at 5. She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. B022 is not aware of having any other joint problems, but she does have generalized body aches that affect most of her entire body, but it appears that it is more muscular related. She is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day. With her retainers, however, she has less pain and discomfort than without the retainers.

In frontal view, B022 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24, upper tooth lip relationship is 3. The maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin are reasonably well aligned with the facial midline. In profile view, B022 has a high mandibular plane facial profile. She has normal chin neck length, but the chin neck angle is acute. Chin angle is actually elevated above the chin by about 1 cm. The lower third face appears a little bit elongated. She has fairly good projection of the upper lip, although it may be just slightly deficient in subnasale. Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids. She has the rest of her teeth. The lower incisors are tipped back lingually. In the upper arch, she is missing probably the first bicuspids. She has a slight Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally and about 1 mm over bite. She has a tendency towards a cross bite on the left side. Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy. She has some moderately enlarge tonsils. Fascial pillars are moderately constricted. Intranasally, the turbinates may be just slightly enlarged and the septum appears reasonably straight. B022 does have about 4 mm of lip incompetence. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the masseter muscles, TMJs, and retromandibular area. She states that when she yawns she gets some loud popping in the jaw joints, but with more normal opening her joints seem to function reasonably smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is 47 mm, but with pain. She would open 19 mm without pain. Excursion movements to the right 5 mm, to the left 4 mm. She has Essex retainers.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. She has root canals on the mandibular left first and second molar, mandibular right second molar. There are also crowns on those teeth. The sinuses look reasonably clear, although she may have a mucous retention cyst in the left maxillary sinus. It appears as though she had condylar hyperplasia as the condylar heads and necks are elongated. The bony septum appears fairly straight. The turbinates appear relatively normal in size.

Coronal view shows that she has extremely large mandibular left inferior turbinate. The right side is moderate in size Sinuses look relatively clear.

Axial view shows that the sinuses appear clear. She has an extremely large left turbinate, but the right one looks fairly normal with a passable airway on the right side but not on the left side.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good morphology. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. The discs are extremely thin or the disc is displaced. The condylar head and neck appear elongated vertically. The articular eminence is moderately shallow.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condylar head and neck that are extremely long. The articular eminence is relatively flat. There may be some decreased joint space.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good mediolateral width. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 4 mm. The disc could be anterior and/or medially displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good left-to-right morphology. There is decreased vertical and lateral joint space.
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a bit of a skeletal Class III kind of relationship. She has a high mandibular plane angle, but a fairly low occlusal plane angle.

B022 then presented for further consultation and evaluation. is back. To me it appears that she has medially displaced discs and this may account for her headaches and TMJ pain with perhaps lateral capsule impingement syndrome. We reviewed her concerns and problems and developed a treatment recommendation for her.

Her basic diagnoses are as follows:
Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and medial displacement of the articular discs.
Maxillary vertical hyperplasia.
Mandibular prognathism.
Transverse facial asymmetry with the left side of the mandible 3 to 4 mm more prominent than the right side. Slight Class III cuspid-molar relationship by 2 mm. Low occlusal plane angle. Anterior mandibular vertical hyperplasia. Hypertrophied turbinates. Previously extracted bicuspid from each of the four quadrants.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Nocturnal and daytime clenching

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally as they are currently positioned. b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly 3 mm anteriorly and 4 mm posteriorly to increase the occlusal plane angle. c.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to move the maxilla in a clockwise direction into proper jaw relationship. d.	Anterior mandibular horizontal ostectomy to vertically shorten the mandible and advance the chin approximately 4 mm. e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B022 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. The condyle looks a little bit large mediolaterally but vertically. There may be discal tissue in the joint but it may be an extremely thin disc. The lateral joint space may be a little bit narrowed. It appears the disc may be medially displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit mediolaterally and long vertically. The disc appears to be in a good anteroposterior but is medially displaced. There is decreased lateral joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking it appears. Out laterally, the disc is hard to see. More medially, it appears there is discal tissue present, but it is extremely thin. It is possible the disc might be posteriorly displaced. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows the disc appears to be anteriorly displaced and out laterally it is not really seen. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

In the T2 films, it is possible the disc could be posteriorly displaced. There is a fluid collection in the most posterior-inferior recess of the superior joint space.

In the right TMJ, there is fluid in the anterior-superior joint space.
IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular discs medially displaced, but reduce on opening with hypertranslation of the condyles.

