B024
B024 is 39 years old. We are going to refer B024 to Dr. XXXX.
B024 states that her TMJ problems began when she was about 12 years old on the right side. Her jaw would click at that time. Etiology is unknown. The left side began causing problems when she was about 18 years old. Etiology is also unknown. She did have splint therapy from 14 years ago, but the treatment did not help and actually made things worse. She tried again about 6 years ago with splint therapy, but this also did not help and made her situation worse. B024 rates her headaches at a level of 8 on the right side in the frontal, temporal and top of the head. She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 9, diet at 8, disability at 9. She takes Advil, ibuprofen, and Bayer aspirin as needed for pain. She gets frequent earaches, frequent tinnitus, and frequent vertigo, but she has no hearing loss and no other joints bother her. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime but not during the day. She is allergic to Lortab. Primary concerns that B024 has includes the following:

Pain and soreness in the jaws and jaw joints. Jaws lock and disfigures her face.
Progressive difficulty eating to where her diet is quite limited to tuna fish sandwiches.
Jaws lock whenever she yawns.

In frontal view, B024 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper lip tooth relationship is about 4 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline, although the roots are angled off towards the left side of both centrals. The mandibular dental midline is off to the left side, although the chin is fairly well aligned on the facial midline. In profile, B024 has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Chin appears a little bit retruded being probably about 15 mm AP deficient. The chin neckline is somewhat short. She does have a head forward neck position. Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars present. She has prominent incisor tips on the cuspids. In the upper arch, she has her teeth all the way back through the second molars. She has a Class II division 2 malocclusion and an anterior deep bite of probably at least 10 to 12 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy, although fairly difficult to visualize. To palpation, B024 has some mild tenderness over the right temporalis, right TMJ area. On opening, she has a soft click in the left side at about 20 mm of opening and closing at 15 mm. She hears grinding noises in the right joint. The maximal incisal opening is 38 mm, opening without significant pain 33 mm. Excursion movement to the right 11 mm and to the left 9 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex evaluation shows the presence of all teeth in the upper arch and all but the lower third molars which are missing in the lower arch. Joints look a little bit arthritic with some flattening on the heads and a little bit of anterior beaking. The sinuses look relatively clear. The right turbinate appears slightly larger than the left one. The septum appears reasonably straight.

Coronal view shows the turbinates are significantly enlarged. The sinus are relatively clear. The septum deviates slightly off to the right side.
Axial view shows that the septum actually has a slight deviation anteriorly to the left side. The turbinates are moderately enlarged. The sinuses are clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some sclerosis on the head and anterior beaking. There is decreased vertical and posterior joint space. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some slight anterior beaking. There is decreased vertical and posterior joint space. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow mediolaterally. There is sclerosis on the top of the condyle. There is decreased vertical joint space, particularly at the medial side of the joint with increased joint space out laterally. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow mediolaterally. There is decreased vertical and lateral joint spaces. There could be bone-on-bone contact towards the lateral aspect of the joint. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B024 has a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway is quite constricted with an airway dimension of about 2 mm at the soft palate and about 4 mm at the base of the tongue.

Basic diagnosis for B024 would be as follows:
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and with severe deformation.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated with reduction.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Maxillary posterior vertical hypoplasia but anterior vertical hyperplasia.
Class II Division 2 malocclusion. Anterior deep bite of 13 mm.
Reversed curve of Spee upper arch.
Increased curve of Spee lower arch. Retained maxillary third molars.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 11 mm).
Sleep apnea.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Severe decreased angulation of the maxillary incisors. Malaligned maxillary third molars.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Sleep study.
2. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally for interdental osteotomies. b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
3. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
4. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts. c.	Bilateral coronoidotomies. d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies. e.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy. f.	Extraction of maxillary third molars.
5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B024 MRI AGE: 39/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology, a little sclerosis on the top. The vertical joint space may be slightly decreased. It appears there may be discal tissue anteriorly and laterally displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat and curving downward only about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. The joint space may be somewhat decreased vertically. It appears that there could be discal tissue anteriorly and laterally displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present. There is a little bit of peaking at the top of the condyle. There is decreased superior and posterior joint space. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and laterally displaced. The articular eminence is moderately steep. The disc has fairly good morphology. There is fluid in the superior joint space both anteriorly and posteriorly.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the posterior head and a little bit of anterior beaking. There is decreased vertical joint space. The articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is anteriorly and laterally displaced. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space.

There were no open views available.
IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis with anteriorly and laterally displaced discs.

