B027
B027 is 52 years old and is a self referral. B027 is in good health. Her current history of her problems began on approximately 7 months ago, when she began having dental work done on the mandibular right second molar. The crown was removed and a root canal was performed on 6 months ago and then a permanent crown placed about 10 days later. She has continued to have problems with that tooth. She had developed some inner ear tenderness and saw an ENT doctor who placed her on medications that did not help and actually were painful for her. Four months ago, she had her bite guard adjusted, but this did not seem to help. The following month, the bite guard was adjusted again and she started taking Lodine 400 mg for 10 days which helped initially, but then failed to improve. She was on antibiotics without any improvement. MRI was performed one month ago that shows that she has some inflammation in the right TMJ and what appears to be a medially displaced disc. The MRI was not a dedicated TMJ MRI and so the quality and the abilities to evaluate the joint structures is limited. She has had the mandibular right second molar crown shaved so that the upper tooth will not touch it, but this did not really help her at all. She has what she terms a “sliding” noise in her right TMJ when she shifts her jaw from side to side. Her jaw and ear pain come and go, but this sliding sound is fairly constant. Approximately 1 week ago she developed for 1 day some numbness when she woke up that affected the left side of her face to the lips, left index finger, and neck and shoulder area but this relieved itself eventually. That has not recurred since.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B027 has good facial symmetry and balance. Upper lip length is about 27mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about zero. The maxillary and mandibular midlines are fairly well aligned. The chin may be just slightly to the right side a couple of millimeters. B027 may have just some slight AP mandibular deficiency but nothing real significant. Chin neckline may be just slightly short. Intraorally, B027 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has quite a few crowns on the posterior teeth. In the upper arch, she also has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has basically a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side and on the left side being probably 3-4 mm Class II. She has an anterior deep bite of about 6 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. She reports no nasal airway problems. She reports no snoring, daytime somnolence, nor sleep apnea. She wakes up at night about 3 times because of hot flashes. She is a nasal breather at night. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the right TMJ, but nowhere else around the head and neck area. On opening, she tends to deviate the mandibular a little bit off towards the right side and she has a rubbing or crepitus kind of sound in the right joint area. As B027 opens, her mandible deviates to the right side about 3-4 mm. Incisal opening is about 45 mm. She can open to about 32 mm without too much discomfort. Excursion movement to the right 10 mm, to the left 9 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. She has had significant root canal work done in many of her teeth. She has crowns on practically all of the maxillary teeth and the mandibular first and second molars bilaterally. There is a little bit of arthritic change in the right TMJ. Sinuses appear reasonably clear. Axial view shows that she has some enlarged turbinates with the right side being larger than the left side. Sinuses appear clear. Coronal view shows large turbinates but the sinuses appear relatively clear. There is a little bit of mucous retention cyst in the floor of the left maxillary sinus. Left TMJ coronal tomogram shows that there is a decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint, but otherwise the joint space looks fairly well balanced. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3-4 mm. Lateral joint space is decreased. Right TMJ coronal tomogram shows a condyle that is postured somewhat lateral in the fossa. There appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact. There is erosions on the head of the condyle as well as some degenerative changes in the fossa. There is a little osteophyte sticking up from the condylar head in the mid part of the condyle.
Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows condyles are postured forward slightly in the fossa. There is almost excessive vertical joint space. Condyle may be held forward just a little bit. Anterior joint space appears decreased. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that has some arthritic changes associated with it. There are erosions in the anterolateral aspect of the condylar head. More medially, it is difficult to identify the cortical bone across the top of the condyle. Articular eminence has a mild inclination. There are erosions in the fossa as well as on the condyle. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she is basically a skeletal Class I jaw relationship and Class I occlusion. There is a slight decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension at the base of the soft palate level of about 6 mm and at the base of the tongue about 7.5 mm.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Right TMJ reactive arthritis.
Right TMJ pain. Right ear pain.
Recommended treatment would be as follows:
MRI of left and right TMJs. CT scans of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. Right TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concept total joint prostheses. Right TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).
Application and removal of arch bars.

B027 MRI AGE: 52/F
She does not have a dedicated TMJ MRI but had brain MRI done three months ago and one month ago she had a facial MRI performed. In assessing both of these MRIs, the left TMJ appears relatively normal, although difficult to identify discal tissue. Joint space appears appropriate. On the right side, it appears that her articular disc is medially displaced and perhaps anteriorly displaced as well. She has a significant amount of fluid in the right TMJ. She does have a lot of fluid in the superior joint space indicative of probably a reactive arthritis.

IMPRESSION: Right TMJ inflammation and articular disc medially and possibly anteriorly dislocated.

