B029
B029 is 21 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. She also sees Dr. XXXX.
B029's TMJ problems began when she was about 18 years of age, 3 years ago, of unknown etiology. She developing clicking and popping in her jaw joints, worse on the left side than the right side. It did not give her much problems until about a year ago. Over the last 9 months, she has had two occlusal splints made by Dr. XXXX. The first one she wore through from clenching and bruxism and she is on her second one. The other treatment she has had is TENS treatment. She takes Advil and Aleve for her pain.

She gets headaches at about a level of 5 one to two times per week in her frontal and temporal areas. She rates her TMJ pain at 8, worse on the left side than the right side. Her average daily pain is 6, jaw function of 5, diet at 7, and disability at 3. She has no earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her hips, knees, and ankles, but she is a runner and feels that part of the problem is related to that. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime.

In frontal view, B029 has fairly good balance in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm. The maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The chin may be just slightly to the left side 1 to 2 mm and appears to be just slightly short vertically. In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm and some AP deficiency of probably about 8 mm. The chin neckline is slightly short. She does have a slight head postured forward neck position. Intraorally, B029 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. She has some thin gingiva around the lower anterior teeth including all 6 anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has some mild crowing in the upper anterior arch. She has a slight reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch. She has just slight Class II cuspid relationship on the left side by about 2 mm and on the right side by probably 4 to 5 mm. She has a slight anterior deep bite of about 3 mm. She has a slight asymmetry in the upper arch with the left cuspid about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. In the lower arch, the left cuspid may be about 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy. The tonsils are of moderate size. Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side. The right turbinate is moderately sized and seems to be almost touching against the septum. The left nasal airway looks clear. She has probably has at least moderate obstruction in the right side of her nose, but the left side is open. She has a high pain level over the left masseter and left TMJ area and high moderate pain over the retromandibular areas, right masseter, and mild tenderness over the shoulders. The maximum opening is 41 mm, opening without pain 26 mm. The excursion movement to the right is 6.5 mm and to the left 9 mm. On opening, she had a very early click at about 5 to 10 mm on the right side and a closing click at about 5 mm. On the left side, she sometimes will have a click at 35 to 40 mm and then a closing clicks, but the clicks were not consistent.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. The bony is fairly straight, but clinically the cartilaginous septum is deviated way off to the right side. The right turbinate appears moderately enlarged. There appears to be a little bit of stuff in the right sinus, but difficult to tell on this view. The left condyle appears quite small compared to the right side. She appears to have lost vertical and anteroposteriorly volume.

Coronal view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side. The right turbinate appears significantly enlarged. The left side seems a little bit more normal in size. There appears to be some occluded airway on the right side, but the left side appears open. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Axial view shows that the right turbinate is enlarged. Some thickening of the mucosal lining in the sinus on the right side and to a little bit lesser extent on the left side. The septum appears reasonable straight at this cut and view.

Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that is quite small in height and anteroposterior width. There has been some condylar resorption of this joint. The articular eminence is relatively shallow. The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. There appears to be relatively normal vertical joint space. Most of the condylar head has been resorbed away.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit more normal morphology. There is some anterior beaking. The articular eminence is steeper on this side than it is on the opposite side.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost a lot of vertical volume. Mediolateral width otherwise is moderately good. There appears to be good vertical joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There is decreased joint space out laterally and the vertical joint space seems a little bit compromised as well. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she does have some retrusion of the maxilla and mandible. She has some adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx. Oropharyngeal airway however appears reasonably good with an AP dimension of about 9 mm at the soft palate level and about 7 mm at the base of the tongue. There is some mild increase in the occlusal plane angle. Basic diagnoses for B029 would be as follows:

Left TMJ reactive arthritis with condylar resorption, articular disc dislocation with deformation, non-reducing but still appears salvageable.
Right TMJ milder arthritis but articular disc anteriorly displaced with early reduction. TMJ pain. Headaches. Myofascial pain. Class II end-on occlusion being worse on the right side as compared to the left side. Maxillary arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 2 to 3 mm anterior to the left cuspid.
Probable tooth size discrepancy with the upper lateral incisors being smaller than normal (models were not available to evaluate).

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Consider using a TAD in the maxillary left side and advance the left cuspid forward approximately 2 mm along with the posterior teeth. This will help with the angulation of the upper incisors. In addition, open some spacing between the upper laterals and cuspids of about 1 mm on each side to correct for the probable tooth size discrepancy. b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to establish a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B029 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows condyle that appears somewhat small and arthritic. The lateral rim is quite flat. It appears that there is discal tissue anterior to the condyle. The head of condyle appears quite sclerotic and narrow mediolaterally.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little better normal size to it. There is fairly good width. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat, but not as flat as the opposite side.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite small anteroposteriorly and appears to have lost vertical volume. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting almost beneath the articular eminence. The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle and it appears that the disc does reduce, but it is a light reduction. It appears that there is reduction on wide opening.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with a little better morphology, but a little bit of sclerosis in the head and a little bit of anterior beaking present. The articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and there appears to be an earlier reduction of the disc on the right side.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocation with late reduction.
Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction.

