B032
B032 is 49 years old. B032 recalls that she had problems with her jaw joints in her teenage years. She did have orthodontics from the age of 12 to 16 which included head gear which she wore 24 hours a day plus she had extraction of her maxillary lateral incisors and her mandibular first bicuspids. She also had her third molars removed. The etiology of her joint problems is unknown. Her bite was off so in 3 years and 5 months ago she began orthodontic treatment in preparation for mandibular advancement. The orthodontics was done by Dr. XXXX. Ten months ago, B032 underwent bilateral sagittal split osteotomies to advance the mandible. One week later, her dog hit her in the jaw and apparently fractured her rami bilaterally. Initially, it was not diagnosed. Finally, three months after the initial surgery, bone plates were placed and one week later they became displaced again. She was taken back to surgery the next week, and longer larger bone plates were placed and her jaws were wired together for six weeks. Since then, she has been maintained on Class II elastics to try to control her occlusion. B032 rates her headaches at a level of 7 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 10, jaw function at 8, diet at 9, and disability at 7. She gets severe earaches, but no tinnitus, vertigo, but she has developed increased hearing sensitivity. Her joints are hyperflexible and she has no other joint involvement. She has been diagnosed with having atypical scleroderma, optic nerve neuritis, and Raynaud's syndrome. She was put on a mixture of medications that caused her kidneys to shut down. She was on dialysis for about 3-1/4 years. She then took what is call Puva treatments that seemed to help her significantly. B032 apparently has recently developed some iritis and dryness of her eyes similar to Sjogren's syndrome. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and she also is aware of clenching during the day. She has total anesthesia to the lower lip and chin area. She has some frontal nerve weakness.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B032 has some slight facial asymmetry. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. She has a fullness in the upper lip and she has had a previous fat graft done there. The nasal tip is off to the right side about 3 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline also is fairly much on the facial midline. The chin may be just slightly off to the left side a couple of millimeters. Upper tooth lip relationship is 1 mm on the right and 0 on the left. Right mandibular ramus may be about 3 mm transversely more prominent than the left side. In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 mm. The chin is retruded about 20 mm. She has an extremely short chin neckline, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. She has eversion of both the upper and the lower lip. She has a lip incompetence of almost 10 mm. With the lower lip relaxed, she has about 7 to 8 mm lower incisor tip to lower lip relationship. The height of her lower lip is almost at the gingival margin. Intraorally, B032 is missing probably the lower first bicuspids. She does have her lower four incisors and cuspid. Occlusion is very flat indicative of either equilibrations or ___________. She has adequate attached gingiva along the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she is missing upper lateral incisors and has the cuspids apparently pulled into the lateral incisor position and they have been reshaped. She has a slight anterior open bite of about 1 mm. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship by about 2 mm. There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1 to 1.5 mm higher than the right side. B032 chews predominantly on her left side and not on the right side. Her open bite in centric relation may actually be closer to 2 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy. To palpation, she has moderate to high moderate pain through most of the head and neck area and actually relatively severe pain through her posterior neck and shoulder areas to palpation. Joints function reasonably smoothly, but as she opens she deviates about 3 to 4 mm to the left. The maximal incisal opening is about 29 mm, opening without significant pain 14 mm. The excursion movements surprisingly were about 7 mm in each direction.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Scleroderma. Left TMJ severe arthritis with articular disc degeneration related to scleroderma.
Right TMJ arthritis, condylar displacement, and medial displacement of the articular discs.
Previous orthognathic surgery to include bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies for mandibular advancement.
Bilateral mandibular ramus fractures from trauma that occurred a few days post surgery. Two subsequent surgeries to try to fix the fractured rami.
Severe malposition of the proximal segment of the left mandibular ramus and condyle.
Significant malposition of proximal segment due to previous fractures.
Severe mandibular hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia. High occlusal plane angle.
Severely reduced oropharyngeal airway of 3 mm (normal dimension is 11 mm).
Missing maxillary lateral incisors and mandibular first bicuspids. Anterior open bite of 2 mm.
Class II end-on occlusion.
TMJ pain.
Headaches. Myofascial pain.
Sleep apnea symptoms. Deviated nasal septum blocking off the left nasal airway.
Bone plates and screws in the left and right mandibular rami.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
2. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch. b.	Continue to align and level mandibular arch.
3. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses with repositioning of the severely displaced mandibular left proximal ramus section. b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies. e.	Nasal septoplasty. f.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy. g.	Removal of previously placed hardware including bone plates x2 and bone screws x10.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B032 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a joint that has a very arthritic condyle. There is increased superior joint space. There is a divot in the center of the condyle. There appears to be loss of vertical volume of the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has better morphology than the opposite side, although still may have lost a little bit of vertical volume but not nearly as much. There may be some discal tissue medial and anterior to the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is arthritic with significant anterior beaking and loss of the volume. The condyle is positioned downwards and forwards in the fossa with a inflammatory response in the joint area. The disc is anteriorly positioned and sitting beneath the articular eminence, but appears degenerated and extremely thin. The articular eminence is moderate in angulation. The patient has some fluid in the joint and almost looks somewhat cystic. The condyle is positioned quite a ways down and forward in the fossa. On opening, there is slight translation of the condyle but not much. The articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ shows a condyle that a better morphology, but may have an osteophyte sticking up posterior behind the articular disc. The disc appears to be in reasonable position except the whole condyle and discal component are positioned forward in the fossa. The posterior band of the disc appears somewhat degenerated. There is some translation and is slightly better than the opposite side. On opening, the disc does move with the condyle in a reduced position.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction and with significant deformation. Condyle significantly anteriorly positioned in the fossa.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc medially displaced but with a condyle positioned significantly forward in the fossa. B032 I-CAT

Left TMJ shows a condyle that is quite arthritic. There seems to be some increased joint space. However, there is one area where there appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact in the medial side which is probably forward on the articular eminence. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle has better morphology, although a little bit sclerotic on the top of the condyle. Over medially, there appears to be some decreased joint space in the area of the articular eminence. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Sinuses appear relatively healthy and clear. She has a deviated septum off towards the left side with a bone spur extending further towards the lateral nasal wall. Left turbinate appears quite large and it appears it may be obstructing the airway significantly. The right turbinate appears to have better morphology. There are some bone plates in the ramus of the mandible.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. The nasal septum is deviated significantly towards the left side with a large spur and appears to be some major obstruction to the left side of the nose. The turbinates are moderate in size with the left one being the largest. The left condyle is smaller and more arthritic appearing than the right side.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is postured somewhat forward in the fossa, but not quite as far as in the MRI. There is increased vertical joint space and posterior joint space, although the anterior joint space is fairly narrow particularly towards the medial side of the joint. The articular eminence is moderately steep. She has a bone plate on the mandible that extends from up in the coronoid process down along the ramus of the mandible. Oropharyngeal airway appears quite narrow at the soft palate level where there may be only 2 or 3 mm of airway space. At the base of the tongue, she probably has about 4 to 5 mm of airway space. She has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.

Left TMJ coronal view shows that she has advanced arthritis in the condyle with significant anterior beaking and decreased joint space between the beak and the articular eminence where there could be almost bone-on-bone contact. The condyle is postured significantly forward and downward relative to its normal position in the fossa. The articular eminence is fairly elongated and comes down almost to the sigmoid notch area. She has a bone plate that extends through the entire ramus down into the posterior body area of the mandible and some additional screws in the ramus as well. She demonstrates significant lip incompetence. The lower lip is extremely everted and well below the lower incisor tips.

PANOREX: The patient is missing all four third molars and there is one bicuspid missing in each quadrant. Bone plates extend down on the left side from the ramus down onto the posterior body with four screws. There are some wires and an additional screw in the ramus. It appears that there was a fracture through the mid portion of the ramus with the superior aspect of the ramus and condyle rotated significantly forward of the rest of the mandible. The styloid process extends down on that side and is visible posterior to the forward rotated proximal segment. On the right side, there is a bone plate that extends from the base of the coronoid process downward with six screws in that plate and two additional screws in the ramus area.

3-D rendering shows that the right condyle is postured forward in the fossa. There is a large plate on the ramus area where it appears there was a fracture through the superior aspect of the ramus and maybe also at a lower level as well. There are two screws in addition to the bone plate in the anterior aspect of the ramus. On the left side, there is a significant upward and forward rotation of the proximal segment where it appears there was a fracture through the ramus. The coronoid process is actually rotated through and above the zygomatic arch. The condyle appears severely arthritic and postured way forward in the fossa. There is a bone plate in this ramus, but there may be a nonunion through the fracture site with a wire and a bone screw positioned anteriorly as well.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis being significantly worse on the left side as compared to the right side. Bone plates bilaterally in the mandibular ramus areas extending into the posterior body. High occlusal plane angle.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension estimated at approximately 3 mm. Fracture through left ramus with displacement upwards and forwards of the proximal segment. Possible nonunion in the left ramus area.

