B033
B033 is 60 years old. She is referred by Dr. XXXX,. She has had orthodontic treatment by Dr. XXXX. Her physician is Dr. XXXX.
B033 is in good health with no major medical problems. Primary concerns she has include the following:

Severe overbite problems that are congenital in nature.
Headaches.
TMJ pain. Myofascial pain.
B033 first became aware of having jaw and headache problems about 10 to 12 years ago of unknown etiology. She wakes with headaches and usually goes to sleep with headaches. She did have orthodontics from the age of 55 for approximately 2 years. She gets headaches predominantly in the temporal areas at a level of 7. She rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 3, diet at 5, disability at 4. She takes the following medications:

Tylenol.
Advil.
Ibuprofen, all for headache control.
She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor hearing loss. She does get occasional vertigo. No other joints bother her. She may clench particularly at night time. She may have some moderate snoring. She has moderate daytime somnolence. Occasionally, she will wake up with difficulties catching her breath.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B033 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is -2 mm. The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the left. The maxillary midline is maybe about 1 mm off to the left. The chin is fairly well on the facial midline. In profile, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of about 3 mm and AP mandibular deficiency of 5-6 mm. The chin neckline is just slightly short. She has prominent gonial angles with a brachiocephalic morphological profile. Intraorally, she is missing mandibular right first molar and has the rest of her teeth back around through the lower left second molar. The teeth appear a little bit smaller in size. Actually, her mandibular dental midline is shifted just slightly towards the right side about 1 mm and it is probably about 2 mm off to the right side. She has a Class II cuspid relationship on the right side and closer to Class I cuspid relationship on the left side. She has an anterior deep bite of probably about 5 to 6 mm. Oropharyngeal structures look healthy and the soft palate and uvula appear to be normal in length. There is mild to moderate discomfort over the temporalis muscles and the left posterior neck area. Joints seems to function fairly smoothly on opening, but on excursion movements she did have a pop in the right joint area. Intranasally, at least clinically, the turbinates in the front appear to be just mildly enlarged. The septum may have some slight deviation to it.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the mandibular right first molar with a maintained space. She has root canals on all the lower four incisors and the right cuspid. She has a crown on the mandibular left first molars. She also has crowns on her lower anterior six teeth. It is difficult to evaluate the joints in this view. The sinuses appear reasonably clear. The turbinates appear moderate in size with the left side perhaps giving a little bit more obstruction than the right side.

Water's view shows that she has moderately enlarged turbinates. The sinuses appear relatively clear.
Axial view shows that the turbinates are of moderate size. Sinuses appear relatively clear. The septum appears reasonably straight.

Left TMJ coronal tomogram shows that the medial pole is lower than the lateral pole. There appears to be some decreased joint space. There is decreased space at the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ shows an exaggerated inferior position of the mediolateral pole compared to the lateral pole. The joint spaces appear somewhat narrow. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears fairly good size. There is some flattening on the anterior head. There could be some what looks like decreased vertical and posterior joint space.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that looks slightly larger. There is a small amount of anterior beaking present.
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a slight Class II skeletal relationship. Functional oronasal airway is about 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 7 to 8 mm at the base of the tongue. She has a low mandibular plane, low occlusal plane angle facial morphology. She has some vertical maxillary deficiency. Oropharyngeal airway space measures 5 mm at the soft palate level and 6 mm at the base of the tongue. She appears to be short in the vertical anterior mandibular vertical height.

Basic diagnoses for B033 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly and laterally displaced. AP maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Class I occlusion on the left side, Class II occlusion on the right side.
Arch asymmetry with the maxillary left cuspid being 2-3 mm posterior to the right cuspid and in the mandibular arch the right cuspid is 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.
Mandibular dental midline shifted 2 mm to the right of the facial midline and maxillary midline shifted 1-2 mm to the left of the facial midline.
Missing mandibular right first molar.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5-6 mm (normal is 11 mm).
TMJ pain. Headaches. Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Medications: Klonopin 1-mg tablet, 1 tablet q.h.s. to decrease nocturnal clenching.
2. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Try to shift maxillary midline to the right about 1 mm and advance the left cuspid 1-2 mm and retract the right cuspid 1-2 mm. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Shift mandibular dental midline to the left approximately 2 mm. Advance the maxillary right cuspid approximately 1-2 mm and retract the left cuspid 1-2 mm. c.	May need to use TADs to function as anchors in correcting the arch asymmetries.
3. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. b.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward. c.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and correct any transverse problems that may be present.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
5. Definitive restorative dentistry that may include an osteointegrated implant in the mandibular right first molar area and reconstruction of crowns.

B033 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There is some sclerosis on top of the condylar head. The lateral rim curves inferiorly a relatively minimal amount. It appears that the discal tissue may be anteriorly displaced. The medial pole is significantly lower than the lateral pole of the condyle. The disc is laterally displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat broad compared to the opposite side. There is decreased lateral joint space. There appears to be discal tissue that is laterally displaced as well as anterior. The medial pole of the condyle is significantly lower than the lateral pole. The right condyle is significantly larger than the left condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology, although there is some flattening and a little sclerosis on the anterior head of the condyle. The disc appears to be laterally displaced as well as anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint. More medially, the disc appears to be in a little bit better position, although the disc appears a little bit more degenerated towards the medial side of the joint. The articular eminence is moderately steep. There is fluid at the lateral aspect of the joint in the superior compartment. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the articular disc with the disc in a reduced position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening anterior but not too much. However, mesially the disc is not seen as readily as it is towards the lateral aspect. It actually appears fairly prominent at the lateral aspect of the joint. There is fluid at the lateral aspect of the joint with the disc displaced laterally. There is good translation of the condyle and articular disc with the disc in good position.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly and laterally displaced. The anterior displacement of the disc is at the lateral aspect of the joint. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly and laterally displaced. The anterior displacement of the disc is at the lateral aspect of the joint. Discs appear salvageable.

