B036
B036 is 33 years old. Referred by Dr. XXXX. B036 is in relatively good health except for allergy problems and some sinus factors as well in addition in her TMJ situation. She had some initial episodes when she was about 15, 16 and 17 years of age where she had some episodes of pain and discomfort around the jaw areas. However, it was not until she was about 24 years old that she was diagnosed has having TMJ problems. The etiology is unknown. She was diagnosed with TMJ 9 years ago. Since then, she has been on splint therapy and has had 3 splints altogether with occasional adjustments, although for the past year she has had no adjustments. Her headaches on the average are on about a level of 2 and are primarily in the frontal area, but if she chews any kind of any food with any substance the headaches can easily go up to a 7. Her TMJ pain she rates as 5, average daily pain at 4, jaw, diet, and disability at 8. She gets earaches, occasional tinnitus, and vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her neck and her left ankle, but her ankle is due to an injury. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time and also during the day. She also is aware of having changes in her speech.

She currently takes the following medications:
Omnaris nasal spray. Multivitamins.
Viactiv calcium.
Advil.
Primary concerns that B036 has include the following:

TMJ pain. Headaches. Difficulties eating and chewing. Bites only on her very back teeth. Speech changes.
Has to stay on a soft diet. Affects her singing abilities as she is a singer and performer. Fatigue in the jaws.
Difficulties breathing through her nose.

CLINICAL EVALUATION. In frontal view, B036 has reasonably good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4.5 mm. The maxillary midline may be about 1 mm off to the left. The mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline and the chin is slightly to the left about 2 mm. In profile view, B036 has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably 3-4 mm. She has a lip incompetence of about 12 mm. She shows probably 3 to 4 mm of lower incisors above her lower lip. The chin is retruded by about 20-22 mm. Intraorally, B036 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. The lower left cuspid is tipped lingually quite significantly and aligns up almost with the lingual side of the first bicuspid. She does have a 3 x 3 retainer on. There is some mild gingival stripping around the lower anterior central incisors. In the upper arch, B036 has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side by about 3 mm and on the left side by about 3-4 mm. She has an anterior open bite of about 3 mm in the central incisor area, but 5 mm at the right lateral incisor area. When occluding, she hits only on her second molars bilaterally. She has a little bit of a buccal cross bite on the left side by probably 2 mm. The maxilla may be up just about 1 mm on the right side in the cuspid area. In the lower arch, the left cuspid is up about 2 to 3 mm compared to the right cuspid. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy. Fascial pillars may be mildly constricted. Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side. The left turbinate appears relatively normal in size and the right side is moderately enlarged. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the TMJs and retromandibular area and has mild tenderness over the temporalis, masseters, and shoulders. On jaw function, she has crepitus in the left TMJ, but the right side seems to function a little bit more smoothly. Maximum opening is 25 mm, opening without significant pain 14 mm. The excursion movement to the right is 4 mm, to the left 3 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. She has severe arthritis in both joints. She has an anterior open bite. She may have a mucocele on the left maxillary sinus.

Coronal view shows that she has a deviated septum in the bony area off towards the left side, although anteriorly the cartilaginous septum is off to the right side. The turbinates actually appear fairly large with the left one being larger than right one, at least more posteriorly. She has a large mucous retention cyst in the left maxillary sinus.

Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the left side. She has a large mucocele on the left maxillary sinus.
Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that is very arthritic and very flat across the top with loss of vertical volume. There are little osteophytes that stick out anteriorly and a sharp edge extending posterior. The condyles are postured forward in the fossa. There is decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The articular eminence is moderately shallow.

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that is quite flattened across the top. There are some sharp edges extending posteriorly and anteriorly. The articular eminence is very shallow, but there appears to be good vertical joint space.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that is quite flat across the top with loss of vertical volume. There is decreased lateral joint space and areas where there could be bone-on-bone contact. There is a little better joint space towards the medial side of the joint. The lateral rim of the fossa is quite flat. The bone towards the lateral rim of the fossa appears sclerotic.

Right TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that has lost significant condylar volume. There is a prominence of the lateral and medial pole areas. The joint space actually looks reasonably good. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B036 has a retruded maxilla and mandible. She has a high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the soft palate level and towards the base of the tongue measures only about 4 mm. There is a skeletal Class II jaw relationship, although the occlusion is closer to Class I. B036 may have been posturing slightly forward when the x-rays were taken.

Basic diagnosis for B036 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis (probable adolescent internal condylar resorption-AICR).
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia but anterior vertical hyperplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion. Anterior open bite.
Occluding only on the second molars bilaterally.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. TMJ pain.
Headaches. Myofascial pain. Left maxillary sinus mucous retention cyst.
High occlusal plane angle.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Place a step in the arch wire to align the 4 incisors at a slightly elevated level compared to the cuspids and posterior teeth. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Remove 3 x 3 retainer. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1.5 mm to 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the 2 mm tooth size discrepancy.
2. CT scans of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).3
3. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction using TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). c.	Bilateral coronoidotomies. d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect, move the anterior aspect upwards, and maximize the occlusal fit. e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. f.	Removal of mucous retention cyst from the left maxillary sinus. g.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the chin approximately 5 mm.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B036 MRI AGE: 33/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to be fairly arthritic. There is sclerosis on the head of the condyle. The top of the condyle is quite flat with a lateral extension out almost beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. There is a decreased vertical joint space. There appears to be discal tissue medially and anteriorly displaced but with a major medial component. The lateral rim of the fossa is quite flat.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost significant vertical volume and is quite flat and sclerotic across the top. The condyle is narrow mediolaterally. The joint space is quite decreased towards the lateral aspect of the joint. There appears to be some discal tissue medial and anterior to the condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is arthritic with apparent loss of vertical volume. The joint space actually appears a little bit increased as one might expect with long-term splint therapy. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is quite foreshortened and thickened. There appears to be some inflammation in the bilaminar tissues. There appears to be a little bit of anterior beaking present on the condyle and sclerosis on the head. Out lateral, the condyle is quite broad anteroposteriorly and more narrow medially. On opening, there is restricted translation and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. In one of the open views, there appears to be an erosion in the fossa eminence area. The condyle is postured forward in the fossa.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is arthritic. It is a little bit broader anteroposteriorly at the lateral aspect as compared to the medial aspect of the joint. The articular eminence is quite flat. There is sclerosis on the head of the condyle and there appears to be some small osteophytic developments in the condyle. The disc is anteriorly displaced, sitting beneath the articular eminence, and severely deformed. The condyle is postured forward in the fossa and the articular eminence is essentially absent. On opening, she has a little bit more translation than the opposite side but still restricted. The articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs anteriorly and medially displaced with severe deformation and degeneration. The patient indicated for bilateral total joint prostheses.

