B037
B037 is 14 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX.
Patient History
B037 is in good health with no major medical problems. She does have some allergy problems but nothing that Clarinex won't help. B037 is not sure when her jaw problems began. She thinks that she can remember having clicking and popping as far back as when she was 6 to 7 years of age of unknown etiology. She began orthodontic treatment two years ago. She takes no medications. She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. She has no other joints that bother her except for her neck that does make some noises. She does have significant pain in her neck, and she rates it about a level of 7 on a daily basis. She has had attempts at piercing her ears x 2, and she was unable to tolerate the earrings and had to have them removed. She has constant drainage. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism, and, in fact, is predominantly a mouth breather particularly when she sleeps. She rates her headaches at a level of 2 that occur about twice a month in the temporal area. She rates her TMJ pain at 0, overall pain at 7 but this is predominantly in the neck, rates her jaw function at 0, diet at 2, and disability at 0. She has worn orthodontic appliances for the past two years.

Patient Concerns
Occasional headaches
Retruded jaw structures
Difficulties eating and chewing
Difficulties breathing through her nose
Predominantly a mouth breather
Gummy smile

Clinical Examination
Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 7.5 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline. Has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably 2 to 3 mm. She has lip incompetence of 9 mm. Chin is AP deficient by probably about 15 mm. Chin-neckline is short, although chin-neck angle is moderately well-defined.

Intraorally, B037 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth except a little narrow band around the left central incisor. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally. She has about a 0 overbite relationship. She has about a 3-mm overjet relationship.

Intraorally, the oropharyngeal tissues look good. Uvula looks relatively normal in length. Soft palate may be a little extended as the posterior faucial pillars are posteriorly positioned. Some moderate constriction of the faucial pillars, but this is affected by the relatively hyperplastic tonsils where the left one is quite a bit larger, although both are larger than normal.

Intranasally, turbinates are moderately large, but I could only see the front and could not see the posterior aspect. They appear inflamed. Luminal valves look okay, but the columella is wide anteriorly and is contributing to some narrow nostrils.

To palpation, she has some moderate tenderness over her shoulders and mild to moderate tenderness over the posterior neck, masseters, and milder tenderness over the temporalis and SCMs.

On opening, she has audible pops in her TMJs at 35 mm of opening on the right side and 40 on the left side and at closing 15 mm on the left side and 10 mm on the right side. Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 5 mm and to the left 10 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the presence of bilateral mandibular impacted third molars and maxillary right third molar. No left third molar is seen. The rest of the teeth are present. Difficult to evaluate the sinuses and the nasal airway. Condyles appear arthritic.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a joint with decreased joint space vertically and posteriorly. Articular eminence is of moderate inclination.
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears somewhat arthritic, and there is decreased vertical and posterior joint space.

Open views show fairly good translation of both condyles slightly anterior to the articular eminence.
Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinate particularly on the right side is quite large. Could be a bony spur off the septum into the left airway.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is anterior vertical maxillary excess and posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. The mandible is AP deficient. High occlusal plane angle is present. There is some adenoid tissue present in the nasopharyngeal area. Turbinate extends significantly beyond the hard palate and appears quite large. Moderately decreased oropharyngeal airway with a dimension in the soft palate of about 7 mm and at the base of the tongue it is about 9 mm. Tonsil shadow is seen.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with late reduction
Anterior vertical maxillary excess
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
High occlusal plane angle
End-on Class II occlusion Impacted mandibular left and right third molars and maxillary right third molar
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction
Moderate amount of nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue
Myofascial pain
Headaches
Moderately decreased oropharyngeal airway
Snoring
Mouth breather
Wide columella with narrow nostrils

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics
Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to increase the room for interdental osteotomies

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly, upright the incisors, and level the occlusal plane angle
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Partial turbinectomies
Reconstruct columella
Surgical removal of three impacted third molars

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
The TMJ pathology is compatible with idiopathic condylar resorption.
B037 MRI Scan Evaluation Age: 14-year-old female

Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow mediolaterally but so is the fossa. Significant downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa probably coming down approximately 4 mm. Decreased joint space vertically. Discal tissue may be anteriorly displaced. Cortical bone is intact.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that likewise is narrow transversely but so is the fossa. There is anterior beaking, and it appears it could impinge upon the medial aspect of the fossa wall. Decreased superior joint space particularly at the lateral rim of the fossa. Discal tissue may be anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good anteromedial dimension. A little bit of anterior beaking present and some mild sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Articular eminence is relatively shallow but somewhat elongated. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is foreshortened in length, and the posterior band is significantly thickened particularly at the lateral aspect of the disc. There is fluid in the superior joint space. May be some mild inflammation in the bilaminar tissues.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle, but the disc remains nonreducing. There is a little osteophyte sticking up on the head of the condyle that is a little bit more visible on the open view as compared to the closed view. Condyle and disc translate well.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that appears to have a little flattening on the head of the condyle and some slight anterior beaking present. A little bit of sclerosis in some areas. Appears there may be an osteophyte extending superiorly off the condylar head. Articular eminence is moderately shallow but somewhat elongated. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. It is significantly foreshortened anteroposteriorly. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space but not quite as much as the opposite side and not quite as much inflammation seen on this side as the opposite side. Condyle and disc translate well.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle, but the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. The osteophyte off the head of the condyle is more visible in this view.

Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction

