B041
B041 is 55 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. She is currently under orthodontic treatment with Dr. XXXX and Dr. XXXX.
B041's joint problems appear to have begun at least from a symptom standpoint at the age of 50 of unknown etiology except for clenching and bruxism. She was referred to a TMJ specialist, Dr. XXXX, who began treatment in about 3 years ago. She has been on splint therapy and was in orthodontic treatment since that time. She had multiple orthodontic adjustments and splint adjustments without resolution of her problems. The treatment was terminated six months ago. She subsequently saw Dr. XXXX and Dr. XXXX for treatment. The orthodontics was reinitiated three months ago.

B041 remarkably does not have any significant TMJ pain and rates her average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 7, diet at 5, and disability at 7. She has no problems with headaches. She has no earaches, has frequent tinnitus with the right side greater than the left side, but no vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her right hip, left knee, and left shoulder. She does not believe that she clenches and grinds currently. She current takes the following medications:

Premarin 0.3 mg q.d.
Synthroid 125 mcg q.d.
Bystolic 5 mg q.d.
Vytorin 10/20 q.d.
Fosamax 70 mg weekly.
B12 injections monthly.
Vitamin D 5000 units monthly.
Ambien 5 to 10 mg p.r.n.

Primary concerns that B041 has at this time will include the following:
Teeth do not fit together.
Limited jaw function. Speech is affected.
Open bite where the back teeth do not touch.
Difficulties eating and chewing.

B041 also has some mild snoring, moderate daytime tiredness. She does not believe she has sleep apnea, but she has had insomnia for the last 15 years. She has significant difficulties sleeping. She does not have any significant difficulties breathing through her nose. She did have a sleep study done four years and seven months ago. She had no apneic or hypopnea events. She only had about 0.3 minutes under 90% oxygenation. Her arousal index, however, was 9.7 related to spontaneous arousals. She had some snoring and 5 arousals from snoring.

In frontal view, B041 has reasonably good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face, but some asymmetry in the mandible. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm. The maxillary midline is fairly much on the facial midline. The tip of the nose is off to the right side about 3 mm. The mandibular dental midline is shifted to the left about 4 mm. The chin is 3 mm off towards the left. In profile, the maxilla is retruded 6 to 8 mm and the chin is retruded probably 10 to 12 mm and chin neckline is extremely short. Nose appears relatively prominent. Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not defined. She has to have an obtuse nasolabial angle. Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale. Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids. She has significant crowding in the lower anterior arch with the left central incisor blocked almost completely out of the arch in a lingual direction. She probably has about 6 mm of crowding in the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspid as well. She is in full braces currently with braces back to the first molars. She has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship on the right side being about 3 to 4 mm Class III and on the left side she is closer to a Class I relationship. She does have close to a 2 mm anterior overbite relationship. She has a posterior cross bite on the left side. The maximal incisal opening is 24 mm, excursion movement to the right 5 mm, to the left 0. B041 does have about a 2 mm open bite bilaterally in the posterior occlusion. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows that the absence of all 4 third molars and absence of the first bicuspids. She has hyper-calcification around the molar teeth in all 4 quadrants. Sinuses appear relatively clear. She has a number of crowns and it looks like a root canal on the maxillary right lateral incisor.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear and turbinates are relatively normal in size. The septum deviates a little bit off towards the left side.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and turbinates are relatively normal in size. The septum is deviated just slightly off to the left side.
Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows that she has severe arthritis in this joint. There is some anterior beaking. There is significantly vertical and posterior joint space. The articular eminence is moderately shallow. There appears to be an osteophyte extending up off the head of the condyle towards the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have greater arthritic changes and there also are arthritic changes in the fossa. It appears that there is some reactive bone in and around the joint area. There is decreased joint space towards the medial aspect of the joint.

Left TMJ coronal view shows arthritic changes. There is significantly decreased vertical and lateral joint space. It appears there is almost bone-on-bone contact. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows advanced arthritic changes with a pseudocyst in the condylar head and erosions. There are also erosions in the fossa. There appears to be some heterotopic within the joint space. The joint spaces are quite narrow and in some areas appear to be bone-on-bone contact.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B041 has a retruded maxilla and mandible. She has a moderate high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 mm at the soft palate level and about 6.5 mm at the base of the tongue. She appears to have a skeletal Class I and occlusal Class I type of relationship. B041 has a tooth size discrepancy with a negative 1 mm.

Basic diagnoses for B041 are as follows:
Right TMJ severe arthritis and ankylosis.
Left TMJ arthritis. AP maxillary hypoplasia and asymmetry.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Class III occlusion on the right side.
Cross bite on the left side. Missing all 4 first bicuspids extracted for previous orthodontic reasons and all 4 third molars. Significantly decreased incisal opening of 24 mm (normal 45 to 50 mm).
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal 11 mm).
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Bilateral posterior open bites.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Keep all of the teeth and align the lower anteriors. This will tip them forward slightly to an end-on incisor relationship.
2. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
3. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with eliminate the asymmetry. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B041 MRI AGE: 55/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. There is decreased vertical joint space. Difficult to identify discal tissue. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is severely arthritic. There is decreased vertical joint space. There appears to be osteophytic extensions off the condyle and also extending down from the fossa. It is difficult to identify discal tissue in this view.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle has some flattening on the anterior aspect of the head and a little bit of anterior beaking. There is decreased joint space and could possibly be bone-on-bone contact. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence, but severely degenerated and deformed. It is quite short anteroposteriorly. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. On opening, there is restricted translation and the deformed articular disc remains anteriorly displaced to reduction.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears quite arthritic. There appears to be a pseudocyst in the head of the condyle. There appears to be some remnants of the disc in the joint space. The joint space is a little bit thicker than the opposite side. There appears to be increased sclerosis in the head of this condyle compared to the opposite side. The articular eminence appears slightly flatter than the opposite side and appears to have some degenerated changes in the subcondylar bone. On opening, there is severe restriction of condylar translation. The degenerative tissues within the joint space appear unmoved.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and with significant deformation. Right TMJ advanced arthritis and severe degenerative changes of the articular disc with possible fibrous ankylosis.

