B049
B049 is 62 years old and is a self-referral.
In frontal view, B049 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 26 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is -4 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on facial midline and so is the chin. Mandibular dental midline may be about 1 mm off to the left side. In profile view, B049 has a head postured forward neck position. He has pretty good projection of the upper lip but could be maybe 2 to 3 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline appears short. The maxilla may be retruded by 3 to 4 mm. Chin is retruded by about 10 to 12 mm. Intraorally, B049 is missing lower first bicuspids but has the rest of his teeth all the way back to the third molars with crowns on the third molars. Very minimal crowding. He has good attached gingiva with evidence of previous graft being done. Some gingival recession around most of the anterior teeth. In the upper arch, B049 has all of his teeth back through the second molars with crowns on the first and second molars. Basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship. He has an anterior deep bite of probably about a 5 mm vertical overbite relationship. B049 has sort of a curtain-type effect from previous LASER to the soft palate. It seems to be bound down almost posteriorly with the soft palate being pulled back towards the posteropharyngeal wall at least on clinical evaluation. Intranasally, there is some evidence of some mucosal bleeding. The septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side. Turbinates have been totally excised with virtually no evidence of any inferior turbinate. To palpation, B049 has some mild tenderness over the temporalis, masseter, TMJ and styloid areas. He has problems with his left knee and has arthritis in this neck. He has arthritis in his right TMJ. On opening, he deviates off towards the right side about 4 or 5 mm. The left joint seems to function reasonably smooth. On the right side there is a little bit of a crepitus kind of noise on opening and a soft pop on closing, probably around 20 mm of opening. Maximal incisal opening is 45 mm. Excursive movements are 8 mm in each direction. B049 is not are of clenching or bruxism.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction (right side worse than left side.)
AP maxillary deficiency. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Fibrosed and retracted soft palate.
Decreased transverse width of the posterior faucial pillars.
Severe sleep apnea.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
B049 Page 2
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Maxillary osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Palatoplasty to reconstruct the soft palate and faucial pillars. 3. Post surgery orthodontics to finish and retain.

B049 MRI AGE: 63/M
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Joint space is fairly well balance, although a little bit narrow at the lateral aspect. The disc appears to be medially displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is severely degenerated. The fossa is extremely flat. There appears to be destruction of bone in the fossa area as well as on the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to be somewhat sclerotic. There is decreased posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. No significant inflammatory process is seen. On opening, there is some restriction of translation and the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. The quality of the disc is questionable. It appears thick and firm. There does not appear to be any identifiable intermediate zone. He does have a pseudocyst in the right condyle. Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has better shape to it, but a little bit of flattening on the top of the condyle and a little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderate steep. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced and not too evident at the lateral aspect of the condyle. More medial, the disc is in little bit better AP position. Not much inflammation present in the joint . On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyle and the disc is in a reduced position.

IMPRESSION:
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated without reduction and with significant degenerative changes. Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint and medially displaced with reduction on opening.

