B052
B052 is 20 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX and Dr. XXXX. B052 is in good health. He has had his wisdom teeth removed. He had previous orthodontics from about the age of 13 to 15 that included palatal expanders and then fixed appliances. Relative to jaw issues, when he was about 18 years old and became aware of having jaw joint problems of unknown etiology. He does not really have any significant problems with headaches. He rates his TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 2, diet and disability at 0. He has no problems with earaches nor tinnitus, but gets occasional vertigo when he stands up. Knees are the only other joints that bother him some.

In frontal view, upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Nasal tip is deviated off to the left side a couple of millimeters. The mandibular dental midline about 1 mm off to the left and the chin is probably about 3 mm off to the left. In profile view, he had just some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe 3 to 4 mm and AP mandibular deficiency of about 3 to 4 mm. Chin neckline is a little big short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined. Intraorally, B052 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. There is 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch. He has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth, although it is quite thin between the central incisors. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship on the right side probably 4 to 5 mm Class III and on the left side is probably about 3 mm Class III. He has an anterior cross bite and a left sided cross bite. He has a reverse overbite of about 0.5 mm. He has a reverse over jet of probably 3 to 4 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy, although the tonsils are quite large. Intranasally, at least anteriorly, the turbinates appear moderate in size. The septum appears reasonably straight. Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of a 3 x 3 retainer. All four third molars are gone. Sinuses look relatively clear. Turbinates appear enlarged. The right condyle appears larger than the left condyle.

Coronal view shows that the nasal septum is deviated significantly off towards the right side. The turbinates are quite large particularly the left one. There is a septal spur present as well off to the right side. The sinuses appear relatively clear. There appears to be quite a constricted nasal airway.

Axial view shows that the turbinates are quite large and obstructive. The septum is deviated off towards the right side with a septal spur. The sinuses appear clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good morphology. Condyle is somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa. The articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. The condyle is somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. Joint space looks reasonably good. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat curving inferiorly only 1-2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat larger than the left side. There appears to be some decreased vertical joint space. The condyle extends a little bit more laterally than the opposite side. We need to rule out osteoma or osteochondroma in the joint.

B052 Page 2
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B052 has a Class III skeletal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 9 mm at the soft palate level and probably 8 to 9 mm at the base of the tongue. He has an increased occlusal plane angle. The turbinates appear fairly large and actually extend beyond the hard palate. He may have a little adenoid tissue still remaining in the nasopharynx.

Dental model analysis reveals that he has a Class III cuspid-molar relationship, being worse on the right side than the left side. The mandibular dental midline is shifted about 1 mm to the left of the maxillary midline. He has anterior and essentially bilateral posterior cross bites. He has a probably a 0.5 mm reverse overbite relationship. Tooth size analysis reveals a Bolton's difference of 1 mm.

Based on clinical, radiographic, dental model, and MRI analyses, B052 diagnoses are as follows:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation with early reduction.
Rule out right mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Mandibular deviated prognathism. Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia.
Class III occlusion, being slightly worse on the right side.
Anterior and left posterior cross bites.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Deviated nasal septum. Nasal airway obstruction. External nasal deformity. TMJ pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Evaluate previous records to see if there is active mandibular growth occurring.
2. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Open a little bit of spacing between the upper laterals and cuspids of about 0.5 to 1 mm on each side to correct for a tooth size discrepancy. b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
3. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible slightly, correct the lower jaw asymmetries. c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect superiorly and advance it forward as well as correct the transverse discrepancies. d.	Partial nasal turbinectomies. e.	Nasal septoplasty. f.	Consider possible external rhinoplasty.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine and retain the occlusion.
5. Restorative dentistry if necessary to build up the lateral incisors to eliminate any residual spacing.

B052 MRI AGE: 20/MALE
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. The disc appears that it may be medially displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly only about 1 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. The disc appears to be medially displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly only about 1 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a disc that appears to be anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint. More medially, it is in a little bit better position. The condyle has fairly good morphology. There is a little flattening at the anterior head of the condyle. The disc is not as readily seen at the lateral aspect of the joint as it is medially. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. On opening, there appears to be early reduction and moderately good translation of the condyle and the articular disc.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology with a little bit of peaking towards the center of the condyle. The condyle is a little bit posteriorly displaced in the fossa. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced. On opening, there is early reduction and moderately good translation of the condyle and disc.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular discs dislocated with early reduction.

