B053
She is 67 years old. She was referred by Dr. XXXX. Recently, she had a left salivary gland removed 8 months ago. She has gone through menopause. She has bronchitis and salivary gland problems. She has some allergies. She gets skin rashes. She also has thyroid disease. She takes:

Armour thyroid 90 mg q.d.
Estradiol 2 mg q.d.
Medroxyprogesterone 2.5 mg q.d.
Vitamin D3 500 mg q.d.
She had an allergy to penicillin as a child and to sulfa also.

B053's TMJ problems apparently began at about the age of 27 as a result of childbirth and an extended difficult labor. Two years later, she had some type of oral reconstruction done. Twenty-four years ago, she had what she called Virtox system/Myomonitor full mouth reconstruction. She has had various TMJ splints through the years. She has had cranial osteopathy that has been helpful for her.

Primary concerns B053 has at this time include the following:
Severe ear ringing. Unstable bite.
Only hits on her anterior teeth.
Pain in the left joint when chewing.
Disc noises in the left joint with any movement.
Severe sleep apnea. Head fog.

B053 rates her headaches at a level of 4 that occur predominantly in the frontal and top of her head and maybe some in her temple area. She rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 3, diet and disability at 2. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. Other joints that bother her include her knees left worse than the right side, shoulders right greater than the left side, and occasionally her hands. She has no earaches, but has severe tinnitus and moderate vertigo. She is currently 5 feet 4 inches tall and weighs 214 pounds.

She had a sleep study done one year and eleven months ago that revealed the following:
Severe OSA.
Sleep-related PACs.
Possible sleep-related epilepsy.
Alpha intrusion. Abnormal EDS scores.
Hypnotic dependent sleep disorder.
Depression/anxiety.
Menopausal on HRT.
Hypothyroidism on HRT.
TMJ disease.
Colon polyps.
GERD.

Her O2 levels dropped to 75% O2 saturation. During sleep, her heart rate got as low as 39 beats per minute and 145 beats per minute while awake.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Upper lip length is 18 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is -2 mm. The maxilla is retruded 6 to 8 mm as is the chin. Chin neckline is not well defined. The maxillary midline is deviated 1 mm off to the right side. The mandibular dental midline and chin are shifted off to the left approximately 2 mm. She is congenitally missing the maxillary lateral incisors and so the cuspids are made into laterals. On the right side, the maxilla crowns are enlarged so she is actually missing 1 tooth, but the replaced cuspid and bicuspid tooth are exceptionally large crowns. On the mandibular left side, she has a Pontic replacing the mandibular right first bicuspid. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal. Uvula may be just slightly elongated. The fascial pillars look fine. The tonsils as well as adenoids were removed at the age of 13. Twenty-six years ago, she had turbinectomy, septoplasty, and nasal polyps removed. Intranasally, the septum is deviated off to the right side, but the turbinates are quite small and there does not appear to be any nasal airway obstruction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows all four third molars are absent. She has a 5-unit bridge in the mandibular right side with replacement of the first bicuspid. On the left side, she has crowns on the bicuspids and molars. On the maxillary right side, she has a 5-unit bridge replacing a cuspid and bicuspid tooth. On the left side, she has a 3-unit bridge replacing the cuspid position tooth since the cuspid is in the lateral incisor position. She has a lot of vascular clips in the left submandibular where the salivary gland was recently removed. Sinuses look relatively clear. The left condyle appears arthritic, and the right side appears to have a little flattening on top, but appears anatomically in better condition. Waters view shows that the sinuses appear a little bit cloudy. The turbinates appear small in size, and there does appear to be adequate airway. Bony septum appears somewhat wide. Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good morphology. There appears to be good joint space. Articular eminence is moderate in steepness. Left TMJ tomogram is a little bit harder to read, but it appears that there is decreased joint space. Articular eminence appears significantly longer than normal. Joint space appears decreased, but a little bit more difficult to read and interpret. On opening, there is better translation of the right condyle than the left condyle. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the soft palate appears of normal length, and there appears to be good airway space at the soft palate level, but the base of the tongue appears to have a decreased airway of only about 3 to 4 mm. She has a slight increased occlusal plane angle. The upper incisors are in somewhat vertical inclination.

To palpation, B053 has moderate pain in the temporalis and masseter muscles, and mild pain in the SCMs and TMJ areas with the left side being a little bit worse than the right side. On opening, she has crepitus in the left TMJ and deviation of the mandible off towards the left side about 3 to 4 mm. On the right side, she has an opening pop at about 30 mm of opening and a closing pop at probably 15 mm. Maximal incisal opening is 46 mm and opening without much discomfort about 25 mm. Excursion movement to the right 9 mm, to the left mm. In excursion movements, she does have a detectable audible crepitation in the left joint. On the right side, she had a definite clicking and popping present.

B053 has recently had some testing done and they found out that she was 100% allergic to gluten, soy, dairy, eggs, and sugar. They also found out that she had some parasites and roundworm that she has been treated for. B053 has been on a CPAP machine for approximately 2 years. She now has a special device called a JPAP. This device includes a device that fits in her mouth and this holds the mandible forward and then she has nasal canulas that go in her nose to provide the air pressure. The change in her bite is likely due to wearing this device and has probably caused some retraction of the upper teeth and some protrusion of the lower teeth.

Basic diagnoses for B053 would be as follows:
Severe sleep apnea. Left TMJ advanced arthritis with condylar beaking or free calcified body anterior to the condyle as well as anteriorly displaced disc that is severely deformed and degenerated. There is a perforation and bone-on-bone contact.
Right TMJ mild arthritis but articular disc anteriorly displaced with reduction on opening. AP maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia. Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 11 mm). Mildly increased occlusal plane angle.
TMJ pain.
Extensive restorative work with crowns on most of the teeth except for the anterior teeth and the maxillary bicuspids. Congenitally missing maxillary right first and second cuspids replaced with a 5-unit bridge.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch. Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward approximately 8 to 10 mm. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral coronoidotomies.
Placement of arch bars if the patient does not have orthodontic treatment. 3
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B053 MRI AGE: 67/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is arthritic with sclerosis on the top of the condyle. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm. The anterior aspect of the lateral pole of the condyle extends out even with the lateral rim of the fossa.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with sclerosis on the head, but there appears to be a more balanced joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. The condyle has a much better confirmation than the other side.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is sclerotic, but does have some anterior beaking present. There appears to be a calcified body anterior to the condylar head. The disc appears to be anteriorly positioned beneath the articular eminence and severely degenerated. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep, but relatively long and curved in an anterior direction. On opening, there is fairly good translation, but the remnant of the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction and the calcified body remains anteriorly positioned inferior to the articular disc. The articular disc is extremely small in size and unsalvageable.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with much better morphology. Just a very small amount of anterior beaking present. Out laterally, the disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. More medially, the disc is in a more normal position. The disc appears to be rotated anterior and forward. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the articular disc, and the articular disc is in a reduced position with likely an early reduction. There is some sclerosis on the head of the condyle.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis with a calcified body at the anterior aspect of the condyle that may or may not be attached to the condyle and articular disc that is anteriorly displaced, non-reducing, and severely deformed and degenerated. Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint, but with early reduction.

B053 I-CAT
Coronal view shows that the patient has already had turbinectomies. She has bilateral increased thickness of the sinus membrane indicative of a sinusitis.

Left TMJ shows a condyle that appears arthritic with a little extension of the lateral pole of the condyle out almost beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. There is decreased superior joint space. There is a little bit of sclerosis present on the head of the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly for about 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ shows a condyle that has a little bit better confirmation. Joint space appears better. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Axial view shows the significant sinusitis that is present throughout both sinuses bilaterally. Nasal septum is reasonably straight. Inferior turbinates are essentially absent. What can be seen of the frontal sinuses and the ethmoid sinuses appears clear as does the sphenoid sinus.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some significant beaking present and quite an extension of heterotopic bone anteriorly. There is decreased joint space posteriorly, somewhat superiorly, and anteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep and is fairly long in length. The left maxillary sinusitis is quite extensive. There is a major decrease in the oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of probably only about 3 mm. Right maxillary sinus also exhibits significant sinusitis.

Right TMJ joint appears to have much better shape of the condyle and better proportioned joint space.
Graphic view shows the absence of all four third molars. She is missing the mandibular right first bicuspid and the maxillary right cuspid, first and second bicuspid as well as perhaps missing the left cuspid.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ advanced arthritis with probable articular disc dislocation without reduction.
Bilateral maxillary sinusitis.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.

