B054
B054 is 27 years old. B054's TMJ problems began at the age of 26, about one year and seven months ago when she yawned and her jaw locked open. She had a doctor sedate her and put the joint back into position. Her jaws were wired together for about 3 days afterwards and she had some significant pain associated with that. After 3 days, she came back and was unwrapped and then her jaw was locked closed and shifted towards the left side. She was placed on medications and it apparently it took about a month to realize that there was a closed lock situation. Dr. XXXX then did an arthrocentesis five times with no appreciable relief. She then had physical therapy and she was able to open her jaw but had very strong pain. Surgery was done on one year and two months ago with a disc plication of the temporal mandibular joint. Since that procedure, she continues to have significant pain problems. She continues to have limited opening and because of the pain situation she is unable to chew. Primary concerns that B054 has include the following:

Severe left TMJ pain.
Difficulties opening her mouth.
Unable to chew and is predominantly on a liquid diet.
She has been in splint therapy for two years and has had two splints. She also has had physical therapy. She takes Percocet 5 mg two to three per day and Uptagin, another pain medication.

B054 has no trouble with headaches. She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain would be at 9, jaw function at 8, diet at 10, disability at 5. She gets pressure in her left ear and has some decreased hearing on that side, but has no tinnitus nor vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her knees and her hips. She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.

In profile view, B054 has good facial symmetry and balance. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars and all of her upper teeth as well. She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has about a 4 mm anterior deep bite relationship. To palpation, she has a pain level of 8 over the left TMJ, but no other pain around the head and neck area. The incisal opening maximally is 26 mm, opening without significant pain 15 mm. The excursion movements are about 3 mm in each direction. Limitation of translation to the left is related to the pain that is created in the left joint without movement. She does not feel that it is due to restriction of the right joint. Oropharyngeal tissues are a little bit difficult to see, but appear relatively normal. Tonsils are maybe mildly enlarged.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc degeneration.
Left TMJ severe pain with severely limited jaw function.
Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
2. Surgery. a.	Left TMJ condylectomy, diskectomy, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Left TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen). c.	Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars with removal at the end of surgery.

Dr. XXXX had proposed cutting off the condyle and just leaving her a swing where she would develop facial asymmetry. I gave B054 the option of repeating the disc repositioning procedure to set the disc a little bit more posteriorly and more laterally over the condylar head and also perform a sagittal split osteotomy. However, I do not believe that this will work very good for her and gave her a less than 50 percent chance of success with that procedure. I believe she would have a 90 percent chance of success with the total joint prostheses. I also did warn her that it is possible that after the total joint prosthesis is done on the left side that she could develop a problem on the right side, although out studies have shown if there is a healthy right TMJ she would have about a 75 percent chance of the right side holding up and doing well. She has no pain or symptoms on the right side at all. I did discuss the pros and cons of both procedures with her and her grandmother. I answered all the questions that they had. My personal opinion is that the total joint prostheses would be much predictable for her and would get her the best result. I answered all the questions she and her grandmother had. They understand. I did discuss potential risks and complications such as infection, bleeding, nerve damage, etc. They understand. She believes she is anxious to proceed on with treatment. B054 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. There appears to be some erosions or deformity on the lateral pole area of the condyle. There appears to be discal tissue medially displaced. There appear to be some degenerative changes perhaps in the fossa as well.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears about the same size as the opposite site. The condyle appears to have a little bit better morphology to it and not as degenerative. There is decreased superior joint space and the disc appears it may be medially displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is somewhat degenerated. The articular disc appears to be in reasonably good position, although there are some degenerative factors associated with it. The condyle appears to have some erosions on the head and some little osteophytic kind of formation. It appears there may be some fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is restricted translation of the condyle and the disc. It appears that the disc reduced on opening.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit larger than the opposite side. The disc appears to be more degenerated on this side. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. The articular eminence is steep and the disc appears to be in vertical orientation. There are some areas of erosion and/or small osteophytic formations more towards the lateral aspect of the joint. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present medially. On opening, there is limited translation of the condyle and the disc.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis with a disc medially displaced, but AP in normal position with degeneration.
Right TMJ arthritis and the disc anteriorly and medially displaced with early reduction.
Bilateral restricted translation.

