B057
B057 is 28 years old. Referred by Dr. XXXX. B057's primary concerns are as follows:
Pain on both sides of her jaws. Cannot chew properly.
Headaches getting worse. Bite getting worse.

She currently takes the following medications:
Asmanex 2 times per day. Albuterol p.r.n. Ortho-Tricyclen q.d. (BCP).
Motrin p.r.n. for pain.
The only other medical conditions that she has include asthma and knee and ankle pain.

B057's problems began when she was about 23 years old of unknown etiology. She has had no treatment to date. She gets headaches at about a level of 8 behind the eyes and in the temporal area about one time per week. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 6, diet at 4, and disability at 4. Other joints that bother her include her knees, ankles, hips, and lower back. She apparently does brux at night.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B057 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. She has some asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 28 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm. The maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to the left side. The mandibular dental midline is about 6 mm off towards the left side. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much in line with each other. As B057 shifts her mandible about 5 to 6 mm to the right side, this significantly improves her facial symmetry. In profile view, B057 has some fullness in the upper lip and appears to protrude by probably 4 mm or so. Subnasale may be just slightly retruded. Chin actually has fairly good AP projection and may be slightly strong. B057 has a high mandibular plane angle facial morphology. She has a well formed chin neck angle. The lower lip is protrusive relative to the chin. Intraorally, B057 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Mandibular right second molar is mal-rotated however. She has some mild spacing between some of the lower anterior teeth, particularly the cuspids and the lateral incisors. She appears to have adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she appears to have all of her teeth back through the second molars present. In centric view occlusion, she has a Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by probably 3 mm or so. On the left side, she is Class I. She has an anterior cross bite and the cross bite extends to the left cuspid, but the posterior teeth are not in cross bite. She has a zero overbite relationship. Incisors hit end on with the maxillary right central to the lower left lateral incisor, but she is in cross bite with the rest of the incisors and the left cuspid. In the lower arch, the teeth on the left side are in a little bit of a lingual inclination. In the upper arch, she has an accentuated curve of Wilson on the left side, but a slightly reverse curve of Wilson on the right side in the upper arch. Intranasally, the septum looks straight. Turbinates appear significantly enlarged, but she appears still to have some functional airway. She could have some mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction. Maximal incisal opening is 54 mm. Excursion movement is about 5 mm in each direction. To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area. On opening, she does get pain in the left TMJ area. The maxilla is fairly level over the right side coming down just about 1 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. She has spacing on the right side between the first and second molar. The right first molar appears elevated compared to the bicuspids. Sinuses look relatively clear. Right condylar head and neck may be enlarged and elongated, but difficult to tell in that view. Waters view shows the turbinates appear quite large and may cause some nasal airway obstruction. Sinuses look clear. Mandible is asymmetric with the midline shifted significantly off towards the left side. Left TMJ tomogram shows that there is fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There appears to be decreased superior joint space, particularly perhaps anterior and/or anteromedial displacement in the articular disc. Right TMJ tomogram shows what appears to be also somewhat of a decreased joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condylar head may be a little bit misshapen. On opening, there appears to be some restricted translation in both joints. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B057 has some bi-maxillary protrusion. She may have a moderately high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway is greater than normal value.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Right mandibular condylar osteochondroma/osteoma. Bilateral articular discs dislocation. Mandibular deviated prognathism. Maxillary AP hyperplasia. Anterior cross bite. Class III end-on occlusion on the right side, Class I occlusion on the left side.
Anterior open bite tendency. Bi-maxillary protrusion profile. AP microgenia. Mandible deviated off to the left side 6 mm.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Progressively worsening facial asymmetry.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
MRI of left and right TMJ.
Presurgical orthodontics. Extract maxillary first bicuspids.
Align and level maxillary arch. Close the extraction space and try to minimize loss of posterior anchorage. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies as they may be necessary to obtain the best possible bite relationship.
Align and level mandibular arch, closing the anterior spacing. Surgery.
Right mandibular low condylectomy.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and repair with Mitek anchors. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to correct the occlusal discrepancies. Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B057 MRI AGE: 28/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a relatively normal mediolateral width. There appears to be discal tissue displaced laterally. It could be displaced anteriorly as well. There is decreased medial joint space. Cortical bone is intact. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is larger than the opposite side with a lateral extension. Joint space appears decreased vertically. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly, and there is significantly decreased joint space laterally. There is a protrusion of the condylar head that looks almost beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 4 mm.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle has a dysmorphic shape to it. There is flattening on the anterior aspect, flattening on the head, and flattening posteriorly with a posterior protrusion extending from the posterior head of the condyle. It is difficult to tell where the disc is. The disc could be anteriorly dislocated. In right sagittal view, the disc appears to be anterior, but reduces fairly early. There is moderately good translation of the condyle and the articular disc.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some anterior beaking and a little sclerosis on the top. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space. It appears there may be some discal tissue anteriorly displaced as well as laterally displaced. On opening, it appears that the disc in a reduced position. On opening, there is fairly good translation and the disc does appear to be in a reduced position.

IMPRESSION:
Right TMJ bony morphology and articular disc that is anteriorly displaced with reduction. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anterolaterally displaced with reduction.
Right TMJ morphology could be compatible with an osteoma or osteochondroma.

