B058
B058 is 52 years old. Referred by Dr. XXXX.
B058's TMJ problems began probably about 10 years ago of unknown etiology. She began wearing a bite splint or night guard about 10 years ago. More recently, she stopped, but had worn it fairly consistently up to recent times. She has no particular trouble with headaches, although she does get an occasional migraine that used to occur at the same time every month, but this has decreased significantly. She states she has no TMJ pain, no pain around the head and neck area. She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability at 1. She has no earaches, tinnitus, hearing loss, but gets occasional vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her knees and her feet occasionally. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime as well as during the day. She takes the following medications:

Vivelle (hormone replacement medication).
Acebutol 200 mg b.i.d. for PVCs.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B058 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 0. The maxillary and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline. In profile view, B058 has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 mm. The chin is retruded probably a good 10 mm. The chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not defined. Intraorally, B058 has all of her of her lower teeth back through the second molars. There is just a little bit of crowding in the lower anterior arch, but has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has probably a slight division 2 type of position of the upper teeth. She has fairly flat curve of Wilson in the upper arch. She has an anterior deep bite of about 5 to 6 mm. She has a Class II cuspid relationship of approximately 6 mm. She has a slight reversed curve of Spee in the upper arch and a slight accentuated curve of Spee in the mandibular arch. Transversely, both arches appear somewhat narrow. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal except uvula may be just slightly elongated. Intranasally, the septum may be deviated just slightly to the right side. The right turbinate is fairly large and the left one appears more normal in size at least anteriorly. To palpation, she has some mild to moderate tenderness over the masseter muscles and the right TMJ. The maximal incisal opening is 55 mm, excursion movement in each direction about 14 mm. Transversely, the maxillary and mandibular arches are fairly level.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of an impacted maxillary right third molar, but all of the other third molars are absent. She has root canals on mandibular left and right first molars and crowns on those teeth as well on the left second molar and maxillary right first molar. Bony septum looks reasonably straight. Turbinates appear moderate in size. The sinuses appear relatively clear.

Coronal view shows that there is a little deviation in the nasal septum off towards the right side. The turbinates are relatively normal in size and do not appear to be causing any significant airway obstruction. The sinuses look relatively clear.

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight, although there is a little bit of a septal spur towards the posterior third of the septum. It may impinge on the right inferior side, but otherwise the turbinates look relatively normal in size, although the right one is slightly enlarged. The sinuses appear relatively clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking present. The joint space actually looks reasonably good. There may be some slight decreased joint space anteriorly. The articular eminence is moderate in inclination. It tends to bow outward towards the condyle along the mid posterior slope.

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows some anterior beaking on the condyle and then some slightly decreased joint space anteriorly. There is good joint space superiorly and posteriorly. The articular eminence is moderately steep and likewise has sort of an outward bow along the posterior slope of the articular eminence.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow mediolateral. There is some flattening in the lateral pole area of the condyle. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Right TMJ condyle has a similar mirror image to the left side in the fact that lateral pole of the condyle is located low on the condylar head and the superior condylar head at the lateral aspect of the joint is somewhat narrow. The joint space looks reasonably good. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is maxillary and mandibular AP hypoplasia. The oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 to 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 4 mm at the base of the tongue. The tongue fills the entire oral cavity.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation with early reduction. Maxillary AP transverse hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia. Transverse constricture of both maxillary and mandibular arches.
Class II division 2 malocclusion.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Impacted maxillary right third molar.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Tip maxillary incisors forward. Open up 1 mm of space between the upper cuspids and laterals and incisors at the crown level and tip the lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally in case interdental osteotomies are necessary. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. c.	If possible, try to expand both arches buccally to try to increase the transverse dimension of the arches.
2. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a slight counterclockwise direction. c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction. d.	Remove impacted maxillary right third molar.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

