B059
B059 is 48 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. He is with XXXX. B059's jaw problems began about seven months ago of unknown etiology. She had developed a gradual pain problem that appears to be associated predominantly with the left masseter muscle area. She received a mouth guard about 8 months ago approximately 2 months before the onset of her problems that she wears just at night as her dentist told her he thought she was grinding her teeth at night. She gets headaches daily currently at a level of 4 in the temporal areas and on top of the head. She does not really express any significant pain directly in the TMJ area. She rates her average daily pain at about a level of 7. She rates her jaw function at 3, although it at its worst is at a 6. She rates her diet at 3 and disability at 0. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor hearing loss but gets occasional vertigo. No other joints bother her. She has constant pain in the left masseter muscle. She has some high blood pressure issues as well. She clenches at nighttime.

In frontal view, B059 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 0. The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline. She only has 3 lower incisors and probably the central is the tooth removed. In profile, she has fairly good facial balance. Intraorally, she is missing mandibular left and right first molars and the second molars are somewhat tipped forward. In the upper arch, she is also missing first molar on the right side but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. B059 has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy and normal. Intranasally, the left turbinate looks relatively normal and has a good airway on that side. On the right side, the turbinate is moderately enlarged and there is a decreased airway on that side. The septum may be deviated just slightly to the right side. She has probably some mild to moderate airway obstruction on the right side. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the left TMJ and relatively minimal tenderness over the left masseter muscle. When she opens, however, she has increased pain in the left masseter muscle area. As she opens, the mandible deviates to the left about 3 to 4 mm. On opening, she could get to about 43 mm, but only 28 mm without significant pain. The excursion movements were 7 mm in each direction, but in excursion towards the right side she had pain in her left masseter muscle. She does report a slight grinding noise in the left joint on jaw opening.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of the bilateral mandibular first molars and maxillary right first molar. The third molars are also missing. The sinuses appear relatively clear. The right turbinate appears a little bit enlarged. The left joint looks a little bit arthritic compared to the right side.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic. There is a little flattening on the condylar head. Out laterally, there appears to be absence of joint space. There appear to be more degenerative changes at the lateral aspect of the joint. Over medially, there appears to be good vertical joint space. The articular eminence at the lateral aspect of the joint appears relatively shallow.

Right TMJ shows a condyle that has better morphology with just some slight anterior beaking. The joint space looks fairly balanced throughout the joint. It appears there may be some decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint. The articular eminence is relatively shallow.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good width, but some arthritic changes at the lateral pole of the condyle. There is significantly decreased joint space at the lateral pole of the condyle and there may be possible bone-on-bone contact. Medially, the vertical joint space appears more normal. It is likely that the articular disc is medially displaced. At the lateral aspect of the joint, the bone level is much higher than the medial pole level so that there is an upward slope from the medial pole towards the lateral pole. There may be an osteophyte on the top of the condyle. There could be a possible perforation present.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that still has good morphology. There is decreased lateral joint space but not as severe as the opposite side. It is possible that the disc may be medially displaced.

In coronal view, the right turbinate is quite large and appears to block most of the functional airway. The septum deviates a little bit towards the right side. The left turbinate is enlarged, but not to the extent of the right one. The sinuses look relatively clear.

Sagittal view shows that she appears to have a fairly good AP airway. She has a long soft palate and uvula which may contribute to her snoring. There appears to be good airway space between the posterior border of her tongue and the pharyngeal wall. At the soft palate level, there appears to be adequate room probably close to a normal range, but the length of the soft palate and uvula is quite long and in particularly in a supine position may obstruct the airway somewhat.

Basic diagnoses for B059 would be as follows:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc with probable medial dislocation. Relative left mandibular hyperplasia. Left masseter myositis. TMJ pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. MRI of left and right TMJs.
2. Medications: Klonopin to see if this will eliminate her masseter myositis.
3. Surgery. a.	Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. b.	Left mandibular ramus osteotomy with bone plate and screw stabilization.

B059 MRI Left TMJ sagittal view shows some arthritis on the condylar head with some sclerosis and flattening on the anterior portion of the head. There is a little bit of peaking. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. The disc appears it may be anteriorly displaced with a little bit of compressed tissue up in the fossa area. More medially, the disc appears that it may be in position, whereas laterally it appears to be anterior. On opening, it appears that the disc reduces and there is moderately good translation of the condyle and the articular disc. There is fluid in the superior joint space.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of sclerosis on the head. The articular eminence is a little bit more shallow on this side than the opposite side. The disc appears to be in position except at the lateral aspect it may be anteriorly displaced. In the right joint, the disc appears to reduce on opening. There is fairly good translation of the condyle and disc.

The coronal view shows a condyle that has sclerosis on the lateral aspect of the condyle. The disc is medially displaced with almost half the top of the condyle uncovered. There is some unevenness on the head of the condyle. The superior joint space and lateral joint space are decreased. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly fairly significantly, probably 4 mm compared to only about 2 mm on the opposite side. On the right side, it appears that the disc is medially displaced as well. There is decreased vertical and lateral joint space.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with early reduction. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with early reduction.

Clinically, the right TMJ is asymptomatic and the pain is all based on the left side. Therefore, my treatment recommendations at this time would be:
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Left TMJ arthroplasty.
Left mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy to maintain the occlusion in a good bite relationship.

