B060
B060 is 40 years old. She was born with arthrogryposis. She has had 17 orthopedic surgeries to date, but none for the past 17 years. She is referred by Dr. XXXX.

B060 takes the following medications:
Effexor 450 mg q.d.
Tegretol XR 200 mg 2 times per day.
B060 has also been diagnosed with epilepsy and with depression. The arthrogryposis also affects her hands, wrists, fingers, elbows, hips, knees, ankles, feet, and toes. B060 gets headaches that occur predominantly on the top of her head at a level of 4. She rates her TMJ pain at 1, average daily pain at 0, jaw function at 9, diet at 8, disability at 8. B060 believes that she breathes through her mouth most of the time when she is sleeping. She has some mild snoring and mild daytime somnolence, but is not aware of sleep apnea problems.

In frontal view, B060 has fairly left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm. The maxillary midline is shifted off to the right side about 1 mm as is the mandibular dental midline. The chin is pretty much on the facial midline. In profile view, B060 has some AP maxillary deficiency particularly up by subnasale of about 4 to 5 mm. The chin appears retruded by about 8-10 mm. The chin neckline is short without a defined chin neck angle. In the lower arch, B060 is missing the mandibular right first molar replaced by a pontic and third molar. The lower arch has some significant asymmetry so that the center of the right central incisor is actually pretty close to being on the facial midline and chin midline. She is missing the left cuspid replaced by a pontic, bicuspids, and probably her first molar. The lower arch from left cuspid through right second molar are all crowns and a bridge. In the upper arch, B060 is missing the right cuspid, bicuspids, and all 3 molars. On the left side, she is missing the cuspid replaced by a pontic and the first molar as well as the third molar. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy. B060 does have good abilities with neck movement. Intranasally, the turbinates may be moderately enlarged. She has anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites. She has a zero overbite relationship. On the left side, she has a end-on Class II cuspid relationship and on the right side she is a full Class III cuspid relationship. Maximal incisal opening is 13 mm with excursion movement to the right of 1.5 and to the left 0.5 mm. To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Joints function relatively smoothly.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of mandibular left cuspid, first bicuspid, second bicuspid, first molar, and right first molar as well as both third molars. In the upper arch, she is missing the third molars, maxillary right cuspid, first bicuspid, second bicuspid, first molar with the second molar in place. On the left side, she is missing the left cuspid and first molar. Those teeth are replaced with bridges and on the right side the cuspid and first bicuspid are replaced with pontics. Joints look severely degenerated.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses appear clear. The septum appears relatively straight with just a slight deviation off towards the right side. The right turbinate appears enlarged and blocking the airway while the left one appears relatively normal.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the septum deviates just slightly off to the right side and the right turbinate appears quite large and may be obstructing the airway significantly whereas the left side appears open.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. There is anterior beaking present. There is total loss of the articular eminence. The joint space appears somewhat decreased.

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms shows a condyle that appears arthritic. There is anterior beaking present. There is total loss of the articular eminence. The joint space appears somewhat decreased.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic with an area of an osteophyte and a depression present. Joint space appears decreased. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly only about 2 mm at the most.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with significantly degenerative changes. The joint space is significantly decreased. The lateral pole of the condyle is significantly higher than the medial pole. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B060 has a moderately high occlusal plane angle. She has maxillary AP hypoplasia. The mandible in the chin is AP hypoplastic. She has over angulation of the maxillary incisors. Oropharyngeal airway, however, appears good with an AP dimension of about almost 11-12 mm at the oropharyngeal area.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Arthrogryposis.
Bilateral TMJ ankylosis.
Maxillary hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Extended right coronoid process.
Severe limitation of jaw opening. Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
2. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). c.	Bilateral coronoidectomies. d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies with bone plate stabilization and bone grafting. e.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy. f.	Application of arch bars.
3. Removal of arch bars.
4. Restorative dentistry.

B060 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. There appears to be some loss of condylar volume. It appears that there may be some discal tissue present, but there could be some that is medially displaced as well. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have somewhat of an abnormal shape. There appears to be loss of vertical height. The entire fossa slopes considerably upwards at the lateral extent compared to the medial side. The lateral rim is fairly flat. There may be some remnant of disc tissue in the joint, but difficult to identify.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat arthritic. It is difficult to identify discal tissue in the joint. There appears to be some significant degeneration of the disc. The articular eminence is quite flat. The condyle is flat across the top. On opening, there is relatively minimal translation. There appears to be a bony osteophyte sticking down from the posterior fossa. There is no articular eminence.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic and appears to have loss of volume. There is essentially no articular eminence present. There may be some discal tissue in the joint but severely degenerated perhaps surrounded by a reactive pannus. The pannus does light up a little bit in this view. On opening, there is limited translation.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis that could be compatible with connective tissue autoimmune disease or previous surgical procedures.

