B063
B063 is 20 years old. I saw B063 originally when she was about 5 and the last time I saw her she was about 8 years old. By history, when B063 was 5 years old, her family was in Saudi Arabia. She was on a wall that was about 7 feet tall and she fell off of it and hit her jaw sustaining a right subcondylar fracture. I saw probably some time after that as she likely was not having any real significant symptoms and the malpositioned condyle had already solidified. While she was in orthodontics and for a time afterwards, she would have an occasional flare-up, but nothing real significant or constant. Dr. XXXX performed orthodontics on B063 from age 15 to 17 years old. She had four bicuspids extracted for orthodontics. For the past 2 years, B063's pain problems associated with her jaws have increased.

At this time, she complains of headaches that occur on the right side almost daily that occur at a level of 8 in the frontal and temporal areas predominantly. She rates her right-sided TMJ pain at 8, average daily facial pain that occurs only on the right side at 7, jaw function at 0, diet at 7, and disability at 4. She gets right-sided earaches frequently. She has right-sided tinnitus and gets frequent vertigo. She has no other joints that bother her. She is allergic to Ceclor. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

Primary concerns B063 has at this time include the following:
Right-sided headaches. Right-sided TMJ pain. Difficulties eating and chewing. She cannot wear any hair type products that puts pressure in and around her right ear area as it creates significant pain problems. Facial asymmetry.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B063 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face, but she has asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship appears to be about 3 mm. The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is about almost 2 mm off to the right side and the chin is almost 5 mm off to the right side In profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency and a little bit of AP mandibular deficiency. AP maxillary deficiency appears to be probably about 4 mm. The chin may be retruded by 6 to 8 mm. Chin neckline appears a little bit shortened, and she does have a slight head postured forward neck position. Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids. She has a 3 x 3 retainer. She has adequate attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch.. In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids. She has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side by about 2 to 3 mm, but on the left side she is fairly close to being Class I. She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm. There is a transverse cant in the maxillary occlusion with the right side being about 1.5 mm higher than the left side. The right mandibular cuspid may be about 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. Chin is probably about 3 mm to the right of mandibular dental midline. By aligning her mandibular dental midline, her chin does still remain off towards the right side. To palpation, B063 has some very high moderate pain over the right masseter and moderate pain over the right temporalis and moderate tenderness over the right TMJ, right styloid area, and right posterior neck. Joints seem to actually function relatively smoothly. On opening, she has a maximum of 50 mm of incisal opening, but about 34 mm without significant pain. Excursion movement to the right is 8 mm, to the left 7 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues looks healthy and normal. Intranasally, the septum may be deviated just a little off to the right side. It appears she has some moderately decreased airway on the right side, but the left side looks open at least in the anterior aspect of the nose.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. Sinuses appear relatively clear. The left condyle looks normal. The right condyle shows evidence of a previous fracture with the height of the functioning condyle at the top of the neck area with the complete condyle itself missing. The ramus on the right side appears short in vertical dimension. The vertical height of the mandible on the right side in the body area is also slightly decreased compared to the left side. Waters view shows that the bony septum is reasonably straight. Turbinates appear moderate in size. There does appear to be a passable airway. Sinuses look clear. Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Joint space looks adequate. Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is extremely short in vertical height. Articular eminence is quite shallow. The condyle is actually functioning far anterior on the articular eminence and essentially out of the fossa. On opening, there is fairly good translation of both joints. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some mild AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6.5 mm at the base of the tongue and maybe 7 mm at the soft palate level. Incisors appear to be in reasonable angulation, although both maxilla and mandible appear AP retruded.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Right TMJ subcondylar fracture.
Right TMJ abnormal morphology secondary to previous condylar fracture with bony osteophytes that extend beyond the articular disc. AP maxillary hypoplasia. Right maxillary vertical hypoplasia. AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Loss of vertical height of the right side of the ramus secondary to previous subcondylar fracture. Class I cuspid relationship on the left side, Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side. Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm shorter vertically than the left side.
Maxillary midline on the facial midline, but mandibular dental midline shifted 2 mm to the right and the chin is shifted 5 to 6 mm to the right. Right TMJ pain. Right-sided headaches.
Closing premature contact on the right molars.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch. Surgery.
Right TMJ arthroplasty, articular disc repositioning and debridement of joint to allow the condyle to be positioned centrically in the fossa.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible about 5 mm and level it transversely.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and level it transversely.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to shift the chin approximately 4 mm to the left of the facial midline.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B063 MRI AGE: 20/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good shape and morphology. Joint space looks fairly good. Disc may be slightly medially displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is significantly abnormal in shape. There appears to be loss of vertical height. The condyle is cup shaped on the superior surface. It appears, however, there may be discal tissue present. There appears to be decreased lateral joint space. There is a little deviation in the shape of the fossa as well as a little dimpling upwards at the mid fossa area.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Articular eminence has moderate inclination. Out laterally the disc is hard to see and appears to be anteriorly displaced at the most lateral aspect of the joint. However, more towards the center of the joint the disc assumes a better position between the fossa and condyle. On opening, there is some moderately good translation of the condyle and the articular disc is in a reduced position between the condyle and articular eminence.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is very dysmorphic. There is some sclerosis on the head of the condyle and there is a V notch in the midportion of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The condyle is postured somewhat forward in the fossa. The disc actually appears to be in reasonably good position. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle and the articular disc with the disc in a reduced position. On opening views, there is a right V notch within the condylar head with some peaking of the condyle posteriorly, but later the condyle appears to be reduced beneath the articular disc.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ articular disc anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint, but with very early reduction. Left condyle with a normal architecture, but an anteriorly positioned disc at the lateral aspect of the joint but with early reduction. Right TMJ condylar malformation secondary to previous fracture but articular disc that appears to be in good position.

