B064
B064 is 22 years old. B064 was referred by XXXX. B064 problems began likely when she was 13 or 14 years of age. At the age of 14 is when she first became aware of clicking and popping in her joints. It was noted when she was wearing elastics for orthodontic reasons. She had orthodontics from age 14 to 17 years old. After removal of her appliances, she noted her bite was started to shift. She went back into orthodontics from age 19 to 20 years old. She had double jaw orthognathic surgery in two years ago by Dr. XXXX. Primary concerns that B064 has at this time include the following:

Lower jaw is becoming recessive again. Bite is opened anteriorly. Crepitus noises in the jaws. Painful jaw muscles.
Drooling.
Headaches. Difficulties breathing through the nose.

Additional treatments that B064 has had includes chiropractic treatment, facial massage therapy, and speech therapy. The only medication she takes is Motrin for her pain.

B064 gets headaches at about a level of 3 in the temporal and posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 4, jaw function and diet at 5, disability at 8. She gets occasional earaches, but no tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. The only other joint that bothers her is her right shoulder. She is aware of clenching her teeth at night. She is predominantly a mouth breather particularly at night and to a moderate extent during the day. She is unaware of snoring, has mild daytime somnolence, but no sleep apnea. Post surgery, B064 did develop an infection in the left maxillary area and Dr. XXXX had to go in and remove the bone plate and screws.

In frontal view, B064 has fairly good left-to-right symmetry. Upper lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. The maxillary midline is slightly to the right about 1 mm. The mandibular dental midline is probably 2 mm to the right and so is the chin. Upper lip supralabrale is probably a good 3 mm posterior to subnasale. The maxilla is probably deficient about 6 to 8 mm. The mandible is retruded about 15-18 mm. The chin neckline is short. Intraorally, B064 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has a 3 x 3 lower retainer. She has very thin tissue around the anterior teeth that appears to be stable. In the upper arch, B064 has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has palatal tori present. She has a Class II end-on occlusion being approximately 4 or 5 mm Class II. She has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm. She has an overjet of about 3 mm. In centric relation, the mandibular dental midline is actually about 3 mm off towards the right side as is the chin. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderately enlarged and probably are blocking the airway. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the temporalis muscles, posterior neck and shoulders. She has audible crepitation particularly in the left joint, but also crepitation in the right joint. The maximal incisal opening is 51 mm, opening with comfort 32 mm. Excursion movement to the right 9 mm, to the left 10 mm. When B064 occludes, she hits only on the second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. She has four bone screws in the left ramus and three in the right ramus. The sinuses appear relatively clear. A 3 x 3 retainer can be seen in the lower arch.

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are quite large. The septum is reasonably straight. Sinuses appear relatively clear.
Axial view shows that there is a little deviation of the septum off towards the right side. The turbinates are quite large and appear to obstruct most of the nasal airway. The sinuses appear relatively clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that she has severe arthritis in the left TMJ with significant loss of condylar volume. There are some small pseudocysts in the joint. The articular eminence is relatively flat.

Right TMJ sagittal view also has severe arthritis with significant loss of condylar volume. The articular eminence is slightly steeper on this side compared to the opposite side. The condyle is narrow mediolaterally.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe arthritic changes. The fossa also has undergone significant arthritic changes. There is a pseudocyst in the head of the condyle. There is medial beaking of the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. There is significantly decreased superior joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost more volume than the opposite side and is a little bit more narrow mediolaterally. Significant decreased vertical joint space is present. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B064 has a significantly retruded maxilla and particularly the mandible. She has a high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 to 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 5 mm at the base of the tongue. She has a skeletal Class II relationship and an anterior open bite.

Basic diagnoses for B064 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocations with severe deformation and nonreducing (probable AICR).
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class II occlusion. High occlusal plane angle.
Occluding only on the second molars bilaterally.
Hypertrophied turbinates with nasal airway obstruction. Decreased oropharyngeal airway. TMJ pain.
Headaches. Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level mandibular arch. b.	Align and level maxillary arch.
2. CAT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies. e.	Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B064 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has significant condylar resorption and destruction. There are also degenerative changes in the fossa. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 or 3 mm. There is some fluid in the superior joint space. There may be discal tissue anterior to the condyle.

Right TMJ condyle is a little bit wider in width, but still a lot of loss of vertical volume. There is less degeneration in the fossa on this side. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. There may be a little fluid in this joint space as well.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe degenerative changes with loss of vertical volume. There is some mushrooming out of the condylar head. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced, severely degenerated and deformed, and extremely anteroposteriorly. There is degenerative changes in the fossa. The articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is some restricted translation. The articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that similarly has undergone significant degenerative changes. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced, although in slightly better condition than the opposite side. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. The fossa appears quite broad in width compared to the size of the condyle. The articular disc is significantly degenerated. On opening, there is some restriction in translation, but the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with significant destruction of the condyles. Bilateral disc displacements with severe degenerative changes and nonreducing. The patient probable candidate for total joint prostheses.

