B065
B065 is 17 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX and Dr. XXXX. B065 is not aware of having any TMJ problems. She had orthodontics initially for 2 years from about the age of 7 to 8 until she was 9 to 10. She had orthodontics again from the age of 12 to 14. She still wears her retainers at night. She gets headaches about two times a month that are predominantly in the frontal area that she relates more to sinus or allergy kind of headaches. She has no TMJ pain, no pain around the head and neck area. She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability at 0. She takes no medications. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo nor hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. B065 reports no problems with snoring, daytime somnolence, sleep apnea, or mouth breathing. B065's primary concerns are as follows:

Jaw malalignment.
Teeth do not fit together.
In frontal view, B065 has fairly good symmetry in the lower and upper third face but has asymmetry in the lower third face. She does have a little bit of vertical dystopia with the left eye being about 2 mm higher than the right eye. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm on the left and 4.5 mm on the right. The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline and may be about 1 mm to the left. The mandibular dental midline and chin midline are closer to being on the facial midline, although the chin may be about 2 mm to the left. She has a lip incompetence of about 8 mm. She has some nasal dorsum prominence with a dorsal hump present. The maxilla is retruded about 4 or 5 mm and the chin is retruded 15 mm. The chin neckline is short and the chin neck angle is moderately well defined. She has significant flatness from labial mental fold down through menton. Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular probably first bicuspids and probably first bicuspids in the upper arch as well. She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and slight Class III on the left side. She has an end-on incisor relationship. She has an anterior cross bite tendency. She has a transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being about 2 mm lower than the left side. Again, from the frontal view, the right side of her face is at least 6 mm more full than the left side in a transverse dimension. The vertical height of the mandible on the right side appears that it may be 3 to 4 mm longer the left side. B065 appears to have a yaw in her occlusion with the posterior maxilla and mandible being shifted about 3 to 4 mm off towards the right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy. The fascial pillars may be just mildly constricted and the tonsils are mildly enlarged. Intranasally, the turbinates appear relatively normal in size. She has a small spur off the right side at the base of septum, but does not appear to be causing any significant obstruction. The maximal incisal opening is 35 mm, excursion movement to the right 7 mm, to the left 5 mm. The joints seem to function smoothly. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over her shoulders, but nowhere else.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. The condyles appear small in size. The turbinates appear moderate in size. The right sinus may have some congestion in it, but difficult to tell from this x-ray.

Coronal view shows that the right turbinate is actually moderately enlarged. The septum appears reasonably straight. The sinuses appear clear.
Axial view shows that the right turbinate is enlarged, but the sinuses are clear.

Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows that the condyle is somewhat narrow anteroposteriorly. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good shape but narrow anteroposteriorly. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width compared to the width of the fossa. The vertical joint space, however, appears to be very narrow as does the lateral joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width compared to the width of the fossa. The vertical joint space, however, appears to be very narrow as does the lateral joint space.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B065 has a retruded maxilla and mandible. She has anterior vertical maxillary excess and posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. She has a high occlusal plane angle and she has two vertical plane lines. She has prominence of the nasal dorsum. Oropharyngeal airway measures 6 mm at the soft palate level and at about 5 mm at the base of the tongue. She does have space between the dorsum of the tongue and the hard palate.

Dental model analysis shows there is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4 mm. There is some residual spacing between the lower bicuspids and cuspids.

Basic diagnoses for B065 would be as follows:
Rule out bilateral TMJ pathology.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia, anterior vertical hyperplasia, transverse asymmetry as well as posterior yaw off towards the right side.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia, transverse cant with the right side being lower than the left, and posterior yaw off towards the right side.
End-on incisor relationship.
Transverse cant of the maxilla and mandible with the right side being 2 mm lower than the left side.
High occlusal plane angle of 23 degrees.
Missing maxillary and mandibular probably second bicuspids and all four third molars.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. Residual spacing in the lower arch between the cuspids and bicuspids bilaterally.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4 mm. Right maxillary turbinate hyperplasia. External nasal deformity.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. MRI of left and right TMJs to rule out TMJ pathology.
2. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Open 1 mm of space between the upper lateral incisors and cuspids. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Try to shift the posterior teeth forward to close the spacing, advancing first the bicuspids, then the first molars, and then the second molars. Could use TADs as anterior anchorage to help move the posterior teeth forward.
3. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ surgery if indicated dependent on MRI examination. b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction, advancing the chin approximately 15 mm. c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction, level the transverse arch and AP occlusal plane. d.	Consider right reduction turbinectomy. e.	Consider external rhinoplasty.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
5. Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors.

B065 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral dimension. Vertical joint space is decreased. There appears to be discal tissue laterally displaced and almost completely out of the fossa.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is actually larger than the left side. There is decreased vertical joint space. There appears to be some discal tissue medial to the condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology with a little flattening on the anterior head. The disc is not seen very well except out laterally it appears to be laterally displaced, but over the center of the condyle there is some very thin discal tissue present that is a little bit anteriorly displaced. On opening, she has moderate translation of the condyle and the disc is in good position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. There is decreased vertical joint space. The articular eminence is moderately steep. There appears to be discal tissue anterior to the condyle. There is also a structure posterior to the condyle. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint, there does not appear to be much discal tissue. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and disc reduces in position.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ mild TMJ arthritis and articular disc lateral displaced. Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc medially and anteriorly displaced.

