B069
B069 is 22 years 11 months of age. Her TMJ problems began when she as about 10 or 11 years of age when the joints began to click and pop of unknown etiology. She began orthodontic treatment at the age of about 10 and finished when she was about 14. She also has worn splints for about 5 or 6 years and has had 3 different splint type devices used. She had her wisdom teeth removed at the age of 17 and she has also had a septoplasty. In the past, she has had lower second bicuspids and upper first bicuspids extracted.

B069 has some thyroid problems and takes Levoxyl 0.01 mg. In addition, she takes Portia (BCP) and Excedrin 2 to 4 tablets per day. B069 does have constant TMJ pain that usually escalates to about a level of 7. Her average daily pain and headache level is at 7, jaw function at 7, diet at 6, disability at 8. She gets headaches that are all the time and almost always hit a level of 9 during the day. They occur predominantly in the frontal, temporal, and occasionally the posterior head area. She would rather stay in bed and rest to try to get rid of her headaches than do many activities.

She gets occasional earaches, no tinnitus, and gets some vertigo particularly when she gets around loud noise type of stimulations. Other joints that bother her include her left shoulder, left hip, and sometimes her right shoulder. She is aware of clenching at night time, and she does it sometimes during the day as well.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B069 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 17 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 4 mm. The midlines are fairly well aligned. In profile, B069 has fairly good facial asymmetry. Intraorally, B069 is missing the lower second bicuspids and has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. In the upper arch, she is probably missing the first bicuspids. She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship by 1 to 2 mm. She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 to 4 mm. Intranasally, B069 has large turbinates that appear to block off a good part of her nasal airway. She is a mouth breather at night and also during the day. She is not aware of snoring and does not seem to have any evidence of sleep apnea. She does have a significant amount of daytime somnolence that she relates to the inability to sleep well at night that could be related to her headaches, TMJ pain, and to anxiety. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal. To palpation, she has moderate pain to palpation in the masseters, TMJs, and retromandibular areas and moderate pain over the temporalis, posterior neck and shoulder areas. On opening, she has a softer click in the right TMJ at about 15 mm, but an audible click at about 25 mm on the left side. On closing, there is a click in the left side at 15 mm and on the right side at about 10 mm. B069 does have an orthodontist, Dr. XXXX.

Basic diagnoses for B069 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation. Mandibular hyperplasia. Headaches. TMJ pain. Myofascial pain. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch. Surgery—Option #1.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone plate stabilization to advance it approximately 5 mm Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it anteriorly approximately 5 mm. Surgery—Option #2 Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone plate stabilization.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B069 I-CAT
Panorex view shows the absence of all four third molars. She is missing mandibular second bicuspids and upper first bicuspids. Sinuses appear clear.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. The septum is straight, but she has large turbinates that appear to obstruct her nasal airway.
Coronal view shows that she has enlarged inferior turbinates. Sinuses appear clear. The right condyle shows arthritis and decreased vertical joint space. There is some medial lipping of the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly only 1 to 2 mm. Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with arthritis. She has decrease vertical joint space and some medial lipping of the condyle. There are some degenerative changes in the condyle.

Sagittal view shows a right condyle that is arthritic with some anterior beaking. There is decreased vertical and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is fairly steep.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has some anterior beaking and some degenerative changes associated with it. There appears to be decreased posterior and posterosuperior joint space. Articular eminence is fairly steep.

