B070
B070 is 31 years old. Referred by Dr. XXXX. Dr. XXXX is an oral and maxillofacial surgeon. B070's TMJ problems began when she was about 22 years old of unknown etiology. She started with teeth grinding and then she got locking of the jaw on the left side. She saw an oral surgeon at that time and was offered muscle relaxers. An MRI was taken and he told her she needed surgery likely to reposition the articular disc which was probably the reason for having the closed lock. He made no inference to the mass in her jaw joint on the left side. She has noted over the years that her face has become asymmetric, and her teeth do not touch on the left side. She has had a significant amount of weight loss recently and it very well could be related to a hyperthyroidism situation that she has been recently diagnosed with. She is not under treatment yet for it.

B070 gets headaches about 2 to 3 times per week in the frontal, temporal, and on the top of the head bilaterally at about a level of 5. She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 2, the left side worse then the right side. She rates her average daily pain at 1, jaw function at 3, diet and disability at 0. She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. The only joints that bother her include her hips. She is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B070 has good facial balance in the middle and upper third facial areas. She has asymmetry in the lower jaw area. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental is also. The chin, however, is off to the right side approximately 6 mm. In profile, she has fairly good vertical and anteroposterior facial balance. Chin neckline appears relatively normal in length and chin neck angle is fairly well defined. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. The lower posterior teeth on the right side are in lingual inclination and on the left side there is probably slight buccal inclination of the molars. She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has buccal inclination in the maxillary posterior teeth on the right side and lingual inclination on the left side. She is very close to being Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has an anterior deep bite of 4-5 mm. B070 has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side in the maxilla being about 2 mm lower than the right side. In the lower arch, the left side is down probably 3 mm compared to the right side. There is a slight open bite on the left side posteriorly. She has an increased prominence of the right angle of the mandible in transverse dimension, probably a good 6 mm more prominent than the left side. The inferior border of the mandible on the left side is probably about 12 mm lower than the right side. Increased vertical height of the mandible appears to extend all the way forward to the symphysis. Oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal. On opening, the mandible deviates about 5 mm to the left. Incisal opening is about 36 mm. Maximum opening is only 36 mm, but 29 mm without discomfort. Excursion movement to the right was about 1.5 mm and to the left 6 mm. On opening, she does deviate about 5 mm towards the left side. B070 has no pain to palpation around the head and neck area. Right joint seems to function reasonably smoothly. On the left side, she does have some crepitation. B070 has no sleep apnea symptoms. Nasal airway appears clear. Septum is deviated just slightly to the left side, but still good airway on both sides.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows that she is missing all four third molars. She has an open bite on the left side particularly in the bicuspid and molar areas. Right condyle has a relatively normal architecture, whereas the left joint is extremely enlarged. It appears that the lesion measures about 19 mm x about 20 mm in this two-dimensional film. Sinuses look relatively clear. Septum appears straight and turbinates appear moderate in size. Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. Septum is straight. Turbinates are moderate in size with the right one being a little bit more obstructed than the left side. Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear. Septum is reasonably straight. Turbinates are moderate in size with the left one being a little bit larger than the right one. Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows condylar lesion that in this view measures about 25 mm x 22 mm. The articular eminence is relatively flat. There is very minimal joint space present. Right TMJ shows a condyle that has a little flattening on the superior head and a little bit of sclerosis as well. Articular eminence is relatively moderate in size and shape. Joint space actually looks reasonably good. Left TMJ coronal view shows the lesion in this dimension measures about 24 mm at greatest width, making the lesion therefore in dimensions 21 x 25 x 24 mm. There is a component of the tumor that extends inferiorly at the lateral aspect of the deformed condyle. There is significantly decreased joint space and areas where there could be bone-on-bone contact. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 4-5 mm.
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm. There appears to be reasonably good joint space. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the patient has a Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship. Vertical height of the mandible on the left side compared to the right side at the angle of the mandible measures 10 mm and at the body area about 13 mm. On occlusal surface, there is a vertical difference of at least 4-5 mm. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 8 mm at the base of the tongue and almost 10 mm at the soft palate level.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Left mandibular condylar osteochondroma. Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations secondary to the tumor. Left mandibular vertical hyperplasia.
Left maxillary vertical hyperplasia. Left posterior open bite. Crowding of lower inferior arch. Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2-3 mm lower than the right side.
Headaches. TMJ pain. In the lower arch, the posterior teeth are tipped lingually and left posterior teeth are tipped labially. In the upper arch, the right posterior teeth are tipped labially and the left posterior teeth are tipped palatally. Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary. Try to tip the maxillary left teeth buccally and the maxillary right teeth lingually to correct the dental compensations. Align and level mandibular arch. Try to tip the left posterior teeth lingually and the right teeth labially. Consider using cross arch elastics to achieve the above-noted movements. This may create a crossbite on the right side and tendency towards a buccal crossbite on the left side, but will provide a better overall treatment outcome. Surgery. Removal of large osteochondroma from the left condyle.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level it transversely, correct for any transverse discrepancy, and align the arches. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition the mandible into best functional facial balance position. Left mandibular angle and body vertical ostectomy at the inferior border. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B070 MRI AGE: 31/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears enlarged vertically and mediolaterally. The condyle has a very unusual shape to it. There is significantly decreased vertical joint space. The condyle appears as though it is an osteochondroma versus osteoma. It is very difficult to identify discal tissue in this joint.

Right TMJ condyle appears a little bit more normal in mediolateral width and vertical dimension. There also appears to be decreased vertical joint space. It is difficult to identify discal tissue, but there may be some medially and anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is exceptionally large and extends off the condylar neck. It is excessively large vertically and anteroposteriorly. It extends almost beyond the articular eminence. The articular eminence is extremely flattened. There is significantly decreased vertical joint space and really no evidence of a disc present. There is fluid surrounding the condyle anteriorly and anteroinferiorly. On opening, there is some translation of the condyle, but there is significant restriction. Again, it is difficult to identify discal tissue. It is possible there could be disc tissue anterior to the condyle actually coming down along the front aspect of the condyle and displaced in an anterior inferior position. This might explain the fluid along the anterior contour of the tumor.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology, but some sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep, but not too long vertically. The articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint. There is some fluid in the inferior joint space. On opening, there is early reduction of the articular disc and moderately good translation.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ extremely large osteochondroma with an anterior inferior displacement of the articular disc. Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction.

