B071
B071 is 16 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. Primary concerns that B071 has includes:
Malalignment of the mandible. Popping and clicking the jaw joints.

B071's TMJ problems began when she was about 12 years old. She had had previous orthodontics including an expander at the age of 8 and then she had her first appliances placed from the age of 9 to 11. The second set of orthodontic appliances were placed when she was 12 years old. It was around this time that the joint situation may have begun. The second orthodontics lasted from the age of 12 through 14. B071 has no problems with headaches currently, but she did previously have headache problems. She rates her TMJ pain at 2, average daily pain at 0, jaw function at 3, diet at 1 and disability at 1. She has no trouble with earaches, but gets occasional tinnitus and vertigo. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also during the day. She did receive a maxillary splint 10 months ago. B071 wears her maxillary bite plate that she received 10 months ago only at night, but then during the day also on the weekends. It helps with the clenching and bruxism, but she is not sure how much it helps with the joint issues. The joints apparently still click and pop.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B071 has a little bit of increased fullness perhaps in the right angle area of about 2-3 mm. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth relationship is about 2.5 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is off to the left about 1 mm and the chin is to the left about 2 mm. In profile view, B071 may have a slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe 2-3 mm. The chin is retruded by about 18 mm. Chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. B071 appears to have an elongated lower third facial height. Intraorally, B071 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch. She appears to have adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. B071 has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship and maybe 5 mm Class II on the left side and 4 mm on the right side. She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm. Her oropharyngeal airway looks normal. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged. Septum may be deviated just slightly to the right side. She could have some mild to moderate airway obstruction, but by history she does not report that. She is not aware of snoring, daytime somnolence nor sleep apnea. She has a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left maxillary cuspid being 1.5 mm higher than the right side. The right eye is about 3 mm higher than the left. On opening, she has a soft click at about 20 mm on the left side and the closing click is a little bit more noticeable at about 15 mm. On the right side, on opening she has a click at about 25 mm and a closing click about 15. To palpation, she has just some mild tenderness over the temporalis muscle and TMJs. Maximal incisal opening is 57 mm and excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Sinuses look reasonably clear. Turbinates appear to fill most of the nasal airway.

Coronal view shows that she has a little mucocele or fluid in the base of the right maxillary sinus. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. Septum is deviated just slightly off towards the right side.

Axial view show that the sinuses appear clear in this view and the turbinates are enlarged and appear to block a good component of the airway.
Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. There is decreased posterior joint space. There may be slight increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is fairly steep.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some slight flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. The condyle appears to be a little bit better centered in the fossa compared to the opposite side. Articular eminence is steep, although not quite as steep as the opposite side.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that has reasonably good mediolateral width, although it is less than the opposite side. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 4 mm at the greatest curvature.

Right TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that is wider than the opposite side. There appears to be decreased lateral joint space.
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B071 has a retruded maxilla and particularly a significantly retruded mandible. She has a high occlusal plane angle. She has a Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about almost 7 mm, but at the base of the tongue measures probably less than 5 mm. She has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.

Dental model analysis shows that there is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm. There is a transverse maxillary deficiency with posterior cross bites in the Class I position.

Basic diagnoses for B071 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. AP mandibular hypoplasia. Maxillary AP, posterior vertical, and transverse hypoplasia.
Class II occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle. Mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Partial nasal airway obstruction.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2.5-3 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy and to keep from flaring them too far forward.
Surgery. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction as well as expand.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
Bilateral partial nasal inferior turbinectomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B071 MRI AGE: 16/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. It is difficult to identify discal tissue within the joint space, although the joint space looks adequate. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. Lateral joint space appears to be a little bit decreased. The disc may be medially displaced. Lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good shape to it, but a little flattening on the anterior head. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Articular disc is vertically oriented and anteriorly displaced, more at the lateral aspect than medially. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint space but not too significant. On opening, there appears to be early reduction and good translation of the condyle and the articular disc.
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. There is flattening on the top of the condyle. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint but more towards the medial side the disc appears to be in a little bit better position. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there appears to be early reduction and good translation of the condyle and articular disc. IMPRESSION:

Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc displaced with early reduction. Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly with early reduction.

