B076
B076 is 27 years old and her primary concerns include the following:
Jaw pain. Neck, shoulder, and back pain. Headaches.
Anterior open bite.
Bites only on the very back teeth.
Difficulties eating and chewing. Significant daytime tiredness.

B076 is aware of having TMJ problems since about the age of 16 of unknown etiology. She had orthodontics performed 9 years ago and then had a LeForte I osteotomy performed 8 years and 9 months ago by Dr. XXXX. Her bite remained closed for about two months and then began to open again. She was tried on an occlusal splint, but it was too uncomfortable for her and so she was unable to wear it. She has had no other treatment. B076 currently takes the following medications:

Levothyroxine 75 mcg q.d.
Naproxen 375 mg that she used to take daily but actually takes it only about once per week.
Advil for headaches and pain.
B076 gets daily headaches in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area at a level of 6 on the right side and a level of 4 on the left side. She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 9, jaw function, diet, and disability at 2. She has no earaches, occasional tinnitus but frequent vertigo. She has no hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her knees and ankles. Her other joints are somewhat stiff for her at times but not painful. She has been diagnosed with hypothyroidism. She is aware of clenching at nighttime and in the daytime and usually wakes up with headaches in the morning. The pain down her neck, shoulders, and back she rates as severe. She states she has no problems with snoring nor sleep apnea but does have moderate daytime somnolence. She is not aware of mouth breathing during the day or at night.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B076 has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face. There is some slight asymmetry in the lower third face. The left side of the mandible may be a little bit short vertically compared to the right side. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about -1. The nasal tip is a little bit off towards the right side about 2 mm. The maxillary midline may be just slightly off to the left side 0.5 mm, but the mandibular dental midline and chin actually appear to be fairly well aligned. In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably at least 3 mm. The maxilla is AP deficient by at least 6-8 mm. The chin is retruded by about 20 mm. Chin neckline is very short, although the chin neck angle is moderately well defined. The lower third face appears elongated vertically. She has probably about a 4 mm lip incompetence. Intraorally, B076 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Attached gingiva anteriorly is quite thin around the incisors. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has an anterior open bite of almost 6 mm. When B076 bites together, she hits initially on her left second molars initially and then the right second molars touch. All other teeth are out of occlusion. She has an end-on Class II occlusal relationship. Transversely, the maxillary occlusal plane looks fairly level. The mandible may be up about 1 mm on the left side. Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy. She has a hypertrophied uvula, but the rest of the tissues look relatively normal. Intranasally, structures look reasonably normal. To palpation, she has some moderate pain over the TMJs and mild tenderness over the left retromandibular area. On opening, she has crepitation in both joints, perhaps a little bit worse on the left side than the right side. Maximum opening is about 39 mm and excursion movements are 7 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. There is a little calcification under the mesial root of the mandibular right first molar. There are bone plates present anteriorly in the maxilla and wires present posteriorly. She has severe arthritis in both temporomandibular joints with significant loss of volume.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear and turbinates appear relatively normal in size.
Axial view shows that the septum appears reasonably straight and the turbinates are normal and sinuses are clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view show a condyle that has undergone severe resorption. The articular eminence has also been resorbed away. The condyle is postured forward in the fossa probably 6 mm compared to its normal position. The articular eminence is almost totally flat.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle hat has undergone significant arthritic changes, but not as severe as the opposite side. There is loss of vertical volume and probable anteroposterior volume. There appears to be a large cyst in the head of the condyle. The articular eminence is resorbed, but is not quite as flat as the opposite side. The condyle is postured forward in the fossa but not as significantly as the opposite side.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle a severely resorbed condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm, but the roof of the fossa in some areas is extremely thin. Right TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that has undergone severe condylar resorption. There is a cyst in the head of the condyle. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 or 4 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B076 has a high occlusal plane angle, being greater in the lower arch than the upper arch. Plates and wires are seen in the upper jaw from her previous surgery. She has an anterior open bite. She occludes only on her second molars. Oropharyngeal airway is severely decreased with an AP dimension of less than 3 mm at the base of the tongue and about 5 mm at the soft palate level. The mandible is severely retruded.

Diagnoses for B076 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ severe resorptive arthritis compatible with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Severe AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Maxillary anterior and posterior vertical as well as transverse hypoplasia. Anterior open bite of 6 mm.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Bilateral posterior cross bite tendencies.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway including an AP dimension of 3 mm. TMJ pain. Myofascial pain. Headaches.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.
Hypertrophied uvula.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a. Align and level the maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdentally osteotomies. Place brackets on the second molars, but do not engage the second molars with the arch wire. Open up 1 mm of space between the crowns of the maxillary lateral incisors and cuspids bilaterally to compensate for the tooth size discrepancy. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Place brackets on the second molars, but do not engage the second molars in the arch wire.
2. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to rotate the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction, advance it, and expand it. c.	Bilateral cornoidotomies. d.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). e.	Uvulectomy.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
4. Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors.

B076 AGE: 27/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant resorption. There is also vertical and mediolateral height. The slope of the condyle is very sclerotic. Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. It is difficult to identify discal tissue.

Right TMJ coronal view shows some condyle still present but there is loss of vertical height and mediolaterally is somewhat narrow, but not compared to the opposite side. Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. There may be some discal tissue medially displaced but very thin.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some anteroposterior width and loss of vertical volume. The articular eminence is moderately eroded away. The bone on the fossa and on the condyle appears eburnated. It appears that there may be some discal tissue anterior and posterior to the condyle, but not in the discal tissue in between. The joint space is decreased between the condyle the remaining eminence. The condyle is postured forward in the fossa probably about 8 mm. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space posterior to the condyle. On opening, there is some translation of the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have a large cystic element in the head. There appears to be loss of vertical volume. There is decreased vertical joint space. There may be some discal remnants in the joint, but difficult to identify. The articular eminence has been eroded away. The condyle is postured anterior in the fossa about 6-8 mm anterior to its normal position. There is a very slight amount of fluid in the superior joint space posterior to the condyle.

In the T-2's, there may be some remnant of the disc present with a small posterior and anterior to the condyle, but no continuity. On opening, there is some translation but not too significant.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ severe resorptive arthritis with the left side worse than the right side.
Destruction on the articular discs bilaterally.
Bilateral erosion of the articular eminences.
Imaging compatible with JRA or other connective tissue autoimmune process.

