B077
B077 is 47 years old, referred by Dr. XXXX, and also indirectly worked with Dr. XXXX. B077's primary concerns are as follows:
Severe headaches. Severe TMJ pain. Difficulties eating and chewing. Clenching and bruxism.
Moderate snoring.
Occasional episodes of inability to catch her breath at night.

B077 has been a clencher and bruxer her entire life. She says there is a familial history of it as her mother had a severe problem with that as well as an aunt. B077's TMJ problems began when she was about 25 years of age. She believes it may be related to bruxism. When she was about 4 years old, she was attacked by a German shepherd dog that grabbed her head and shook it fairly violently. She is not sure if that was the initiation or whether it did occur later on with the bruxism. She has been aware of clenching and bruxing her entire life. She had orthodontics from the age of 12 to 14, and she has had her wisdom teeth removed. Over the past 10 years, she has at least 6 splints made without relief of her symptoms. In addition, she has had acupuncture, electrical stimulation, biofeedback, physical therapy, deep tissue work, craniosacral treatment, and osteopathic treatment, all without success in eliminating her significant pain problems.

B077 rates her TMJ pain at a level of 9, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 5, diet at 3, disability at 5. Headaches are at a level of 5 and they occur predominantly in the frontal and on top of her head. She gets right-sided earaches, occasional tinnitus, occasional vertigo, but no hearing loss. Other joints that bother include her SI joint and she has a lot of pain in her feet. She previously had Lyme's disease. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time and also during the day. She currently is taking the following medication:

Lamictal 200 mg q.d.
Ativan 0.05 mg q.h.s.
Valium 11.5 mg q.h.s.
Rozarem 8 mg q.d.
Emsam 3 mg q.d.
She is also taking some supplements including L-tryptophan, B12, B folate, calcium, and magnesium.

Primary objectives B077 would like to reach would be to be pain free with good jaw function and good functional airway.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B077 has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about zero. The maxillary midline is about 1 mm off towards the right side. The mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The chin appears to be about 1 to 2 mm off to the right side. In profile, the maxilla is slightly retruded by probably about 3 mm. Chin is retruded by about 10 to 12 mm. Chin neckline is a little bit short in length. She does have crenations around the borders of her tongue. She has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled. There is a little bit of clefting on the gingiva around the mandibular left central incisor. Teeth, however, otherwise appear in good alignment and there is good attached gingiva except for around that mandibular left incisor. In the upper arch, B077 is missing the first bicuspids bilaterally. B077 has an anterior open bite. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relatively on the left side and just slight Class II on the right side. She seems to hit only on the right side and the anterior teeth and the left teeth are out of occlusion. Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy. Soft palate may be slightly elongated. Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged, but septum is relatively straight. She does give a history of mild snoring, moderate daytime somnolence, and likely at least some mild to moderate sleep apnea symptoms. B077 has crepitation in both joints. Her mandible tends to deviate towards the right side on opening probably about 3 to 4 mm. Maximal incisal opening is 33 mm, opening without significant pain 28 mm. Excursion movement to the right 6 mm, to the left 2 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and maxillary first bicuspids. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Condyles appear arthritic with the right side looking worse than the left side. Coronal view shows that the turbinates are quite large which minimizes the airway. Septum is deviated significantly off towards the right side. Sinuses look relatively clear. Axial view shows that the inferior turbinates are quite large and appear to block most of the airway. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Left TMJ coronal view shows condyle that appears significantly arthritic. There appears to be loss of vertical volume. There is significantly decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint, but the vertical joint space is actually increased. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 mm. Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is arthritic. There is significantly decreased vertical joint space in the lateral joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly significantly probably 4 to 5 mm. Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that demonstrates what appears to be loss of vertical dimension. There is anterior beaking present on the condyle. There is increased vertical joint space that could be related to the splint therapy. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On the right joint, there is significant arthritic changes with erosions and a pseudocyst in the head of the condyle. There is decreased vertical joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B077 has some slight AP maxillary deficiency and some AP mandibular deficiency. The oropharyngeal airway is fairly constricted with an airway dimension of only about 4 mm at the soft palate level and about 5.5 mm at the base of the tongue.

Dental model analysis shows in a Class I cuspid position B077 has a little bit of an overjet of about 2 mm, but no significant vertical overbite. She has transverse deficiency in the width of the maxilla. In Class I position, she has a cross bite on both sides. She has some spacing in the maxilla on the left side between the second bicuspid and first molar and on the right side between the second bicuspid and first molar and between the lateral incisor and cuspid. Tooth size analysis reveals no significant tooth size discrepancy.

Basic diagnoses for B077 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis. AP mandibular hypoplasia.
AP and posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia. End-on Class II occlusion. Bilateral posterior crossbite tendency. Anterior and left-sided open bite. TMJ pain. Headaches. Myofascial pain. Hypertrophied turbinates causing nasal airway obstruction. Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of only about 3.5 mm at the soft palate level and 4.5 mm at the base of the tongue.
Periodontal gingival clefting around the mandibular left central incisors.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Gingival graft around mandibular left central incisor.
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisors mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Close spacing that is present between some of the teeth.
Align and level mandibular arch. CAT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and expand it. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). Bilateral partial turbinectomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B077 MRI AGE: 47/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. It appears that there has been loss of condylar volume. There appears to be some discal tissue displaced. Joint space appears actually slightly increased in some areas. The condyle appears perhaps somewhat narrow mediolateral, but it is short vertically.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is small in size mediolaterally and appears to have lost vertical volume. There is significantly decreased vertical joint space. There appears to be discal tissue anterior and medial to the condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good morphology, but a slight hockey stick or golf club shape to it. The disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting almost beneath the articular eminence. There is increased vertical joint space. Articular eminence is quite steep. It appears there may be some kind of reactive tissue perhaps in the joint space. On opening, it appears there may be a partial reduction of the disc. Translation is fairly good with the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears much more arthritic. There is anterior beaking. There is sclerosis on the head of the condyle. There is significantly decreased vertical joint space with possible bone-on-bone contact, particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. Articular disc is severely degenerated, and, if any of it is left, it is sitting anterior to the condyle and medial to the condyle. On opening, there is some restriction in translation and whatever discal tissue may be present remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with partial reduction. Right TMJ arthritis (worse than the left side) with anteriorly displaced severely degenerated articular disc.
Probable indication for bilateral total joint prostheses.

