B078
B078 is 29 years old, referred by Dr. XXXX.
B078's TMJ problems began when she was about 21 years old when she got hit in the jaw with a car door. She has had basically a downhill slide since that time. Primary concerns B078 has at this time includes the following:

Diminished quality of life. Jaw pain.
Joint pain.
Open bite.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Headaches.
Nausea and dizziness.
Ear pain. Neck and shoulder pain.
Stuffy ears.
Chronic fatigue.

Problems got worse until she finally sought treatment. She did have clicking and popping and sometimes hurting in her jaw, but 2 years and 10 months ago, she developed a closed lock situation where she was locked shut for 11 days before they were able to get her released. She began splint therapy 3 months later, and has continued splint therapy until the present time. For a long time, she wore the appliance 24 hours a day and has weaned off now to wearing it just at nighttime. Last year, she began massage therapy for about 50 minutes weekly. She also uses hot and cold packs. One month ago, she began physical therapy for about 50 minutes on a weekly basis. Unfortunately, 2 years and 4 months ago, she had to make a significant lifestyle change and had to quit her job as a counselor because of her significant pain problems.

B078 gets earaches occasionally, but they are quite severe when she gets them. She has no tinnitus, occasional vertigo, and no significant hearing loss, although her ears feel stuffy quite often. She has no other joint involvement. She is aware of clenching her teeth at nighttime. Her pain sometimes is worse in the mornings, but usually gets worse throughout the day. She drinks one cup of coffee per day.

B078 rates her headaches at a level of 8 that are basically behind the eyes which would probably come from the frontal temporal area and also if she gets headaches around the posterior head area. She rates her average pain when on medications at about a level of 5, but the worse it goes to a level of 9. Her average daily pain is at 4 and at the worse gets to be about an 8. She rates her jaw function at 7, diet at 9, disability at 8.

In frontal view, B078 has fairly good facial balance in the middle and upper third face. She has some slight increased fullness on the left side on the masseter muscle area. Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm on the left and 3.5 mm on the right. The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other. In profile, upper lip supralabrale is just slightly posterior to subnasale. She may have about a 4 mm AP deficiency in the maxillary projection. The mandible appears to be about 15 mm AP deficient. The chin neckline is somewhat short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. Intraorally, B078 has all of her lower teeth and upper teeth back through the second molars present. She has a slight Class II occlusal relationship by about 3 mm. She has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm. As B078 bites down, she occludes first on the right first and second molars and the rest of the teeth are out of occlusion. If she bites harder, then the left side does come into contact again involving perhaps the first and second molars. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. Intranasally, the structures look reasonably good, although the right turbinate may be slightly enlarged. However, the columella is quite wide and the nostrils are extremely narrow, particularly on the left side. Holding the nostrils open with the nasal scope significantly improved B078's ability to breathe through her nose. On opening, the joints function smoothly. On excursion movement, she has a little glitch in the right joint. To palpation, she has moderate pain throughout most of the head and neck area. The maximal incisal opening is about 38 mm opening without pain 16 mm. The excursion movements are 9 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. The rest of the teeth are present and there does not appear to be any restorations. The sinuses appear relatively clear. The turbinates particularly in the right side appears enlarged. The condyles appear arthritic and small in size.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses look relatively clear. The septum is deviated a little bit to the left but not real significant. Right turbinate however appears quite large and appears to be obliterating most of the airway on that side. The left turbinate appears relatively normal.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. The septum is reasonably straight with just a little bit of deviation. Right turbinate appears quite large and appears to block most of the functional airway whereas the left side is relatively normal in size.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic with significant loss of vertical volume and is also narrow anteroposteriorly. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. The joint space appears reasonably adequate. The condyle appears to be reasonably well centered in the fossa.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant condylar resorption. In fact, there appears to be some loss of cortical bone on the anterior aspect of the condylar head. The condyle actually appears to be postured somewhat forward in this imaging sequence. There appears to be some decreased joint space between the disc and the articular eminence. The articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that there has been some significant condylar resorption with loss of vertical height of the condyle. There is decreased vertical joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. The lateral pole of the condyle is significantly lower than the medial pole by probably 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows that there has been significant condylar resorption with loss of vertical height. The condyle is a little bit narrow mediolaterally. There is decreased vertical joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The medial pole of the condyle is significantly higher than the lateral pole.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B078 has good oropharyngeal airway. Mandible and maxilla appear somewhat retruded and the mandible appears to occlude only on the second molars with the rest of the teeth out of occlusion. She has a skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship.

B078's models do hand articulate into a reasonably good Class I occlusion.
Basic diagnoses for B078 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ reactive arthritis.
Mandibular AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior open bite of 2 mm. Occludes only on the right first and second molars with the rest of the teeth out of occlusion. Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches. Myofascial pain.
Hypertrophied right nasal turbinate. Wide columella with extremely narrow nostrils.
Nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Bilateral mandibular coronoidotomies. e.	Right partial turbinectomy.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B078 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic and appears to have lost vertical volume. It appears that there may be some discal tissue above the condyle, but also there is definitely discal tissue anterior to the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. There appears to be reasonable vertical joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost vertical volume. There may be some compressed tissue in the joint and the disc appears anteriorly displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. There is actually reasonably good vertical joint space.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant resorption and has lost vertical volume as well as anteroposterior volume. There is increased vertical joint space. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and is much more visible at the lateral aspect of the joint than anteriorly. The disc is significantly deformed with a very thick posterior band and a very short anteroposterior dimension. The articular eminence is fairly steep. The condyle is narrow anteroposteriorly particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space and some fluid in the bilaminar tissues posterior to the head of the condyle. On opening, there is good translation of the condyles, but the articular disc remain anteriorly displaced without reduction and with sever deformation.

In the right TMJ, the condyle is a little broader anteroposteriorly but not much. The articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. It is quite short anteroposteriorly and quite thick with what appears to be complete loss of the intermediate zone. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space and also in the bilaminar tissues. On opening, there is good translation of the condyles, but the articular disc remain anteriorly displaced without reduction and with sever deformation.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ condylar resorption with articular disc dislocations without reduction with significant degeneration and deformation. MRI findings compatible with AICR.

