B079
B079 is 18 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. B079 has had previous orthodontics with Dr. XXXX. When she got her braces off, her teeth fit together fairly well, but then they started shifting. Primary concerns are as follows:

Teeth do not fit together correctly.
Clicking noises in the joints.
She has had previous orthodontics from age 14 to 16 for approximately 3 years. She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, no pain around the head and neck area. She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability all at 0. She takes no medications. She has no earaches, but she does get occasional tinnitus but no vertigo or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B079 has more fullness in the right side of her jaw than the left side by probably about a good 4 to 5 mm. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. The maxillary midline is 1 mm off to the left. The mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline, but the chin is about 2 mm to the left. In profile view, she has some AP deficiency at the base of the maxilla with the nasal tip slightly ptotic. She has an acute nasolabial angle. Upper lip is a little bit protrusive compared to subnasale. The mandible appears to be strong in AP dimension as well as vertically. The chin neckline appears elongated, although the chin neck angle is well defined. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some lower arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. The left cuspid is partially blocked out of the arch. In the upper ach, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars but she has a high arched palate. She has a Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by about 4 mm and on the left side it is probably 6 mm Class III. She has an anterior cross bite and an end-on incisor relationship. Oropharyngeal airway tissues look healthy. The tonsils are moderately enlarged. B079 has a lip incompetency of about 8 mm. Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderately enlarged with the right one larger than the left one. The septum appears reasonably straight. There may be some slight constricture of the luminal valve. She has had her wisdom teeth removed. The excursion movements are about 9 mm to the right and 8 mm to the left with incisal opening of 58 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior six teeth. The sinuses appear relatively clear. The condylar head and neck lengths are very long with the right side being worse than the left side. The roots on the incisors appear somewhat foreshortened.

Coronal view shows that the nasal septum is reasonably straight, but she has very large turbinates. Sinuses appear clear.
Axial view shows that the septum appears fairly straight, but her turbinates are quite large and appear to block most of the airway. The sinuses are clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows an elongated condylar head and neck. The joint space may be a little bit narrow. The condyle has a little bit of flattening on the posterior head. The articular eminence is moderately shallow.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears elongated. There may be some decreased vertical joint space. The articular eminence is moderately shallow.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with significant decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 to 5 mm beginning on most of the mid portion of the fossa causing significant decreased joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 5 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that likewise is enlarged particularly vertically. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 6 mm. There is significant decreased joint space.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B079 has a Class III skeletal relationship with some over angulated maxillary incisors. The occlusal plane is slightly high. The vertical height of the mandible appears elongated. The roots on the anterior teeth appear foreshortened. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 9 mm at the soft palate level and probably 8 at the mid palatal area.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia with possible articular disc dislocation.
Deviated mandibular prognathism.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia but vertical and transverse hyperplasia.
Class III end-on occlusion being worse on the left side as compared to the right side.
Lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being 2 mm anterior to the right cuspid. Mild crowding of the left anterior arch. End-on incisor relationship.
Bilateral hyperplastic inferior turbinates.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. MRI of left and right TMJs.
2. Assess growth for probable active condylar hyperplasia.
3. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Try to retract left cuspid 1 to 2 mm and advance the right side forward 1 mm to correct the lower arch asymmetry. May need to use TADS to accomplish these movements.
4. Continue to monitor growth and development. 5 Surgery. a.	Bilateral mandibular condylar high condylectomies and repositioning of the articular disc with Mitek anchors. b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to move the mandible posteriorly and improve facial symmetry. c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to align the maxilla and upright the incisors. d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
6. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B079 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is fairly wide, but with an abnormal shape with the medial pole significantly higher than the lateral pole. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. There appears to be some discal tissue medial, but the disc may also cover the lateral aspect of the condyle. The condyle appears long in the vertical dimension.

Right TMJ coronal view likewise has a condyle with the medial pole higher than the lateral pole. There appears to be discal tissue medially displaced. The condyle appears long in vertical dimension.

On side 1 sagittal view, it appears there is discal tissue anterior to the condyle. The condylar head and neck appear elongated. The condyle otherwise appears to have a reasonable shape to it with a little bit of anterior beaking present. There is fluid in the anterior superior recess. On opening, the disc appears to be in a reduced position.

Side 2 shows a condyle that is somewhat peaked anteriorly. It appears there may be discal tissue posteriorly displaced. There is what appears to be an anterior osteophyte extending superiorly off the anterior head of the condyle. There is fluid in the posterior superior space recess. On opening, the disc appears to be in a reduced position.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral condylar appearance compatible with condylar hyperplasia with one side demonstrating a posteriorly displaced disc and the other side an anteriorly displaced disc.

