B080
B080 is 16 years old and was referred by Dr. XXXX. He was accompanied by his father. He believes his jaw problems began when he was 6 to 7 years old.

B080's primary concerns are as follows:
Facial asymmetry that is getting progressively worse.
Underdevelopment of lower face and chin.
Teeth do not fit together.
Jaw joints pop.
Daytime tiredness.
Predominantly a mouth breather because of difficulties breathing through the nose.

B080 has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain or myofascial pain. He rates his jaw function at 3, diet at 0, disability at 1. He has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss. His knees bother him occasionally. He may clench or brux some at night time. He did have previous orthodontics from the age of 12 to 14-1/2 by Dr. XXXX. There were 4 permanent teeth extracted.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B080 has fairly good facial balance in the middle and upper third face. He has asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 5 mm on the left side, 4 mm on the right side. The nasal tip is deviated a little bit towards the right side about 3 mm. The maxillary midline is off to the right side probably 2 mm. The mandibular dental midline is probably about 3 to 4 mm off to the right side. The chin is about 6 mm off to the right side. In profile, he has some prominence of the nasal dorsum. Upper lip supranasale is posterior to subnasale by probably 2 to 3 mm. The maxilla is probably AP deficient by at least 6-8 mm, and the mandible is retruded by about 18-20 mm. The chin neckline is extremely short and chin neckline is moderately well defined. He has eversion of the lower lip. He has a lip incompetence of 7 mm. Intraorally, B080 is missing all four second bicuspids. He has the rest of his teeth. He has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch. He has a Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by probably 4 to 5 mm and on the left side he is a little bit closer to Class I, although probably still about 2 mm Class II. He has about a 3 mm overjet. He has about a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. B080 has a transverse cant to the occlusal plane being up about 3 mm on the right side. To palpation, he has some very mild tenderness over the retromandibular areas. On opening, he has a soft click at about 10 mm on the left side and a closing click at 5 mm. On the right side, he has got a much more obvious click at about 20 mm of opening and reciprocal click at 15 mm of opening. The maximal incisal opening is 47 mm, excursion movement to the right 8 mm, to the left 11 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of all 4 third molars that are impacted and unerupted. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged. Sinuses appear relatively clear. It is difficult to evaluate the joints.

Coronal view shows that turbinates are fairly large and probably cause some airway obstruction. The sinuses appear relatively clear. The septum appears reasonably straight.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. There is a septal extension into the right maxillary sinus. The septum appears reasonably straight. The turbinates are moderately enlarged and may interfere with the functional nasal airway. Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condylar head and neck that appear elongated and somewhat longer than the opposite side. The condyle has some mild anterior beaking present. The condyle appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space and decreased vertical joint space. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. The condyles appears somewhat narrow anteroposteriorly.

Right TMJ has some anterior beaking present. The condyle also appears to be somewhat posteriorly positioned and there may be some decreased vertical joint dimension. The articular eminence is moderately shallow. The condyles appears somewhat narrow anteroposteriorly.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears larger in vertical dimension compared to the opposite side. The condyle appears to have moderate width. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. There appears to be decreased vertical and lateral joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit wider in width than the opposite side, but the condyle is shorter vertically. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. The joint space appears decreased.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B080 has a retruded maxilla and mandible and high occlusal plane angle with a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship. The oropharyngeal airway measures about 8 mm at the soft palate level and 7 mm at the base of the tongue. Increased fullness on the left side of his face in the mandibular angle ramus area by about 4 to 5 mm. He has a yaw in the posterior maxilla and mandible being shifted towards the left side 2 to 3 mm.

Basic diagnoses for B080 would be as follows:
Left TMJ condylar hyperplasia.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation. Mandibular AP hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia but anterior vertical excess as well as asymmetry. Class II end-on occlusion.
Right posterior cross bite. Missing all 4 second bicuspids extracted previously for orthodontic reasons.
Impacted third molars x4. Hypertrophied turbinates with nasal airway obstruction. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. MRI of left and right TMJ.
2. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots slightly mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Consider slenderizing the lower teeth removing 1 and no more than 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the slight tooth size discrepancy.
3. Surgery. a.	Left mandibular high condylectomy. b.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction and level it transversely. d.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction and correct the asymmetry. e.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4. f.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B080 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite large in size. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. The condyle extends almost beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. The lateral rim is fairly flattened. There is decreased superior joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit smaller than the opposite side. There is decreased vertical joint space. The disc appears to be anteriorly and perhaps laterally displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condylar head and neck that is excessively elongated. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting down along the posterior aspect of the articular eminence. There is some fluid in the superior joint space. There is good translation of the condyle and early reduction of the condyle onto the disc.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that it is a little bit arthritic on this side probably from joint overloading. There is a little bit of anterior beaking and a little bit of flattening on top of the condyle. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting along the posterior aspect of the articular eminence. There is a little bit of fluid at the lateral aspect in the superior joint space beneath the articular eminence. Open view shows that there is good translation of the condyle and the articular disc with the disc reducing early in opening.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ enlarged condylar head and neck with anteriorly displacement of the articular disc with early reduction.
Left TMJ mild arthritis with articular disc anteriorly displaced with early reduction.

