B081
B081 is 16 years old. He is in good health with no major medical problems. He has had an adverse reaction to Ceclor. He currently takes no medications. The primary concerns that B081 has is that his lower jaw has grown forward of the upper jaw creating an underbite. The only previous treatment B081 has had was from a maxillary expander about 2 years ago. He takes no medications. No other joints bother him. He has been diagnosed with irritable bowel syndrome. He has no trouble with headaches, TMJ pain, earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, hearing loss, clenching, bruxism, etc.

In frontal view, B081 has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0. Maxillary midline is about 1 mm off towards the left side. Mandibular dental midline and chin appear to be pretty much on the facial midline. In profile view, B081 appears to have some AP maxillary deficiency probably about 5 or 6 mm. Mandible also appears somewhat retruded by maybe about 4 mm. Chin-neckline seems just a little bit short but not too significantly. Intraorally, B081 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. He has some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch. He has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch B081 has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has crowding in the upper arch particularly in the bicuspid areas. Upper laterals particularly on the left side appears a little bit small. The left central appears a little bit narrow compared to the right central. B081 has a full Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally. He has anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites. He has an anterior open bite of about 1 to 2 mm. The uvula is relatively normal. Soft palate appears a little bit elongated. Faucial pillars may be mild to moderate in constriction. Tonsils appear relatively normal. He has a super gag reflex. The septum may be deviated a little bit off towards the left side. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. There may be some moderate nasal airway obstruction. The columella is wide and nostrils are moderately narrow. To palpation, B081 has some mild tenderness over the masseter muscles. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly. Incisal opening is 56 mm. Excursive movement to the right 5 mm, left 6 mm. There is a transverse cant in the occlusion with the left cuspid being 2 to 3 mm higher than the right cuspid. However, that right cuspid is elevated at least 2 mm compared to the right cuspid and elevated 2 mm relative to the first bicuspid. Therefore the actual cant in the occlusal plane would likely be less.

Previous records sent include Panorex from 11 and 15 years old, and 3 months ago. It shows that he has developed into a significant Class III molar relationship as in age 11 he was closer to Class I molar. Lateral cephalometric radiograph from 1 year and 1 month ago shows at that time he had an end-on incisor relationship and then now has an anterior crossbite. However, he was a Class III molar relationship at that time.

Dental model analysis shows that he has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about ½ mm. He has a full Class III cuspid relationship. He has anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites. He has an anterior open bite of about 1 to 2 mm. Significant crowding in the lower anterior arch and crowding in the upper anterior arch particularly in the left side of the arch. He has a 2 x 2 retainer in the upper arch.

When placing B081's molars into a Class I cuspid molar relationship he just has a remaining crossbite involving the left second bicuspid.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars. 2 x 2 retainer wires seen in the upper arch. Difficult to evaluate the sinuses. Condyles are hard to evaluate but are reasonably normal in morphology although the condylar head and neck maybe a little bit elongated.

Waters view shows that the sinuses all appear relatively healthily. The nasal septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side. Turbinates are fairly large particularly on the right side.

Right TMJ tomograms shows a condyle that may be a little bit flattened on top. The condylar head and neck appear elongated. Articular eminence appears relatively normal in slope.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly normal morphology. There may be a little bit of anterior beaking and a little flattening on top. It appears to be somewhat elongated in length. Joint space may be appropriate if the discs are thin. On opening, there is restricted translation.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B081 has a Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship. He has a moderately high occlusal plane angle. He has good oropharyngeal airway and looks better than perceived with the clinical assessment. He appears AP deficient in the maxilla with AP microgenia.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Mandibular prognathism.
AP maxillary deficiency. Class III occlusion.
Anterior open bite. Transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being slightly shorter vertically than the right side.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Partial nasal airway obstruction.
Impacted third molars x4. Significant crowding in maxillary arch. Significant crowding of mandibular arch.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally.
Align and level mandibular arch. Continue to monitor growth and development.

Surgery. Bilateral TMJ high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchors. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition the mandible.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it, correcting transverse discrepancies and level transversely. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B081 MRI AGE: 17/M
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. There is decreased vertical joint space. Articular eminence appears to be medially displaced and may be anteriorly displaced as well. Lateral rim of the fossa is relatively flat with minimal downward curvature of 1 to 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. The disc appears to be medially displaced as well as anterior.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Out laterally, there is decreased vertical joint space, and the disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. There is a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. There is some flattening of the condyle at the lateral aspect of the joint. Articular eminence is relatively flat. On opening, the disc appears to reduce early and there is good translation of the condyle and the disc.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with some flattening on the anterior head and some peaking out posterior to the disc. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the articular disc with what appears to be early reduction.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteromedially displaced with reduction on opening.

