B082
B082 is 41 years old, referred by Dr. XXXX. B082 is in good health. He did have TB 25 years ago and was treated for that. He has had no problems since then.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Class III skeletal jaw relationship.
Closed vertical dimension. TMJ problems.
He has had previous TMJ treatment including lower splint, upper splint at nighttime, orthodontics but he stopped that treatment. B082 currently has a splint in place that he has had for over two years. B082's problems began about two to three years ago of unknown etiology. He developed a closed lock situation. Since that time he has had splint therapy times three. He had orthodontics for about 6 or 7 months last year and appliances were removed 7 months ago at completion of the orthodontics. He had the Prolo injections from age 39 to 40. He has had physical therapy. He gets chiropractic treatment about every two to three weeks. He takes no medications at this time.

He has a history of earaches in the past and tinnitus in the past as well. He recently has had some problems with vertigo. He also has hearing loss. Other joints that bother him include his back, fingers and he has flat feet. He has had orthotics made and these seem to be helping him. He is aware of clenching at nighttime and during the day. He rates his headaches at a level of 9 in the frontal, posterior head area and sometimes in the temple areas. These develop usually during the day about two times per week and occur also in the afternoon and evenings. He rates his TMJ pain at a level of 5. Overall, daily pain level of 9, jaw function at 7 and diet at 0. He rates himself at 2 with the splint in and with the splint out his level was at a 9.

In frontal view, B082 has increased fullness on the right side of the face particularly in the masseter muscle area. He has some masseteric hyperplasia on the right side. He has probably 4 to 5 mm of increased fullness on that side compared to the left side. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about -4 mm. Maxillary midline is shifted out to the right side probably 1.5 mm. Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned on the facial midline. In profile view, it appears to be a little bit vertically over-closed. When he opens up, he has fairly good chin projection though may be just a little bit weak. Lower lip is inverted. Upper lip is in fairly good balance. He has a mustache so it makes it a little bit difficult to determine that. Chin appears a little bit AP deficient compared to the protrusion of the lower lip. Submental area, however, appears a little bit full and chin-neckline is not particularly well defined. Intraorally, B082 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present. He has some malrotation of lower incisors. He may have a little excess of space. Lower incisors appear to be in somewhat of a lingual inclination. In the upper arch, B082 has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has a full Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and Class III end-on on the left side being about 3 to 4 mm Class III on the left and on the right side it is closer to probably 7. He has anterior and right posterior crossbite. Lower dentition appears to be rotated off to the right side of the face indicating a yaw off to the right side.

He has about a 1 mm open bite. In centric relation, he occludes only on the second molars with the right side touching first then the left side touches. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. He has an elongated uvula that might be contributing to some of the snoring. The soft palate is mildly elongated. Faucial pillars are moderately constricted. Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side. Turbinates are relatively normal in size. It appears he has adequate airway. To palpation, he has rather severe pain over the posterior neck area. He has moderate pain over the left temporalis, masseter, styloid, SCM and milder tenderness over the right TMJ and right shoulder. During jaw function he has crepitation that is audible in both TMJs.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of maxillary third molars but all other teeth are present including the mandibular third molars. There is spacing between some of the crowns in the lower anterior arch. Condylar heads and necks are long with the right side being a little bit longer than the left side. Gonial notch is a little bit more prominent on the left side as compared to the right side. Sinuses look relatively clear. Right condyle appears larger than the left condyle.

Waters view shows that the left nasal airway appears to be obstructed with possible turbinates or septal spurring in the bony aspect of the septum. Right side appears that there is a passable airway. Sinuses look relatively clear. The asymmetry between the upper and lower arch is evident. The right side of the mandible appears a little bit shorter vertically as compared to the right side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows some arthritis present in the joint. There appears to be adequate superior posterior joint space but anteriorly there appears to be decreased joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. It appears there may be some bony changes associated with the articular eminence as well.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that may have a little bit of sclerosis on it. Decreased superior and posterior joint space as well as anterior joint space. There may be some degenerative changes in the articular eminence. A little sclerosis and some bony changes in the condyle as well. On opening, there is restricted translation of both joints particularly on the right side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B082 has a high occlusal plane angle and a Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship. There appears to be some decreased oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measuring about 7 mm and at the base of the tongue that may decrease to as much as 5 mm. Moderately high occlusal plane is present and a Class III occlusion is present. The tongue appears to fill the entire oral cavity. Maximal incisal opening is about 43 mm.

Basic Diagnoses:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
Mandibular prognathism.
Maxillary hypoplasia; A-P, vertical, and transverse.
TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain (right side > left side).
Anterior openbite.
Class III occlusion (right > left).
Anterior and right posterior cross bite.
Posterior yaw to the right side.
Right side masseteric hyperplasia.
Occludes only on the second molars in centric relation.
Bilateral audible TMJ crepitation during jaw function.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.

Recommended Treatment:
Presurgical Orthodontics.
Align and level the maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level the mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
CT scan of jaws and TMJs (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular repositioning with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies with bone plate stabilization and hydroxyapatite grafting.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen)/
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Post Surgical Orthodontics. Finish and retain.

B082 MRI Evaluation
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is arthritic. There is some anterior beaking and sclerosis on the head of the condyle. There appears to be an osteophyte coming off the top of the condyle at the mid part. Decreased superior joint space. There appears to be an osteophyte coming off the posterior wall of the fossa. There appears to be discal tissue positioned anterior to the condyle and beneath the articular eminence. On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle but with a decreased vertical joint space. In the open view there is a darker signal of tissue up in the depth of the fossa.

Coronal view shows severe osteoarthritic changes and significantly decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves significantly inferiorly at least 5 mm. I do not see any evidence of discal tissue though there could be some medial and anterior.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has greater arthritic changes than the opposite side. There is a cyst in the head of the condyle on the anterior aspect. There is a large osteophyte extending up from the medial condyle. There appears to be degenerative changes in the fossa as well. On opening, there is significant restriction in translation. Significantly decreased superior joint space and posterior joint space. There is no discernible discal tissue present.

Coronal view shows severe arthritic changes in the condylar head and virtually no joint space remaining. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly a significant amount. There appears to be sclerosis on the head of the condyle.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ severe arthritis with probably anterior displaced and nonreducing discs with severe degeneration. Right TMJ advanced arthritis and no discernible discal tissue present. Probable indication for TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.

