B083
B083 is 20 years old. She has had kidney stones and she has had two ankle surgeries in the past. She otherwise is in fairly good health. She takes for medications Yaz. She does take Imitrex for her migraine headaches. B083 is not sure when her TMJ problems began, but she was aware in about eighth grade that she developed clicking and some pain problems with her jaws. She had previous orthodontics on from the age of 11 to 13. When the braces came off was when it was noted that her bite was beginning to change and lower jaw was becoming more retruded. She has had no other treatment for her jaw problems until about 2 months ago her dentist made her a mouth guard to wear at night to keep her from grinding her teeth. Apparently, she is creating some significant wear on her teeth from bruxism.

B083 gets significant headaches at a level of 9 that occur predominantly in the frontal and temporal areas and behind her eyes. These occur about 2 to 3 times per week. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 7, diet at 6, and disability at 5. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, nor hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her ankles and back, but these are the results of cheerleading injuries. She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at night time as well as day time. Primary concerns that B083 has include the following:

Clicking in the jaw joints.
Severe teeth grinding. Overbite has increased. Migraine headaches. The jaws lock where she is limited in her opening.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B083 has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left, and the chin is probably about 2 mm off to the left. In profile view, B083 has just some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably 2 to 3 mm. Chin appears retruded probably about 10-12 mm. Chin neckline is a little bit shortened, but chin neck angle is fairly well defined. Intraorally, B083 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. The teeth are nicely aligned and leveled. She has adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship and about 3 to 4 mm Class II. She has about a 2 mm overjet. It appears she may have a little tooth size discrepancy. She has a vertical overbite of about 2 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. She has tonsils that are mild to moderate in size. Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderate in size, but she appears to have a wide intranasal width and appears to have adequate airway. She has had previous trauma to her nose and the dorsum is a little bit wide and she has a little bit of bump on the nose from that injury. To palpation, she has some moderate pain over the left masseter area, but other no pain around the head and neck area. On opening, the right joint is smooth, but on the left side she had a soft click at about 30 mm and a closing one at about 10. This does not correlate though with the MRI findings. Maximum incisal opening is about 48 mm, and she could open to about 40 mm without significant discomfort today, but today is a better day for her. Excursion movement to the right is about 8 mm, to the left about 9 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged particularly on the left side. Condyles appear a little bit arthritic with loss of volume in the left side and the right side appears to have an anterior beaking present. Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone some resorption with loss of vertical height and mediolateral dimension. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm. There is a little osteophyte off the lateral pole of the condyle. The cortical bone is extremely thin over the top of the condyle. The remainder of the lateral pole is significantly lower than the medial pole. There is decreased lateral joint space. Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit larger than the opposite side. There may be some loss of vertical volume. There is a little osteophytic kind of formation off the lateral pole of the condyle. Lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. There is decreased lateral joint space. Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has lost significant volume vertically and anteroposteriorly. There is some anterior beaking. Condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.. Articular eminence has a moderate inclination and somewhat elongated. There appears to be some small osteophytes on the head of the condyle. There is increased anterior joint space.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little better morphology, but with some anterior beaking particularly towards the medial side of the joint. The articular eminence is moderate in inclination. The condyle is postured a little bit more centered position, but there is a decrease anterior joint space towards the medial side of the joint.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. The left turbinate, however, appears quite large and it appears it may be blocking a good part of the airway. Coronal view shows that the septum appear reasonably straight, but the left inferior turbinate appears quite large and appears to block most of the airway towards the posterior aspect of the nose. Sinuses appear clear.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is retrusion of the maxilla and particularly the mandible. There is a high occlusal plane angle. The oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 to 5 mm at the base of the tongue and less than 3 mm at the soft palate level (normal dimension 11 mm).

Basic diagnoses for B083 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR).
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of approximately 3 mm.
TMJ pain. Headaches. Myofascial pain. High occlusal plane angle.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Open up 1 mm of space between each maxillary lateral incisor and cuspid. Tip lateral incisors mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies, if necessary, but also to correct for the tooth size problem. Align and level mandibular arch. CT scan of jaw and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft the posterior aspect in a counterclockwise direction. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral coronoidotomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors to complete correction of the tooth size discrepancy.

B083 MRI AGE: 20/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is small in size with what appears to be loss of vertical and mediolateral dimension. Discal tissue appears to be displaced anterior to the condyle. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is small in size, but not as small as the opposite side. It actually has a much better mediolateral width. Lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm. There appears to be discal tissue anterior to the condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost vertical volume and may be a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly. The actual condylar head and neck appear reasonably long. The condyle is positioned posterior in the fossa. There is flattening on the anterior head and some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep and somewhat elongated. The articular disc is sitting anterior beneath the articular eminence. The disc is extremely short anteroposteriorly. There is some fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good size to it anteroposteriorly. There may be a little bit of flattening on top and a little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep and somewhat elongated. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is short in anteroposterior dimension. On opening, there may be partial reduction of the disc.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis with resorption and articular disc dislocated without reduction and significantly deformed. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with partial reduction but severely deformed.

