B087
B087 is 51 years old, referred by Dr. XXXX. Primary concerns that B087 has include the following
Speech difficulties. Grinding teeth.
Jaws click.
Overbite.
Severe snoring.
TMJ pain.

B087 states that he has had TMJ problems for as long as he can remember even perhaps back in the teenage years. The etiology is unknown. B087 has had no treatment to date for his jaw problems.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B087 has fairly good symmetry except some asymmetry in the nose from an injury about 15 years ago. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about -1. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The nasal tip is off to the right side about 2 or 3 mm. The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off towards the right side. The chin is also just slightly off to the right side 1 or 2 mm. In profile view, B087 is probably deficient in the maxilla about 3 to 4 mm. The mandible is deficient by about 12 to 15. He has a head postured forward neck position which makes the chin neckline actually look reasonably good. Intraorally, B087 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. He has an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch, but has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has some crowns on his posterior teeth. He has a very narrow transverse arch width. He has a full Class II cuspid relationship. He has an overjet of 10 mm. He has a vertical overbite of about 1 mm. He has a hyperplastic uvula that is thick and extremely long. However, the rest of the pharyngeal structures are relatively normal. Intranasally, the left turbinate is moderately enlarged, but the right one appears more normal. The septum is reasonably straight considering the previous traumas. The luminal valves are somewhat constricted on both sides. B087 rates his headaches at about a level of 5 and they occur behind the eye about once per month. He rates the intensity at about a level of 5 which include likely the frontal and the temporal areas. He rates his TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 4, diet at 0, and disability at 7 to 8. To palpation, he has some very mild tenderness over the TMJs and retromandibular areas. On opening, he has a click in the right joint at about 10 mm of opening and 5 mm of closing. On the left side on opening, he has a glitch on closing pattern, but in excursion movements he has significant crepitus in the left TMJ area. B087 takes no medications. He has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo. He has had episodes in the past of vertigo that was treated with what appears to be fascial grafts to repair perforations in the tympanic membranes bilaterally. No other joints bother him. He is aware of bruxing at night time and also during the day. The maximal incisal opening is about 65 mm, excursion movements in each direction are about 9 mm. On reevaluating his occlusion, his midlines are actually aligned to each other and he must have been posturing a little bit off to the side when I first saw him, but his dental and facial midlines appear to align with each other except for the nasal tip which is still 2 to 3 mm off to the right side.

DENTAL MODEL ANALYSIS. B087 has a full Class III malocclusion. He has a significant accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and in the lower arch. He does have a 10 mm overjet relationship. When placing the models into a Class I cuspid-molar relationship, there is significant transverse maxillary deficiency extending from the lateral incisors all the way back through the second molars. There is probably an 8 to 10 mm transverse maxillary deficiency. B087 has a tooth size discrepancy of about 1.5 mm.

RADIOGRAPH EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. He has crowns on all the molar teeth as well as the left first and second bicuspid and right central incisor, left second bicuspid. He has a root canal on the maxillary left bicuspids.

Coronal view shows that he has enlarged turbinates. He has a large septal spur coming off the right side back in the bony septum area that appears to hit against the turbinate. The sinuses appear relatively clear with a couple of small areas of mucosal thickening, more on the right side than the left side.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is arthritic with some anterior beaking and some sclerosis on the head. There is a decreased posterior joint space. The articular eminence is moderately steep. There is increased anterior joint space.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some anterior beaking. There is decreased joint space posteriorly. The articular eminence is moderately steep. There is some sclerosis on the head of the condyle.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears smaller than the opposite side. The vertical joint space may be somewhat narrowed. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is larger than the opposite side. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 4 mm. There may be some decreased lateral joint space.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is some AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency. There is about a 10 mm overjet relationship. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 2 to 3 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about almost 7 mm.

Basic diagnoses for B087 would be as follows:
Left TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc dislocated without reduction with significant degenerative changes. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class II occlusion. 10 mm overjet.
Accentuated curve of Spee in both the maxillary and mandibular arches.
Hyperplastic uvula.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Large nasal septal spurring blocking the right side of the nose.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Sleep apnea.
TMJ pain. Headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Consider some expansion of the upper arch. Align at two occlusal plane levels, aligning the four incisors in elevated plane and the cuspids through the second molars at a lower plane. Try to extrude the cuspids slightly if necessary to align them vertically with the posterior teeth. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1.5 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
2. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and expand it. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies. e.	Bilateral partial turbinectomies. f.	Nasal septoplasty. g.	Uvulectomy.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B087 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 4 or 5 mm. There appears to be some fluid or inflammation within the joint. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little bit better shape than the opposite side. The lateral rim of the fossa is a little bit flatter and curves inferiorly about 2 mm. There appears to be some fluid inside the joint space. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. There is anterior beaking. There is sclerosis on the head of the condyle. The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with a decreased posterior joint space. The articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is short anteroposteriorly and with loss of the intermediate zone. The disc is significantly degenerated. There is some fluid in the superior joint space. Left TMJ open view shows that there is moderately good translation of the condyle, but the disc is non-reducing.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is arthritic with some anterior beaking and sclerosis on the head of the condyle. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. The disc is anteriorly displaced, although not as severely as the opposite side and has a little bit better morphology than the opposite side. There is some fluid present in the superior joint space. On opening, there is better translation than the left side and the articular disc is in a reduced position. On the right side, there is almost an immediate reduction with good translation.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocation without reduction with significant degenerative changes.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced but with early reduction.

