B088
B088 is 7 years old. She is in good health with no major medical problems. She currently taking the following medications:
Motrin 260 mg b.i.d. Klonopin 0.5 mg at bedtime.

B088 apparently has had some problems with headaches over the past 2 years, but in the past year they have gotten worse. Particularly during the past 4 to 6 weeks, her pain levels have increased significantly. She does have a history of clenching and bruxism at night time. She has worn an Aqualizer splint for about 2 to 3 weeks and this has helped some, but she chews them up fairly quickly. Her mother has given her some 0.5 mg of Klonopin at night and this seems to help have helped the situation, both to keep her from chewing the Aqualizer splints as well as decreasing her headache and pain problems. She did have some physical therapy last week as well. She has been to see an orthodontist who wants to use some type of mandible growth appliances plus headgear to correct her bite problems.

B088 gets earaches, but no tinnitus and she does have some problems with vertigo.
On clinical examination, upper lip length is probably about 18 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm. Midlines all appear to be fairly well aligned. She has fairly good profile balance. Chin may be just slightly AP deficient. Intraorally, she has her lower four incisors, but has her primary C, D, and E's, but her first molars are also in in the lower arch. In the upper arch, likewise she has four incisors and first molars, but has her primary C, D, and E's. She basically has Class II end-on cuspid relationship. She has an anterior deep bite of about 5 mm. She is a little bit more Class II on the right side as compared to the left side. She is almost Class I on the left side, but a little bit Class II on the right side by probably 2 mm. Mandibular dental midline may be just about 1 mm off towards the right side. It is hard for B088 to bite on her back teeth as it is not comfortable for her. Oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal. Tonsils look normal for her age. She does have a cold right now, but still tonsils look relatively normal. She normally can breathe through her nose without any significant problems. To palpation, she has mild tenderness over the left TMJ. Maximum opening about 52 mm. Excursion movements were about 9 mm in each direction. On opening, joints seem to function relatively smoothly, although she does dislocate the condyle out beyond the articular eminence, but I do not feel any sounds or indications of an articular disc displacement.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the development of permanent cuspids and all the bicuspids. The mandibular right second bicuspid is tipped mesially somewhat, but the others appear to be fairly aligned. The second molars are all developing. The condyles look relatively normal. The sinuses look relatively clear. Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears fairly well seated within the fossa. It appears to have adequate space around it. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram is a little bit more difficult to read. It is difficult to identify the condyle and joint spaces. On opening, only the left side was taken with the jaw open. The right side was not open all the way. On the left side, the condyle comes out and anterior significantly to the articular eminence and may account for the popping noise that she has in her joints. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B088 has slight Class II skeletal relationship and Class II end-on occlusion. Mandible appears slightly retruded. Oropharyngeal airway, however, looks good. Incisors appear to have good angulation in both the maxillary and mandibular arches. Diagnoses for B088 would be as follows:
AP mandibular deficiency.
Chronic subluxation of the mandibular condyle.
Chronic nocturnal clenching and bruxism.
TMJ pain. Headaches. In the mixed dentition.

B088 does have chronic clenching and bruxism. The mother has given her some Klonopin 0.5 mg that appears to work well for her, and B088 has felt better during the past few days that she has taken it and her headaches have pretty much stopped. I believe her headaches and TMJ pain are caused by the inflammatory process created by the chronic clenching and bruxism as well as the subluxation of the mandibular condyles. The orthodontist back home has recommended headgear and growth appliances on her mandible. At this time, I think we should hold off on those and see if we can get her jaw situation under control. I am recommending we continue on the Klonopin since that seems to be effective for her. I gave her a prescription for Klonopin 0.5 mg, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x5. B088's mother is to keep me informed of B088's progress.

