B089
B089 is 53 years old. B089 was referred by Dr. XXXX. B089 is good health except for her current problems. By history, B089 had a fall when she was age 6 down some stairs. She subsequently had a major bicycle injury at the age of 30 when she fell off the bike and ended up fracturing her left clavicle and she hit her head. At age 35, she had a fall from a horse. At age 42, she fell from a golf cart that hit a moving car so she was actually thrown out of the cart. At age 49, she had a ski accident where she landed on her back and struck her head on the ground and apparently sustained a whiplash type of injury. At age 51, she fell down some stairs. Basic concerns that B089 has at this time are:

She wants to rule out TMJ issues.
Find out what injury she may have to her neck and cervical alignment that might explain her pain. Headaches.
Stinging in her retromandibular cervical area.

Treatment that B089 has had so far includes the following:
Orthodontics from age 14 to 15.
Orthodontics at age 41.
Orthodontics at age 43.
She has had physical therapy from age 51 to 52. She has had some ionophoresis treatment. She has had splints, three of them over the past 3 years.

She gets headaches at about a level of 4 in the frontal and temporal top of the head area. She does not have any overt TMJ pain, but gets myofascial pain at about a 6 most of the day, but in the evenings that can escalate up to 8. She rates her jaw function at 1, diet at 0, disability at 5. She gets occasional earaches, mild tinnitus, moderate vertigo, but no hearing loss. Shoulders, left hip, left knee, and neck with a bulging disk are other joints that are involved. She does not believe that she clenches or bruxes at night or during the day.

In frontal view, B089 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1. The maxillary midline is on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm to the left as is the chin. In profile view, B089 has some AP maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia, being probably about 4 mm AP deficient in the maxilla and in the mandible probably 6 mm. The chin neckline is somewhat short and submental tissues are full. Intraorally, B089 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. The left cuspid is about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth on the right side to the third molar and on the left side through the second molar. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side by about 4 mm, and she has almost a full Class II occlusion on the right side. She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm. She tends towards a buccal cross bite on the right side. B089 is a little bit more comfortable when she postures her mandible forward slightly where she is just about 2 mm Class I on the left side and 4 to 5 mm Class II on the right side. She has a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left cuspid being about 1 to 1.5 mm higher than the right cuspid. When she holds herself forward all the way to eliminate the overjet, she is fairly close to Class I cuspid on the left side, but is still about 3 mm Class II on the right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal. She has some moderate pain over the masseters, medial pterygoids, TMJs, retromandibular area. The maximal incisal opening is 70 mm and excursion movements are about 13 mm in each direction. On opening, she has some noises in the left joint including some crepitus kind of noises. It sounded like she had an opening click somewhere around 35 mm with a closing click at about 30 mm. On the right side, it seemed like there may be a very early click and light closing click. For diagnostic purposes, I injected the right TMJ with 1.5 cc of Marcaine 0.5% with 1:200,000 epinephrine. She had improvement in her symptoms with unlocking, “untangling” of her muscles and jaw structures. I then injected the left TMJ. She had initially had some improvement, but then she said her pain factors got worse. She continued to have pain in the mandibular right retromandibular area that may be related to the medial pterygoid muscle. Prior to the injections, she had noises in her right joint that appeared to be like a pop at about 35 mm of opening and 30 mm of closing in the left joint and on the right side a very early opening pop and closing pop. However, this does not completely correlate with the MRI. On the MRI, I felt that both discs may be slightly anteriorly displaced particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. By injecting the joints, it shifted her mandible forward into a better relationship and caused posterior open bites as expected. Based on the results of the injections, I am not sure that her pain problems are directly related to the TMJ joints. She is to keep a diary through tomorrow and then let me know what the results are. She will keep me informed of her progress.

At this time, her diagnoses may be:
Possible right medial pterygoid myositis.
Bilateral TMJ anteriorly displaced discs at the lateral aspects of the joints. Myofascial pain. TMJ pain to palpation.
Headaches. Class II end-on occlusion.

Treatment considerations may include:
1. Possible right medial pterygoid block. 2. Medications: a. Antiinflammatory such as Relafen, Celebrex, Mobic, etc. b. Magnesium. c. Vitamin D. d. Klonopin. e. Muscle relaxant. 3. Possible surgery to include the following: a. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. b. Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy to advance the mandible. 4. Pre and post-surgical orthodontics. B089 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There appears to be good vertical joint space. It is difficult to identify discal tissue, but may be some anterior to the condyle and perhaps some superior as well. There is a little sclerosis on the top of the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa is quite flat.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. A little sclerosis on top of the condyle. The joint space looks reasonably good. The lateral rim of the fossa is quite flat. Difficult to identify discal tissue, but there may be some anterior.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head with a little bit of anterior beaking. The articular disc could be just slightly anterior at the most lateral aspect of the joint. The articular eminence is moderately steep. More medial, the disc is harder to see. On the left side on opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the articular disc with the disc in a reduced position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is narrow anteroposteriorly. The posterior band of the disc is quite thick and appears to be in reasonable position. There are some degenerative changes of the condyle more in the middle aspect of the joint. Toward the lateral aspect of the joint, the disc may be just anteriorly positioned. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the articular disc with the disc in a reduced position.

Left TMJ T2 films show a little bit of fluid in the superior and even lesser in the inferior joint spaces. The discs may be just slightly anteriorly displaced, more so at the lateral aspect of the joint. On the right side, there is some fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. The discs may be slightly anteriorly displaced.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis being a little bit worse on the right side than the left side and articular discs that may be anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint but with reduction and good translation.

