B093
B093 is 15 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. B093 developed multiple joint symptoms at about the age of 7 to 8 years old. She was eventually diagnosed with polyarthropathy of JAR (juvenile rheumatoid arthritis) at the age of 9. She began orthodontic treatment at the age of 8 with an expander. She was placed in a permanent retainer in the upper arch. At age 13 until present, she has been in orthodontic treatment.

B093 has no problems with headaches, no TMJ pain or myofascial pain around the head and neck area. She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability all at zero. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo nor hearing loss. However, all joints are involved in her disease process except for her spine. She takes the following medications:

Enbrel 25 mg subcu q.2 weeks.
Motrin p.r.n.
She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.
In frontal view, B093 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 3 mm on the left, 4 mm on the right. The maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin are fairly well aligned with each other. The right eye is about 2 mm higher than the left eye. In profile view at point A, she is maybe 2 to 3 mm AP deficient. Tongue is retruded by 12 to 15 mm. She does have a chin postured forward head position. Intraorally, B093 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth appear to be nicely aligned and level. She has a little bit of inflammation of her gingiva. She has very thin attached gingiva around the lower central incisors and a high labial frenulum. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class II end-on cuspid-molar relationship being approximately 4 mm Class II. She has an overjet of about 3 to 4 mm. She has a vertical overbite of about zero. Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. Tonsils are moderately enlarged. Fascial pillars are moderately constricted mainly due to the large tonsils. Intranasally, the turbinates appear mildly enlarged. The septum may be deviated just slightly to the right side. The columella is moderately wide and nostrils are moderately narrow. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the masseter muscles and retromandibular area. The maximal incisal opening is 40 mm and opening without significant discomfort 32 mm. The excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of 4 impacted third molars. All the rest of the teeth are present. She has appliances on from first molar to first molar in both arches. Joints appear arthritic.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are relationship clear. Turbinates are moderate in size. The septum is reasonably straight, although off to the right side some.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. The septum is reasonably straight, but there is a septal spur that goes off towards the right side and appear to block a good portion of the airway there. Turbinates are moderate in size, but with deviation of the septum appears to be more obliterated on the right side as compared to the left side.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone some significant condylar resorption and degenerative changes. There is some mild flattening of the articular eminence. There is anterior beaking present. The joint space may be somewhat decreased but not real significant.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic and appears to have lost some significant volume. There is some anterior beaking present. The articular eminence has some moderate flatness. The joint space looks a little bit better on this side than the opposite side.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is small in the mediolateral direction and also appears to have lost vertical volume. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 mm. The joint space seems to be somewhat decreased vertically.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is narrow mediolaterally and appears to have lost vertical volume. There may be some decreased vertical joint space, but not too significant. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B093 has a retruded maxilla and mandible. She has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology. She has some adenoid tissue still in the nasopharynx area. The oropharyngeal airway area however looks reasonably good considering the amount of retrusion of the mandible. The lower incisors appear somewhat over angulated, and it appears that she also has some AP macrogenia.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.
Maxillary slight anterior vertical hyperplasia, posterior vertical hypoplasia, and slight AP hypoplasia. Mandibular AP hypoplasia. AP macrogenia. Class II occlusion. Anterior open bite tendency. Impacted third molars x4. Slight over angulations of lower incisors.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
2. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b.	Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 3 mm of tooth structure and retract.
3. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). c.	Bilateral coronoidotomies. d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to counterclockwise rotate the maxilla. e.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy. f.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B093 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is very narrow mediolaterally. There appears to be loss of condylar volume vertically. There seems to be some amorphous tissue within the joint area with some evidence of some compressed tissue. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is very narrow mediolaterally. There appears to be loss of condylar volume vertically. There seems to be some amorphous tissue within the joint area with some evidence of some compressed tissue. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat small. There is some anterior beaking. There appears to be loss of vertical volume in the condyle. The articular eminence is moderately shallow. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle, but the disc is non-reducing.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have a lost a significant amount of volume. The articular eminence is a little bit steeper on this side. The disc is anteriorly and medially displaced. On opening, there is reasonably good translation, but the disc is non-reducing.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis with condylar resorption with articular discs that are dislocated, moderately deformed, and non-reducing.

