B096
B096 is 18 years old. Her primary concerns are:
Lower jaw is retruded and may be getting progressively worse.
Bite is off.
B096 has had previous orthodontics 8 years ago for 3 1/2 years beginning when she was 10 years old. She had braces reapplied to her teeth two months ago. She had her wisdom teeth removed the same day. B096 reports no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain. She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability all at 0. She takes no medications. She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus and gets occasional vertigo. She does have some trouble with her hips and she has minor asthma.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B096 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm. The maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to the left. The nasal tip is slightly off to the right side about 2 mm. The mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. The chin may be just slightly off to the right side. In profile view, upper lip and maxilla may be retruded about 3 mm. Chin is retruded about 18 mm. Chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. Intraorally, B096 is missing the mandibular first bicuspids and in the upper arch missing probably first bicuspids. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship, probably 3-4 mm Class II. She has an anterior overbite of about 1.5 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. Fascial pillars are moderately constricted. Intranasally, the septum may be deviated a little bit off towards the right side. The turbinates are moderately enlarged. The columella may be moderately wide. To palpation, she has some moderate pain over the right TMJ particularly after jaw function. She has some mild tenderness over the SCMs and shoulders. The incisal opening is 42 mm. The excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction. The transverse occlusal plane appears fairly level.

RADIOGRAPH EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. Sinuses appear clear. Condyles appear small and arthritic. Evidence is still present of the third molars that were removed in January.

Coronal view shows the turbinates are quite large particularly on the right side and in the bony section of the septum, it actually deviates a little bit towards the left side where anteriorly the cartilaginous portion seems to deviate a little bit off towards the right side. The sinuses are clear.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the right side.
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is small and arthritic. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present. Joint space actually appears to be reasonably good, but the condyle definitely has lost vertical and anteroposterior volume. The articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that also appears quite arthritic. There is some significant anterior beaking present. The condyle is small anteroposteriorly as well as loss of vertical volume is present. The articular eminence is moderately steep. The joint space appears fairly well balanced in both joints, although the condyles are slightly positioned posteriorly.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost probably some mediolateral width. The lateral pole of the condyle is well within the confines of the lateral rim of the fossa.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is just slightly larger than the opposite. There is a pseudocyst on the lateral head of the condyle. The joint space appears to mimic the joint space on the left side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B096 has a steep occlusal plane angle and retruded maxilla and a significantly retruded mandible. Oropharyngeal airway is about almost 5 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue. The maxillary and mandibular incisors appear to be somewhat over angulated even with the Bolton's difference of 1.5 mm.

Basic diagnoses for B096 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR).
Severe AP mandibular hypoplasia. Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion. High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm (normal AP dimension is 11 mm).
Hypertrophied turbinates.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure and retract to correct for the tooth size discrepancy and to decrease the excessive angulation of the lower incisors.
2. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. b.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and up right the incisors. d.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy. e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B096 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is somewhat narrow mediolaterally. Joint space vertically looks good, but the disc does not appear to be present. There is significant artifact present because of the presence of braces.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is narrow mediolaterally, although perhaps slightly more bone still remaining than the left side. The joint space appears fairly good, but the disc does not appear to be in position. It appears to be anteriorly displaced further anteriorly. The disc seems to be anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost vertical volume. There is some anterior beaking present. The articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is foreshortened anteroposteriorly and appears somewhat degenerated. On opening, the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is small mediolaterally and has lost vertical dimensions. The joint space looks fairly good. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The articular eminence is moderately steep. There is anterior beaking present in the condyle.

The T2 films show a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space and also there is a bubble of fluid in the inferior joint space. On the right side, there are some sclerotic areas in the head of the condyle. Really do not see any significant fluid problem. On opening, the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated without reduction. Imaging compatible with AICR.

