B098
B098 is 44 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. For the most part, she is in good health. About 2 years ago she began developing some problems in her jaw joints of unknown etiology. She is not aware of any trauma or other insightful factors that may have started the problem. She has been in orthodontic treatment for the last 18 months. Once Dr. XXXX got her started in treatment, the headache and joint pains that she was having prior to then went away. She did pretty well for quite some time, but has had 2 episodes since then of developing pain and headache problems associated with her jaw joints and back of her head. She has had her previous sleep study that was normal.

B098 rates her headaches at 0, TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 1, jaw function 1, diet at 4, disability at 2. She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo nor hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her shoulders and hips sometimes. She has had previous surgery on both knees, but they are doing very well. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime and she is aware of clenching during the day, too.

In frontal view, she has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 0. The maxillary midline may be about 1 mm off to the left. The mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. The chin is shifted about 3 mm to the left. She does have almost a full Class II occlusion and she has an anterior open bite in centric relation. In centric relation, she occludes only on the first bicuspids on the right side and all the rest of her teeth are out of occlusion. She has about a 2 mm open bite anteriorly and probably 2 mm posterior on the left side, 3 mm on the right side. In profile view, she has a little fullness in the upper lip by about 2 to 3 mm. The chin is retruded about 10 to 12 mm. The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. She has hyperfunctioning mentalis muscle. She has a head postured forward neck position. In centric relation, she actually has a fairly good Class I cuspid-molar relationship, although buccally she is a little bit wide on the left side where her maxillary lingual cuspids touch almost on top of the lower buccal cuspid. She has good attached gingiva around the teeth. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy. The uvula is slightly elongated. B098 does not report any difficulties breathing through her nose. B098 has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 to 3 mm higher than the right side. There is some upper arch asymmetry with the maxillary left cuspid being at least 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid and the mandibular left cuspid is about 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid. The left inferior border is about 2 to 3 mm elevated compared to the right side. There is tenderness over the masseter muscles. The incisal opening is 56 mm but only 26 without pain and discomfort. The excursion movements are 10 mm to the right and 11 mm to the left. It does appear on clinical photos that B098 does have a slight yaw towards the right side of probably a couple of millimeters.

Basic diagnoses for B098 would be as follows:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated without reduction. Right TMJ medial displacement of the articular disc. AP mandibular hypoplasia. Slight AP maxillary hyperplasia and posterior vertical hypoplasia. AP microgenia. Class II end-on occlusion, in centric relation occluding only on the right first bicuspids. Anterior and bilateral posterior open bites with occlusion only on the right first bicuspids. Missing mandibular right first molar, maxillary 1st molars and left 2nd biculpid. Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm (normal 11 mm). Moderate increased occlusal plane angle. TMJ pain. Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch. b.	Continue to align and level mandibular arch.
2. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning with ligament repair with Mitek anchors. b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to advance the mandible into a centric occlusion position.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
4. Restorative dentistry to reconstruct the occlusion.

B098 MRI AGE: 44/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic with some dips in the coronal surface and elevation in the mid part of the condyle and decreased vertical joint space. The condyle extends out even with the lateral rim of the fossa. There appears to be discal tissue probably anteriorly and medially displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly only about 1 mm or so.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has better morphology than the opposite side. The lateral rim of the fossa curves probably about 2 mm. The articular disc is medially displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic, particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present towards the lateral aspect. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. There is increased superior and posterior joint spaces. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting in front of the condyle. The disc degenerated and foreshortened anteroposteriorly. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. There appears to be some edema in the retro discal area. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle, but the disc appears to remain anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ sagittal view show a condyle that has better morphology. The articular eminence is relatively shallow. The articular disc appears to be in position. The condyle appears postured forward in the fossa. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc. \

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction.
Right TMJ medial displacement of the articular disc.

