DEBORAH NORGARD								2/16/05

Deb is 48 years old, referred by Dr. Peter Crump, St. Louis, MO.  She has had some problems with mild depression.  Deb apparently has a lot of environmental type of allergy problems.  She has had some problems with hayfever.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Evista 60 mg per day.
Lexapro 10 mg per day.
Excedrin ES for headaches.

Deborah's problems began on June 30, 2004.  Deb had a bicycle accident and sustained a fracture of the mandibular symphysis and had a left subcondylar fracture.  Jaws were wired together for about 6 weeks and then she was wired for 3 more weeks with partial opening.  That may have meant perhaps elastics being used.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Heaviness in the jaw joint area.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Teeth and jaws do not fit together.

Deborah has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  She has some popping in the lower back, but no pain problems there.  Her wrists bother her occasionally.  She has environmental allergies.  She does not wear jewelry except for a watch.  She is not aware of any allergy problems with jewelry.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day.  She gets headaches that she rates at about a level 6 in the frontotemporal area behind the eyes.  She has them about 3 to 4 times per month.  She states they usually last about a day when she gets them.  Before the injury, she did get headaches especially over her menstrual cycle.  Then they went away then she went through menopause.  Then after the injury, the headaches returned again.  Although they average about a level of 6, they can escalate to 10.  Relative to TMJ pain, she does get pain discomfort usually with function and chewing.  About 3 to 4 weeks ago, her pain levels were about a level of 8.  On an average day, currently she rates her pain around the head and neck area at a level of 2, but this excludes the day when she gets her severe headache problems.  She rates her jaw function at 7, diet at 7, disability at 2. 

Clinical Evaluation
 In the frontal view, she has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  It looks like more fullness on the left side compared to the right side.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-lip relationship is about 1/2 mm.  Maxillary dental line is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular midline may be about 1 mm to the right side.  Mandibular midline and chin midline are fairly close to being aligned with each other.  In profile view, she may have some slight AP maxillary deficiency of a couple of millimeters.  Mandible is retruded probably 10 to 12 mm.  Chin-neckline is short and the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular left first molar and has the second and third molars drifted forward with significant major inclination.  


DEBORAH NORGARD			2/16/05				Page 2

On the right side, she likewise is probably missing the first molar and has the second and third molars drifted forward into the first and second molar position with a little bit of angulation on the opposite side.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth through the second molars.  She has a real constricted maxilla.  She has full Class II cuspid molar relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 to 3 mm.  Deb's bite has changed fairly significant since her injury.  Her lower teeth used to bite up into the roof of her mouth where she would have indentations in the gums right behind the upper teeth.  She does not have relationship anymore so her lower jaws likely moved backwards and perhaps and little bit further downwards in the front.  Maximal incisal opening is about 34 mm.  She can open 26 mm with reasonable comfort.  Excursion movement to right 1 mm, to the left 3 mm.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness to the styloid areas and right TMJ.  No other pain to palpation in the head and neck and area.  On opening, joints seem to function reasonably smoothly, but with significant limitation of mobility.  As Deb opens, she felt she had some slight clicking in the right joint, but is different than the popping that she used to have prior.  

Before Deb's accident, she had no clicking or popping in her jaw joints.  They only developed after the accident and now the loud popping has essentially gone away.  The popping that she used to have was only on the right side.  Deb is not aware of having any significant difficulties breathing through her nose.  She does have snoring.  She sometimes is tired during the day.  She is not aware of having any sleep apnea type of problems.  Intranasally, turbinates are large sized, but not too significant.  Nostrils are quite constricted.  The Columella is wide and contributes to the narrowness of the nostrils.  Using the nasal scope and pulling the nostrils open significantly improved her ability to breathe through her nose. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows an absence of mandibular first molars and mesial drifting of the second and third molars.  There is more significant mesial tipping of the left second and third molars as compared to the right side.  Missing maxillary third molars.  Difficult to evaluate sinuses on this view.  Nasal airway appears it may be adequate.  

Right TMJ condyle shows some anterior beaking present.  

Left mandibular condyle shows evidence of previous subcondylar fracture with the head of the condyle rotated anterior and forward underneath the articular eminence. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows condyle appears arthritic.  There is extreme loss of dimensions superiorly and posteriorly.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  On the opening view, there is virtually no evidence of translation.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a subcondylar tangential fracture with the condyle sitting almost overtop of the sigmoid notch and the condyle is completely anterior to the articular eminence.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be some remaining transection of the oblique fracture through the condylar neck area that does extend up towards the joint that falls far short.  On opening, there is no significant evidence of translation. 


DEBORAH NORGARD			2/16/05				Page 3

Waters view shows the sinuses appear clear.  Turbinate in the left nostril appears a little bit enlarged as does the right side.  There appears to be some airway on the right side, more so than the left side. 

Cephalometrically, she has a severe skeletal Class II relationship.  There is some vertical maxillary deficiency, but not too significant, perhaps some slight AP maxillary deficiency.  Oropharyngeal airway is moderately constricted with an AP dimension of about 6 to 6.5 mm at the base of the tongue and 5 mm at the base of the soft palate.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Left TMJ subcondylar fracture with nonunion and a condyle positioned anterior and inferior to the articular eminence.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and with adhesions creating a closed lock.
Severe AP mandibular deficiency.
Severe transverse maxillary deficiency.
Slight vertical maxillary deficiency.
Slight AP maxillary deficiency.
Class II occlusion.
Mild crowding of lower anterior arch.
Mild crowding of upper anterior arch.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Mastoid dysfunction.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Snoring.
Narrow nostrils.
Wide Columella.
Anterior nasal airway obstruction.
Significant mesial tipping of mandibular left second and third molars.
Missing mandibular first molars bilaterally with the second and third molars drifted forward into the first and second molar position. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure to account for probable tooth size discrepancy and to keep from flairing the lower incisors any further forward.  Upright roots on the first and second molars bilaterally. 
DEBORAH NORGARD			2/16/05				Page 4

Surgery.
Option 1:
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction of mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from abdomen.)
Bilateral condylectomies.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand it, advance slightly and downgraft.
Reconstruction of the columella to increase nostril size.

Option 2: Surgery Stage I
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla, advance it slightly and        
      downgraft it.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
Reconstruction of the columella.

            Surgery Stage II (if TMJs get worse.)
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)

 Option 3 Surgery Stage I.
     a.  Reconstruct left condyle but uprighting the condyle repositioning the condyle and                     
          disc into the fossa.
     b.  Right TMJ articular disc reposition and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. 

   Surgery Stage II.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
Reconstruction of the columella.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  