JENNA NORMAN								01/19/2012

Jenna is 27 years old, birth date 03/20/1984.  Jenna believes that her joint problems may have possibly started in May 2011 when she was riding in a boat and the water was extremely choppy and it was quite traumatic for her.  When she got off the boat, she was lightheaded and dizzy.  Her symptoms did not get significantly worse until about September 10, 2011, when she woke up with fullness in her ears.  She then saw some ENT specialists because of the ear symptoms.  She was placed on steroids and even some antibiotics without relief.  On October 10, 2011, after seeing Dr. Polson, he made her a splint.  This made the pain worse.  She got injections into her tendons intraorally.  Jenna is under quite a bit of stress as she is a 7th grade schoolteacher and also coaches three sports.  She took a month off of school at one point because she was getting significant pain and migraine type headaches.  Initially, she did have chiropractic treatment around September 3, but this did not seem to help very much.  She got an NTI splint in November 2011.  She then was referred to Dr. Shaw, a pain specialist.  He placed her on medications and also gave her Botox injections which were not beneficial.  She did have orthodontics for about 7 months when she was in the 3rd grade.  

Jenna currently takes the following medications:

Cymbalta 60 mg q.d.
Hydrocodone 7.5 mg 3 tablets per day.
Baclofen 10 mg tablets 3 tablets at bedtime.

Primary concerns that Jenna has at this time include the following:

Severe TMJ pain.
Ear pain.
Face pain.
Significant headaches.  

Jenna apparently is very emotional and prior to the Cymbalta was significantly emotionally stressed.  
   
Jenna rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 7, jaw function 5, diet at 7, and disability at 7.  Her headaches she rates at a level of 7 and they occur all over her head including the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area.  She has no earaches, occasional tinnitus, no vertigo, and no hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She has no known allergies and is not aware of any allergies to jewelry.  She may have some nighttime clenching.  

In frontal view, Jenna has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm.  In profile, Jenna has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Jenna has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some spacing between the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class II cuspid relationship on the left side and to a slightly lesser degree on the right side.  The midlines are fairly well aligned.  She is Class II by probably 5 mm on the right side and probably 6 on the left side.  She has an anterior deep bite of 4 to 5 mm.  She has a slight reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch.  She has an overjet of 1 to 2 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and tonsils are just mildly enlarged.  She gives no history of snoring, has mild daytime somnolence, but no sleep apnea issues.  She is predominantly a nasal breather.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles and over the TMJs.  The maximal incisal opening is 29 mm, opening without discomfort 23 mm.  The excursion movements are 8 mm in each direction.  On opening, she has a click in the right TMJ at about 20 mm and a closing click at 10 mm.  The left side functions reasonably smoothly, although on MRI it shows that the disc is displaced on that side.  Jenna does report that she has also lost about 15 to 20 pounds through all this.  She used to weigh about 128 and was very active and now she weighs about 112.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that she has impacted mandibular third molars and maxillary third molars.  She has a root canal in the maxillary left first molar.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The turbinates appear relatively in normal size.  The septum appears a little bit deviated off to the left side.  Difficult to evaluate the joints.  

Coronal view shows at least posteriorly the bony septum is reasonably straight.  Sinuses appear clear.  Left turbinate is moderately enlarged.  

Axial view shows that sinuses are clear.  The septum is deviated just slightly to the left.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening and sclerosis towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with a little flattening on top of the condyle.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There appears to be a little extravasation of the lateral pole of the condyle out laterally creating a decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width.  There is decreased vertical joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Jenna has a skeletal Class II relationship and a Class II occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway is decreased with an AP dimension of about 5 mm at the soft palate level and about 7 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Dental model analysis shows a tooth size discrepancy of 2 mm.

Basic diagnoses for Jenna would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc displaced with early reduction.
Mandibular hypoplasia.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Headaches. 
Class II end-on occlusion.
Multiple diastemas lower anterior arch.
Anterior deep bite of 4 to 5 mm.
Tooth size discrepancy of 2 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Open 1 mm of space bilaterally between 
                         the cuspids and lateral incisors to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch closing the mandibular anterior spacing.  
2.	Surgery.	
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
4.	Restorative Dentistry.
            Place bonding or veneers on maxillary lateral incisors to eliminate spacing created 
            to correct the tooth size discrepancy.

