JANNINA NIKA									07/02/2007

Jannina is 39 years.  Jannina has had jaw problems since 1999.  She had a malocclusion at that time and underwent orthognathic surgery where the maxilla was moved backwards and the mandible was moved forwards.  Following the surgery she had significant problems with facial swelling, inability to open the jaw and function the jaw as well as significant pain problems.  Her doctor, Dr. Michael Shelkun, felt it was related to some screws so in 2000, he took her back to surgery and removed the screws.  Most of the screws were from the jaw area but this had no affect and she continued with the facial swelling and continued pain.  She then went to see Dr. Robert Diecidue, at Jefferson Hospital.  MRI was taken showing that the discs were displaced.  In 2001, he took Jannina back to surgery where apparently he identified a nonunion in the upper jaw and did some bone grafting.  In addition, Jannina has undergone 6 to 7 bilateral TMJ arthroscopies.  Another doctor was going to do a laser surgery on her joints but by that time they were unable to enter the joints.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:  
Teeth hurt and are loose.
Vestibular problems.
Nerve damage.
Bad smell always present in her nose.
Decreased hearing with the left worse than the right. 
Tongue feels constricted. 
Sleeps with mouth open.
Breathes heavy.
Difficult to eat and chew.
 Pain all day long in the face.
 As the jaw opens, her mandible shifts towards the right side.
 She has had teeth pulled for pain without resolution. 
 Headaches.
 Painful to smile.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Percocet 10/650, 2 q.4h.
OxyContin 80 mg b.i.d.
Celexa 20 mg daily.
Trazodone 50 mg q.h.s.
Xanax 1 mg p.r.n. 
Aromasin (her cancer medication.)
Lyrica t.i.d.
Topamax 25 mg p.r.n. 

Jannina has been diagnosed with breast cancer and is being treated for that.  She was diagnosed in 2003 and has had radiation therapy and she had a lumpectomy.  They could not give her chemotherapy because of the jaw, bone and pain problems that she has.  


JANNINA NIKA				07/02/2007				Page 2

In frontal view, Jannina has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  She has a little bit more fullness in the upper lip on the right side as compared to the left side.  Upper lip length is around 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm.  Maxillary and mandibular dental midline are pretty much on the facial midline.  Chin may be just slightly to the left 1 to 2 mm.  When Jannina relaxes her lower lip, the distance from her lower lip to her lower incisors is 5 mm.  She has hyperfunction of mentalis muscle when she puts her lips together.  In profile view, Jannina appears to have some slight deficiency in upper lip projection.  It appears retruded by probably about 10 mm.  She has an obtuse nasolabial angle.  Chin-neckline is short although the chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, Jannina has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.  In the upper arch she is missing the first molar on the left side and on the right side.  These teeth were extracted for pain reasons.  She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship.  She has about a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Uvula appears relatively normal as does the length of the soft palate.  Faucial pillars appear mild to moderately constricted.  She has a coating on her tongue.  Jannina states that she has been on antibiotics about every other month for the past 7 years and she is placed on Diflucan frequently as well.  

She has been told that the saliva gland on the right side (submandibular gland) is nonfunctioning.  That area is constantly sore for her.  She apparently tends to run fevers and was put on antibiotics for that reason.  Sometimes she feels better when she is on the antibiotics, other times cannot tell much difference.  Transversely, she may be just vertically short on the right side maybe 1 mm.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear relatively moderate in size.  She has a septal spur off on the left side that may be causing some slight blockage.  However, Jannina says that she does breathe through her mouth most of the time daytime and at nighttime.  Jannina is not aware of any snoring problems but has a lot of daytime somnolence and rates that as a severe level of tiredness.  She does state that she does have some sleep apnea symptoms.  It is difficult for her to sleep at night.  She also has problems with hot flashes.  She also has problems with drooling and this sometimes can wake her up at night as well. 

Jannina rates headaches that she gets as often as twice a day a level of 8 and they occur in the frontal, temporal, posterior and the top of the head areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 8, diet at 7, disability at 10.  She has a decreased sensation in the upper lip, lower lip and cheek areas that are closer to being numb as compared to having feeling.  To palpation, Jannina has high moderate to severe pain over the temporalis, masseters, medial pterygoids, TMJs, styloid areas, and high moderate over the posterior neck and shoulder areas.  Maximal incisal opening is about 25 mm but there is really no opening that Jannina is comfortable at.  As she opens her jaws, her mandible deviates towards the right side 4 to 5 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is 5 mm and to the left a maximum of 2 mm.  Jannina has significant crepitation in both joints and occasionally had a loud cracking kind of noise.





JANNINA NIKA				07/02/2007				Page 3

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the maxillary first molars.  Some bone loss around the upper anterior teeth.  There is a 2 x 3 stabilizing wire in the upper arch.  She has a root canal and a maxillary left second bicuspid, mandibular left first molar.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Left TMJ joint shows flattening on the anterior head.  There may be a little osteophyte sticking up superiorly off the condyle.

The right condyle appears quite arthritic with osteophytic formation off the superior posterior aspect. 

Waters view shows that the septum is fairly straight at least posterior in the bony area.  Turbinates are of moderate size.  Sinuses are difficult to tell if they are a little bit cloudy or not.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly.  Significantly decreased vertical joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit of bone extruding from the top of the condyle.  There may be a little roughness in the fossa area as well.  Articular eminence is steeper on this side as compared to the opposite side.  Joint space is decreased superiorly.  On opening, there is some translation of the left condyle coming down towards the posterior aspect of the articular eminence whereas the right joint shows virtually no translation. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the upper incisors are a little bit _________.  Chin appears retruded.  She has a Class I occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good.

Jannina said that when she would develop pain or facial swelling she would be put on antibiotics.  She said she has been antibiotics about every other month and then Diflucan is often added. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis (right side worse than the left side.)
Heterotopic bone formation around the right TMJ.
Severe headaches.
Severe TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
AP microgenia.
Depressions in the gonial notch being worse on the right side than the left side secondary to the previous sagittal split osteotomies. 
Slight increased fullness in the right side of the face overlying the anterior aspect of the maxilla. 
Pain in the anterior maxilla beneath the base of the nose. 
 Missing maxillary first molars.
JANNINA NIKA				07/02/2007				Page 4

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch. 
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Bilateral fat grafts to the TMJs (harvest from the abdomen.)
Augmentation genioplasty.
Resuspension of the mentalis muscles.
Augmentation of right inferior border of the mandible in the agonal notch area.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Dental restorations to include possible osseointegrated implants and crowns to replace the missing maxillary first molars.