ROBERT NORRIS									05-08-03

Robert is 46 years old. 

Patient History

In 1991, Robert had previous TMJ surgery bilaterally for disc repositioning. In 1996, he had a cervical fusion performed. In 2001, he had an occipital nerve stimulator. Other than the headaches and neck problems that he is currently suffering from, he is in good health.

Robert’s problems may have begun as long ago as 1975 when at the age of 18 he was involved in a motorcycle accident. He was unconscious for five days. Since then, he has also been in a couple of other MVAs at least x 2. In 1991, he underwent surgery for bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair by Dr. Greg Ellis. He then had orthodontic treatment done from 1991 through 1994. He did get better for a couple of years but then headaches began to develop again. He has been treated with injections, physical therapy, relaxation therapy, myofascial release therapy, splints, and more recently an occipital nerve stimulator. This treatment provided for him was primarily directed toward his neck. No one until just very recently has suspected any TMJ problem at all. He does get earaches, slight tinnitus, and gets frequent vertigo. The only other joint that he really has problems with is with his neck where he has degeneration in the C5-C6 area. 

He does have an allergy to WHEAT AND BEEF but NO DRUG ALLERGIES.

He feels that he probably has some nocturnal clenching and bruxism but is not sure. He has some numbness in his cheeks bilaterally. He has headaches constantly day and night, and the average is about a level of 6 in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally. They can escalate up to 8. He rates his TMJ pain at 6, overall pain on an average day at 5, jaw function at 8, diet at 6, and disability at 5. 

Current Medications

OxyContin 20 mg b.i.d. 
Wellbutrin 150 mg once per day
Hydrocodone

Patient Concerns

Severe headaches 
Severe jaw pain
Recently identified TMJ pain
Difficulties eating and chewing
Painful even when talking
Earaches 
Frequent lightheadedness and dizziness

Clinical Examination

In frontal view Robert has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is almost 30 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is probably -3. Maxillary, mandibular, dental, and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned with each other.

In profile view, Robert has what appears to be fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose. Chin appears somewhat retruded by about 15 mm. Chin-neckline is short, and chin-neck angle is not well defined. 

Intraorally, Robert has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Mild attrition on his lower anterior teeth particularly affecting the first bicuspids and the cuspids with the right cuspid having quite a bit of attrition down into the dentin. Lower incisors also are extremely flattened. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars as well. Fairly close to a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly flat. Oropharynx appears clear, and soft palate and uvula look relatively normal. Robert gives no history of snoring.

Intranasally, there is evidence of previous surgery, and he did have a nasoseptoplasty in about 1980. Nasal airway seems a little bit compressed or constricted, particularly on the left side more so than the right side. 

To palpation, he has high moderate tenderness over the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, styloid areas, shoulders, and moderate tenderness over the medial pteryoids and SCMs. Incisal opening is about 53 mm. Excursive movement to the right 10 mm and to the left 11 mm. On jaw function, he would inconsistently have pops on one side of the jaw then the other side. May have been some crepitus kind of noises in there as well.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Sinuses appear clear. Cannot evaluate the nose. Condyles look reasonably good. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some significant anterior beaking present. On one view, it appears that there may be some decreased joint space. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Appears to be a lot of sclerosis in the articular eminence as well as in the fossa area. 

Open view shows excellent translation of the condyle and minimal joint space in the open view. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some flattening on the posterior head of the condyle. Condyle is actually postured forward quite a ways within the fossa. The condyle is seen down on the articular eminence about halfway down. Increased posterior and superior joint spaces. Anterior joint space looks a little bit narrow perhaps. 

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and perhaps some decreased joint space. It is possible that the disc could be posteriorly displaced in this joint.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Nasal septum appears reasonably straight. Appears to be some decreased airway particularly on the left side at the base of the nose. The occipital nerve stimulator is seen in position.

Cephalometrically, Robert has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship. Has probably a moderately high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway appears somewhat constricted with an airway of only about 4.5 mm at the base of the soft palate and about 5.5 mm at the base of the tongue.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations 
Severe TMJ pain
Severe headaches 
Severe myofascial pain
Vertigo
Earaches 

Recommended Treatment

Bilateral TMJ MRIs

Consider bilateral TMJ injections with Marcaine to determine effects of the TMJs on the pain factors 

Surgery for reconstruction of the TMJs by one of the following methods:

Treatment option #1:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies 

Treatment option #2:
Bilateral TMJ meniscectomies
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with sternoclavicular disc grafts
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to control the occlusion and make space for the sternoclavicular disc grafts 

Treatment option #3:
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)
