CHELSEY NORRIS									02-12-03

Chelsey is 14 years old and referred by Dr. William Hang, 101 N. Westlake, #202, Westlake Village, CA  91362.

This evaluation was based on records sent by Dr. Hang and also on a telephone conversation with Chelsey’s mother, Cheryl Norris.

Patient Concerns

The primary concerns that Chelsey has include the following:

Difficulties eating
Difficulties with speech intelligibility, which is getting worse
Cannot close her lips without extreme strain
Tenderness in some of the jaw muscles
Difficulties breathing through the nose
Predominantly a mouth breather

Patient History

About a year-and-a-half ago was the first that her family realized that her lower jaw appeared to become more retruded. She has been under orthodontic care, and she has also seen another oral surgeon by the name of Dr. Scott Binion, who suggested extraction and retraction of her teeth to correct her bite problem. The parents realize that this was not the best approach and sought Dr. Hang for a second opinion.

Chelsey gets headaches occasionally, but the mother is not aware of any TMJ pain, clicking or popping, earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. 

Chelsey has had a speech evaluation, and it shows that she has a significant speech disturbance affecting her intelligibility. She is classified as having inappropriately low speech intelligibility. She also was evaluated by an orthopedic surgeon, and she has a thoracic curve, and one leg is about a half inch shorter than the other. Dr. King, the orthopedic specialist, feels that she still has a lot of growth yet.

Clinical Examination

Evaluation based on her photographs reveals that she has significant lip incompetence of probably 10 mm. She has an excessive upper tooth to lip relationship of probably at least 8 mm. Either the nasal tip is off toward the left side 2 or 3 mm or the maxillary midline is off to the right a couple of millimeters. Mandibular dental midline is about a millimeter to the left of the maxillary midline. In the photographs, her head is tipped a little bit, so that the left eye is higher than the right eye, and her left ear is higher than her right ear. In the photographs I have, she has orthodontic appliances on her teeth. In the profile view, she does have a retruded mandible. It is difficult to tell to what extent because her head is tipped up significantly. Upper lip may be a little bit retruded as well.

Intraoral photographs show that she has a Class II occlusion, worse on the left side as compared to the right side, and she has an anterior open bite. Dr. Hang has removed all of her current appliances and is planning on putting on new appliances.

Radiographic Evaluation

Lateral cephalometric x-ray shows a high occlusal plane angle, anterior vertical maxillary excess, retruded mandible, and overangulated lower incisors. Oropharyngeal airway is decreased measuring only about 4 mm at the base of the tongue.

Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars, but they are developing and unerupted, and some are malaligned significantly. She has the rest of her teeth present. Condyles show evidence of resorption and arthritic changes. It is possible that she may have a mucous retention cyst in the right sinus but difficult to tell. Turbinates appear enlarged. 

Dental models show that she has a Class II end-on occlusion, being worse on the left side as compared to the right side, and she has a significant tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of approximately 3 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Based on clinical photographs, radiographs, and dental model analyses, Chelsey’s diagnoses are as follows:

Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption
Anterior vertical maxillary excess
Anteroposterior mandibular deficiency
Class II occlusion 
Anterior open bite
Occluding only on the first molar
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction
Significant tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm in the bicuspid area
Tooth-size discrepancy in the bicuspids
Slightly accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
Overangulation of lower incisors
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars
Headaches
Speech dysfunction

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJs

Presurgical orthodontics
Continue to align and level maxillary arch
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing 2.5 to 3 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy and to decrease the inclination of the lower incisors. Also, strip all four lower bicuspids, removing about 0.5 mm of tooth structure from each tooth and retract. Maximize posterior anchorage so we can maximize retraction of the lower incisors

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly and correct any transverse problems that may arise
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies
Surgical removal of bony impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion