MELISSA NIX								05/20/2011

Melissa is 18 years old.  Birth date 06/09/1992.  Referred by Dr. Devek Frech, 3621 Maplewood Avenue, Wichita Falls, TX 76308.

Melissa states that her jaw problems began when she was about 15 when she started getting some clicking her jaw joint in 2008 of unknown etiology.  She underwent orthodontic treatment from 2009 to 2010.  Following removal of the braces, her upper arch collapsed in and she has her current condition with a cross bite on the left side. She takes no medications.  She gets headaches on the left side in the frontal and temporal area and it feels like it is behind her eye 3 to 4 times per week.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 5, diet at 3, disability at 0.  Melissa is currently completing her freshman year in pharmacology at Midwestern University.  

She is not aware of clenching or bruxing her teeth at night, but she does wake up with headaches in the mornings 3 to 4 days per week.  The only other joint that bothers her is her right shoulder.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  She has some mild snoring, but no daytime somnolence or sleep apnea.  She is a mouth breather at night and some during the day probably as well.  

In frontal view, Melissa has fairly good facial symmetry in the lower and upper third face with some asymmetry in the lower third.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 4 mm.  The maxillary midline is 1 mm to the left.  The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm to the left.  The chin is probably 5 to 6 mm to the left.  In profile view, Melissa has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  The mandible is somewhat retruded probably 6 or 8 mm.  Intraorally, Melissa has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars.  The lower arch is fairly well aligned and leveled.  She has a good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  The upper lateral incisors are blocked lingually.  She has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by about 2 mm and on the left side she has a Class I relationship.  Upper left lateral incisor is in cross bite.  The cuspid is not but the bicuspids and molars on the left side are in full cross bite.  As Melissa shifts her mandible about 2 to 3 mm to the right, it improves her facial midline and puts her back into Class I cuspid relationship on the right side but a slight Class III on the left side.  It does tend to balance the cross bite a little bit better, although there is some transverse tendency that remains in the maxilla.  She does have some mild crenations along the borders of her tongue, but not too significant.  Oropharyngeal structures look relatively normal and tonsils are mild to moderately enlarged.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear to be fairly large and appear to probably create some nasal airway obstruction.  The septum may have some deviation in it.  To palpation, Melissa has moderate pain over the left masseter, left medial pterygoid, left TMJ and left styloid area.  Right joint function functions smoothly in opening, but the left one has a pop at about 35 mm of opening and closing at 25 mm.  The maximal opening is about 62 mm and opening without pain 38 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 9 mm and the left 7 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  The right condyle appears larger than the left condyle with elongated condylar neck.  

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are large.  The septum appears reasonably straight at this particular cut.  The sinuses appear clear.  

Axial view shows that there is some small polyps or mucous retention cysts in both sinuses along the posterolateral sinus walls.  The septum appears reasonably straight, although there could be a little spur off to the left side on the anterior aspect of the septum.  The turbinates appear quite large and appear to obliterate a good portion of the functional airway.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic.  There is a prominence of the lateral pole of the condyle extending out lateral.  The joint space appears fairly well balanced.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit larger than the opposite side.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 mm.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is somewhat arthritic with some flattening on the top of the condyle and some anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is taller and also increased in size anteroposteriorly.  The joint space appears reasonably well balanced.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she is basically a skeletal Class I occlusal relationship, but does have a  high occlusal plane angle.  She has a large adenoid mass in the oropharyngeal area that is likely contributing to some nasal airway obstructions.  Turbinates extend beyond the hard palate and are quite evident.  AP space from soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall is 5 mm and from the base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall about 8 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Melissa would be as follows:

Right mandibular condylar hyperplasia (osteochondroma versus accelerated growth).
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Maxillary hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle. 
Class III end-on occlusion on the right side and Class I on the left. 
Left-sided cross bite.
Impacted third molars x4.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Hypertrophied nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5.5 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Right TMJ high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning with Mitek 			anchor.
	b.	Left TMJ disc repositioning with Mitek anchor.
	c.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a 				counterclockwise direction.
	d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to rotate it in a counterclockwise direction 			and expand it.
	e.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
	f.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	g.	Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 