ROBERT NIGOHOSIAN								07/08/2010

Bob is 58 years old and a self-referral.  He was diagnosed with sleep apnea in 1999.  He has been on a CPAP periodically from 2000 to 2006 and then since 2006 he has been on it on a routine basis.  His primary concerns are to eliminate the severe sleep apnea and eliminate the CPAP machine.  He gets headaches about 3 times per week in the posterior head at about a level of 3 and also behind the right eye.  He has no TMJ pain.  Average daily pain is 1, jaw function 0, diet at 3, disability at 0.  He has no earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  He has some problems with his left knee.  He is borderline diabetic.  He takes the following medications:

Ambien 10 mg q.h.s.
Amlodipine 5 mg.
Hyzaar 100 mg.

He apparently has no TMJ issues.  He has severe problems with snoring, daytime somnolence, and sleep apnea syndrome.  He has moderate to severe sleep disorder.  There are times when he is predominantly a mouth breather.  He does have an elevated blood pressure of about 140/100.  He does clench and grind his teeth at night.  He has had a bunch of bridge work done and some cosmetic procedures such as veneers and these keep popping off so it is then highly suspicious that he is a clencher and bruxer.

In frontal view, Bob has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about zero.  The maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are fairly close to being on the midline as is the chin.  In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably 2 to 3 mm.  The maxilla is AP deficient by probably 4 to 6 mm.  The chin is retruded by probably 15 to 18 mm.  The chin neckline is somewhat short.  He does have a slight head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, Bob has all of his lower back through the second molars.  He has a lot of wear and erosions on his anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, he has all his teeth back through the second molars.  He is fairly close to a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  He has about a 3 mm anterior deep bite relationship that would apparently be closer to 5 or 6 if it were not for the severe attrition of the lower anterior teeth.   The maximal incisal opening is 50 mm.  The excursion movements to the right are 7 mm, to the left 8 mm.  There is no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  Joints seems to function smoothly.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy and pretty much normal except the fascial pillars appear quite constricted.  Intranasally, the turbinates are enlarged.  The septum is reasonably straight.  There is some constriction of the luminal valves.  He probably has at least a moderate nasal airway obstruction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary right second molar, maxillary left cuspid replaced by a pontic, and the 4 unit bridge as well as the left first molar with the second and third molar drifted forward.  He is also missing the mandibular left third molar.  He has crowns on a lot of his teeth.  He has got root canals on the right central and lateral incisor, the second molar on the left side, and the third molar on the right side.  He has bilateral maxillary sinusitis.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The septum deviates a little bit off towards the left side.  For the most part, the airway looks reasonable.

Tomograms shows the joints look reasonably healthy, although there is decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joints bilaterally.  

Basic diagnoses for Bob would be as follows:

Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal AP dimension is 11 mm).  
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Soft palate hyperplasia with constricture of the fascial pillars.
Severe sleep apnea. 
Bilateral maxillary sinusitis.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Evaluation and management of the bilateral maxillary sinusitis. 
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch. 
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 				counterclockwise direction, advancing pogonion approximately 15 mm.
	c.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	d.	Uvulopalatapharyngeoplasty (UPPP).