BILL NOBLE										11/01/2007

Bill is 51 years old.  The primary concern he has involves some sleep apnea and snoring issues.  He has no apparent TMJ problems.  He is aware of clenching and bruxing.  His medications include Excedrin Migraine and Cozaar.  He has had previous orthognathic surgery.  He had a Leforte I osteotomy to expand the maxilla to correct the crossbite by Dr. Kevin McBride.  He has also had orthodontics x3.   The surgery was performed sometime around 1980 or 1981.  Bill has had some implants performed and some extensive dental work.

In frontal view, Bill has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 
30 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about –4 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are shifted off towards the right side probably 1 mm at the dental midline and probably 3 to 4 mm at the chin.  In profile view, Bill has some AP deficiency of the maxilla probably 3 to 4 mm.  Chin is retruded about 15 to 18 mm.  Chin-neckline is not well defined.  Intraorally, Bill is missing lower first bicuspids that were taken out for previous orthodontic reasons.  He has a crown on mandibular left first molar.  The rest of the teeth are present and fairly well aligned.  He has good attached gingiva.  He has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Transverse width of the mandible appears to be a little bit constricted.  In the upper arch Bill is also missing the first bicuspids.  He has implants replacing all four incisors.  The incisors look a little bit small.  He is basically pretty much to a Class I on the left side with Class II end-on on the right side in the cuspid area by about 3 mm.  There is an anterior vertical overbite of about 1.5 mm.   Bill actually has all four of his third molars erupted into position.  It appears that he likely has a tooth size discrepancy due to some small upper incisors.  Bill has no tenderness around the head and neck area to palpation.  Joints function smoothly.  Maximal incisor opening is about 55 mm.  Excursive movements are about 
9 mm in each direction.  There is a slight cant in the occlusion with the right side being about 
1 mm higher than the left side.  There is just a slight crossbite tendency posteriorly around the right second or third molar.  He has a slightly open bit tendency in the bicuspid area bilaterally.  The uvula is a little bit elongated.  The soft palate appears a little bit elongated and the posterior airway dimension seems somewhat constricted.  Faucial pillars may be mildly constricted but not too severe.  Intranasally, the septum is fairly straight although it may be just slightly off to the left side.  The turbinate is a fairly good size.  Transverse width of the nose is probably a little bit greater than normal but the turbinates are quite large and may cause some obstruction particularly at night when Bill feels that he does breathe more through his mouth.  Bill describes his snoring as probably severe.  He does not really experience daytime somnolence.  He occasionally will wake up unable to catch his breath.  He has difficulty sleeping at night.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows that he is missing all four first bicuspids.  He has an implant replacing the maxillary left central incisor and maxillary right cuspid.  He has crowns on his four incisors and also the right cuspid.  He has a root canal in the maxillary right central incisor.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  The right condyle appears a little bit larger than the left one.




BILL NOBLE					11/01/2007				Page 2

Waters view shows that he has significant sinusitis on the right side with most of the sinus obliterated.  The left sinus appears clear as do the rest of the sinuses.  The bony septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side.  Turbinates actually do not appear so bad in size and there appears to be adequate nasal airway.

Left TMJ tomogram is a little hard to evaluate.  The condyle appears to have reasonably good shape.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  There appears to be adequate joint space although posteriorly it may be a little bit narrow.

Right TMJ condyle appears a little bit larger in size.  Joint space seems fairly well balanced except a little bit decreased posteriorly.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  On opening there is good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is some vertical maxillary deficiency relative to upper lip length.  There is a decreased oropharyngeal airway of only about 4 mm at the soft palate level.  It seems more constricted at the base of tongue.  There are double images of the posteropharyngeal wall and with the anterior part of the double image the airway dimension is only about 2 mm.  A little bit lower down it measures about 6.  This may indicate some transverse narrowness of the oropharyngeal airway.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Vertical maxillary deficiency being worse posteriorly and anteriorly.
AP maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal 11 mm.)
High occlusal plane angle.
Missing four first bicuspids. 
Hyperplastic elongated soft palate and uvula. 
Severe snoring. 
Replacement of maxillary left central incisor and maxillary right cuspid with osteointegrated implants. 
 Sleep apnea syndrome. 
 Right maxillary sinusitis versus mucous retention cyst. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.
CT scan versus i-CAT scan of sinuses. 



BILL NOBLE					11/01/2007				Page 3

Surgery.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla about 6 mm and down graft it posteriorly about 8 mm.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward approximately 15 mm. 
Consider UPPP procedure.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

At this point in time Bill is not interested in pursing the surgical approach but the plan he would like to follow is as follows:
Weight reduction to see if he can decrease his high blood pressure as well as decrease his sleep apnea symptoms.
Consider use of CPAP machine to help control sleep apnea.
If successful with weight management and outcome, but snoring still present, then proceed on with a UPPP procedure. 
If weight reduction does not alleviate sleep apnea symptoms, then the surgical options previously outlined would be available.