BARBARA NOAKES									11-04-04

Barbara is 68 years old. 

Patient History

She has given me an outline of her history with her problems beginning at the age of 8 to 9 years old. She has had numerous TMJ surgeries. She apparently had Silastic implanted into the left jaw joint at one time. She had about 4 procedures and eventually in 1997 had a rib graft placed into the left jaw joint area and for about seven years did alright.  Then just a few months ago she began having headaches on the left side again and pain down through her jaw. She apparently does have some arthritic changes in her neck. On 10/07/2004, she woke up, and the left side of her face was paralyzed. She went to the emergency room, and she has actually seen about four other doctors in reference to this. Some have felt that she just basically has a Bell’s palsy situation there, but along with the development of the Bell’s palsy, she has also developed significant pain problems on the left side of the face. 

She gives no history of earaches per se directly in the ear. Other joints that bother her include the bones in the neck, her knees, and left ankle. On her right shoulder she has had a hemiarthroplasty previously done, and she has had a right total knee done. Left knee has painful and arthritic. She has a list of allergies written down in the notes that she provided for us. She is extremely hypersensitive to ADHESIVE TAPE and also to CLEANERS. She does have some problems wearing cheap earrings possibly, although she doesn’t wear cheap earrings now, but when she first got her ears pierced, she had problems that took about a year to clear up. 

She gets headaches on the left side at about a level of 8 on an average day in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. These can escalate to 10. She rates her TMJ pain at 9 and overall average pain without medication at 10 and with medications at 6. She rates her jaw function at 8, diet at 9, and disability at 9. 

Barbara has a history of diabetes and also fibromyalgia. She has a chronic bladder problem for which she has to take Keflex quite often. At other times she will take Macrobid. 

Patient Concerns

Facial paralysis, left side (possible viral Bell’s palsy)
Severe pain, left jaw and face area
Severe left-sided headaches
Severe left-sided pain around the ear
Severe pain in the left neck area
Swelling on the left side of the face
Pain in the right jaw that has developed within the past year but is partially blocked out because of the severe pain on the left side
Posterior teeth don’t come together
Decreased jaw opening and function
Difficulties eating and chewing and with those functions she has significantly increased pain
On puree and liquid diet
Pain, left eye
Vision on the left side significantly affected
Ringing in the ears
Lightheadedness
Hearing loss on the left side
Clinical Examination

Barbara does exhibit facial asymmetry. The left side of the face is much more full than the right side probably due to the rib graft placed on that side. She probably has a good 8 to 10 mm of additional fullness on that left side. There may be just a slight difference in vertical position of the ear with the left ear perhaps slightly higher than the right by maybe 5 to 6 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Chin, however, is deviated off to the right side probably about 7 or 8 mm. 

In profile, she does have fairly good facial balance. 

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth except she is missing the left first molar. Second molar is drifted forward, and she has a bridge in that area to replace the remaining of space of the first molar. She has lots of crowns on almost all of the posterior teeth. In the upper arch, she is missing the right second bicuspid and first molar replaced by a bridge, and on the left side she likewise is missing the first molar, and it has been replaced. In centric occlusion, she is fairly close to being Class I cuspid-molar relationship on the right side and on the left side. However, her teeth don’t seem to fit together quite as well on the left side. They seem to be apart. The open bite on the left side is new, and it has occurred just since the facial paralysis has developed on that side. She has about a 2 to 3-mm vertical overbite. There is a slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being maybe a millimeter higher than the left side but not really significantly. As she bites together, her lower dental midline does shift off to the right side about 1 to 2 mm. Flexion and extension increase pain in the jaw area. Rotating the head did not affect the pain levels. Tilting the head from side to side increased her pain levels. 

Maximal incisal opening is 25 mm and without significant pain is only about 15 mm. Excursive movements to the right are about 1 mm and to the left about 6 mm. As she goes into excursive movements, this increases the tinnitus in her ears. 

To palpation, she has rather severe pain over the left TMJ, moderate pain over the masseter muscles, left  styloid area, and in the left temporalis area, and moderate pain over the right temporalis, medial pterygoids, and right styloid area. 

Barbara has facial paralysis on the left side of her face. Zygomatic, buccal, and mandibular branches are totally out. She has regained a little bit of function of the left frontal area which she says is quite new. This gives good hope that she will regain function of that nerve over time. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear fairly clear. Turbinates appear large particularly on the right side. Right TMJ has a little bit of anterior beaking on the condyle. Joint space looks fairly good. Overall the condyle looks reasonably good. 

On the left side, the rib graft is present. Appears to be calcification going up into the depth of the fossa with virtually no separation from that calcification in the roof of the fossa. Styloid processes are extremely large and calcified. Missing all four third molars. Missing maxillary right second bicuspid, first molar with a four-unit bridge replacing it. In the upper right arch, she is missing the first molar replaced with a three-unit bridge, and she is missing the mandibular left first molar replaced with a three-unit bridge. She has lots of crowns. Has crowns on all the incisors. She has several root canals including the maxillary left first and second bicuspids and mandibular right second molar.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that there is a little flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. Decreased posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Difficult to tell where the disc might be. Possibly could be in reasonable posterior or it could be anteriorly displaced. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows calcification up in the fossa area and the presence of a rib graft on that side. On this side the styloid process shows up and is quite thick and elongated. Articular eminence is not well-defined in the fossa and is quite a bit more shallow than the opposite side. There may be heterotopic bone up in the depth of the fossa as the depth of the fossa is not well-defined either. Two screws at the inferior border of the mandible supporting the rib graft. 

Right TMJ shows some restricted translation, but the condyle does come down the posterior aspect of the articular eminence. On the left side, there are no visible translatory movements. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. The left side of the mandibular ramus is much more full secondary to the rib graft placement there than the right side in the ramus area due to the rib graft on the left side. Asymmetry in the mandible is also noted with the chin being shifted off toward the right side. 

Cephalometrically she is skeletally and occlusally Class I. Has a good oropharyngeal airway. 
 
Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ previous rib graft with fibrous and bony ankylosis
Right TMJ arthritis and probable articular disc dislocation without reduction
Malocclusion with a left posterior open bite
Severe left-sided TMJ pain
Severe left-sided headaches
Severe left-sided myofascial pain
Excessive fullness, left side of face and jaw and TMJ area
Significantly decreased incisal opening (25 mm)
Difficulty eating and chewing which those activities significantly increase pain levels
Pain in the left eye
Pain in the right jaw area
Left-sided tinnitus
Vertigo
Bilateral hypertrophied styloid processes and calcified stylohyoid ligaments
Eagle’s syndrome
Neck pain
Fibromyalgia
Diabetes
Left-sided Bell’s palsy affecting all branches
Throat pain
Dysphagia

Recommended Treatment

Physical therapy to help prevent left facial muscle atrophy

Medications to help control pain considering the following:
OxyContin versus MS Contin

MRI of left and right TMJ specifically to evaluate the condition of the right TMJ and articular disc 

CT scan of jaws and jaw joints following the TMJ Concepts protocol

Surgery
Left TMJ removal of previously placed rib graft, removal of heterotopic bone and fibrosis, with extensive debridement of the left TMJ including removal of heterotopic bone from the fossa
Right TMJ condylectomy and debridement
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)
Bilateral styloidectomies and removal of calcified stylohyoid ligaments
Placement of arch bars to control occlusion during and immediately postsurgery

Removal of arch bars two to four weeks postsurgery

Physical therapy as necessary to improve jaw function
