KATIE NORWOOD									02/12/2007

Katie is from Austin, Texas.  She is 18 years old and is a self-referral but indirectly through Dr. Kyle Keeter.  Katie is in good health with no major medical problems.  The only medication she takes is Wellbutrin 300 mg daily.  She does have a history of snoring but no daytime somnolence and no sleep apnea problems.  Katie gets headaches in the frontal and temple areas at about a level of 4.  Her average TMJ pain with her splint in place is about 1 but without the splint it elevates to about a 5.  Likewise average daily pain is similar at a level of 1 and without splint about a level of 5.  She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 5, disability at 4.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching at night.

Katie believes that her joint problems may have begun as early as the age of 4 when in some photographs her mother noted that she might have had some asymmetry.  At the age of 12 after the braces were removed and photos were taken it was noticed that she had more facial asymmetry.  Katie's mother believes that the facial asymmetry is slowly continuing to worsen for her.  She has to have her splint adjusted about every month. 

She had orthodontics done previously from the age of 11 to 12.  She has worn splints for 4-1/2 years now and for the last 3 years she has had to wear her splint 24 hours per day.  When the splint is out she has significantly increased pain and headache problems.  

In frontal view, Katie has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  She has significant asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline may be about 1 mm off to the left and the chin is at least 10 mm off to the left.  In profile view, the upper lip may be retruded about 2 mm.  The chin may be retruded about 6 mm.  Chin-neckline is a little bit short but chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  She has significant prominence of the mentalis muscle and a prominent labial mental fold.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has some crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has hypereruption of the molars with the marginal ridges significantly higher at the mesial aspect of the first molar compared to the distal second bicuspid by probably at least 2 mm bilaterally.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  Again, she has hypereruption of the molar teeth with the mesial marginal ridges being 1 mm or 2 lower than the distal ridges on the second bicuspids.  She appears to have small upper lateral incisors.  She has increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch.  Katie has a transverse cant to the maxillary occlusal plane with the left cuspid being probably 3 mm higher than the right cuspid.  Mandibular occlusal plane is a little bit more level being just 1 mm higher on the left side as compared to the right side.  She has an anterior open bite of probably 5 mm.  In centric relation, Katie occludes only on the left second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side being probably about 5 mm Class II and basically the same on the right side.  Right commissure is down about 3 mm compared to the left side.  In the lower arch the left cuspid is about 1 to 2 mm anterior to the right cuspid.   In the upper arch the left cuspid appears more symmetric.  Katie tends to have a crossbite on the left side and on the right side she has a buccal crossbite tendency.  


KATIE NORWOOD				02/12/2007				Page 2

Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  The uvula may be mildly elongated.  The soft palate length looks normal.  Faucial pillars appear to be mildly constricted.  Intranasally the right turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  The left side looks normal.  The septum may be deviated just slightly off to the right side.  There could be some moderate nasal airway obstruction particularly on the right side.  To palpation, she has some mild to moderate pain over the TMJs and moderate discomfort over the masseters, styloid areas and shoulders.  Reassessment of her open bite actually measures about 7 mm.  Incisal opening is 39 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 8 mm, left about 6 mm. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  All other teeth are present.  Severe deviation of the nasal septum in the bony area showing almost complete collapse of the left side of the nose.  Turbinates appear quite large particularly on the left side where the turbinate appears to obliterate most of the nasal airway.  Sinuses appear clear.

Waters view shows that she may have a mucocele in the right maxillary sinus.  Otherwise, sinuses look pretty clear.  Left nasal airway appears fairly well blocked with the turbinate.  The right side appears that there is some opening there.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be quite large in vertical length.  There may be some anterior beaking present.  There may be decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows that the condyle is quite small and seems to have lost a lot of volume.  Length from sigmoid notch to top of condyle is short.  There appears to be moderate slope to the articular eminence.  There appears to be significantly increased vertical joint space.  On opening, there appears to be good translation of both condyles.  The right one seems to show more deformity on the open views than the closed view.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has an anterior open bite and it appears to occlude just on some specific teeth, perhaps on the left side.  She has a skeletal Class II relationship.  Occlusion appears Class II.  Anterior open bite measures about 6 mm.  She appears to have reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch.  She has adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx.  Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good with an airway dimension of about almost 9 mm at the soft palate level and also close to 10 mm at the base of the tongue.  Lips are forced together on this x-ray and not relaxed. 

Dental model analysis shows that Katie has had all 4 first bicuspids extracted.  Dental model analysis shows that there is an anterior open bite.  Class II end-on cuspid relationship.  There is reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch with the lower incisors being at least 3 mm lower than normal.  The molar teeth are hypererupted with marginal ridges between the second bicuspids and first molar being approximately 2 mm of vertical discrepancy with the molars being higher.  In the upper arch there is probably at least 1 mm vertical difference between the marginal ridges between the second and first molar. 
KATIE NORWOOD				02/12/2007				Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Right mandibular condylar hyperplasia versus osteochondroma/osteoma.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe deformation and non-reducing. 
Mandibular hypoplasia and severe asymmetry.
Maxillary hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Severe apertognathia (7 to 18 mm.)
Occluding only on the left second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion. 
Missing all 4 first bicuspids and all 4 third molars.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
 Significant masticatory dysfunction.
 Class II end-on occlusion.
 Left posterior crossbite.
 Reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch.
 Significant mismatch of marginal ridges in all 4 quadrants between the mesial marginal ridge of the first molar and the distal marginal ridge of the second bicuspid being worse in the mandible as compared to the maxilla.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth to keep from flaring them any further forward.  Try to elevate them approximately 2 mm if possible and to decrease the reverse curve of Spee.  Level off the marginal ridges between the first molars and second bicuspids.
Surgery.
Right TMJ high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.  
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the transverse occlusal plane and advance it.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back on the facial midline into a good bite relationship.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
