MICHAEL O'DONNELL								10/01/2007

Mikey is 14 years old and is referred by Dr. George Adams.  The primary concern for Mikey is the lower jaw is growing in a more rapid rate than the upper jaw.  Dr. Adams has been following Mikey for about 3 years in reference to the bite situation.

Mikey has no problems with TMJ pain, headaches, myofacial pain, earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bothering him.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  The only medication he takes in Focalin 15 mg for ADD.  He apparently has no breathing issues except the parents are aware of breathing through his mouth when he sleeps occasionally.  

In frontal view, Mikey has good facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Mikey may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency.  The chin appears a little bit AP deficient as well.  Intraorally, Mike has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has some mild to moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.  He has good attached gingiva present.  In the upper arch he has all of his teeth back to the second molars.  The upper arch appears somewhat constricted.  A little bit of a Class III cuspid relationship by probably 3 mm on the right side whereas the first molar is probably 4 mm Class III and on the left side sort of a similar kind of relationship.  He has bilateral posterior crossbites with a tendency towards an end-on incisor relationship.  He may have about ½ mm vertical overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway looks healthy.  The uvula and soft palate appears pretty much normal.  Faucial pillars may be just mildly constricted but not too significant.  Tonsils are probably mild to moderate in size.  Intranasally, the base of the septum is deviated off towards the right side.  The right turbinate is moderately enlarged and appears to be touching against the septum.  On the left side, the turbinate is quite large and is touching against the septum and it seems to be creating a significant airway blockage on that side.  The quality of the tissue around the turbinate is boggy and irritated in appearance.  He is not aware of snoring or any significant daytime somnolence due to airway problems nor any sleep apnea symptoms.  Maximal incisal opening is about 47 mm.  Excursive movements are about 9 mm in each direction.  To palpation, he has some very minimal tenderness over the masseter muscles but no tenderness around the head and neck area.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of 4 third molars.  All other teeth are present and accounted for.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  

Waters view show that he has large frontal sinuses.  The sinuses appear fairly clear.  The septum appears fairly straight in the bony area.  Turbinates appear to fill considerable volume in the nasal cavity.  The left side seems pretty much obliterated and the right side is fairly close.

Left TMJ tomogram shows there appears to be good joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space may be just slightly decreased posteriorly.  



MICHAEL O'DONNELL			10/01/2007				Page 2


Right TMJ tomogram is a little bit more difficult to evaluate.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There seems to be some decreased posterior joint space.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both joints.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a high angle in the occlusal plane and a Class II skeletal relationship although the occlusion itself appears slightly Class III in the molar area.  Oropharyngeal airway is fairly normal.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Rule out bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Class III end-on occlusion. 
Bilateral posterior crossbites and tendency towards anterior crossbite. 
AP microgenia. 
Crowding in the lower anterior arch.
Crowding in maxillary arch.
 Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Nasal airway obstruction. 
 High occlusal plane angle.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies if they are necessary.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider slenderizing the lower anterior teeth removing no more than 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward and to help compensate for the small tooth size discrepancy.  
Continue to monitor maxillary growth and develop to confirm the presence or absence of condylar hyperplasia.
Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies with articular disc repositioning of Mitek anchors (only if condylar hyperplasia is confirmed.)
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect superiorly and posterior aspect inferiorly and expand.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin and reduce the vertical height. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 