JAMES OLIVER									09-20-02

Jim is 60 years old. 

Patient History

Nasal surgery composed of removing some nasal polyps and fixing a deviated nasal septum. He used to have asthma as a child but outgrew that when he was about 13 or 14 years old. He still has some hayfever problems.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Jim has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 2 to 3 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted a little bit to the right side about a millimeter. Chin is pretty much on the facial midline.

In profile view, Jim appears to have some AP maxillary deficiency. Mandible also appears retruded, and he appears to have some AP microgenia. Chin-neckline is extremely short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.

Intraorally, Jim has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Has some crowns on the lower first molars and right second molar. Mandibular right first bicuspid is blocked almost totally out of the arch. Moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch. Has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, he appears to have all of his teeth back through the second molars. Some mild crowding, upper anterior arch, particularly on the right side. Appears to have small upper lateral incisors. He basically has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship in the right side but Class I on the left side. Has a crossbite associated with the right mandibular first bicuspid. 

He has no history of headaches, TMJ pain, he has no vertigo, and no earaches. He gets occasional ringing in his ears. TMJs seem to function fairly smoothly, although there is a little bit of a rubbing noise there perhaps indicative of medial displacement or just thin tissues probably towards the lateral rim of the fossa. He has about a 2-mm overbite relationship. Incisal opening is about 55 mm and about 10 to 11 mm of excursive movements in each direction. Jim has moderate enlargement of the uvula. Faucial pillars actually appear to be fairly well anteriorly positioned and moderately wide. 

Intranasally, it appears that he has had a previous turbinectomy and also reports having a septoplasty. Columella base is a little bit wide causing some constricture of the nares. Luminal valves are somewhat restricted as well. Holding the luminal valves open made a significant improvement in his ability to breathe through his nose.




Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except for the third molars. Has crowns on most to the posterior teeth. Condyles appear to be broad and perhaps a little bit short vertically. Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Waters view shows that internally the septum appears fairly straight, and the turbinates appear to be small in size. The airway appears that it should be adequate.

Left TMJ tomogram shows what appears to be relatively normal architecture of the condyle, fossa, and the articular eminence with good balanced joint space.

Right TMJ x-rays are probably similar, although the images aren’t quite as clear as they were on the opposite side.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Cephalometrically, he appears to have retruded maxilla and mandible. Moderately high occlusal plane angle. Distance from soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall at the uvula area measures about 5 mm. At the base of the tongue, it measures about 6 to 7 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia.
Class I occlusion on the left, Class II end-on occlusion on the right.
Blocked out mandibular right first bicuspid.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway, being about one third of the normal dimension.
Sleep apnea symptoms.
Constricture of luminal valves.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Slightly wide columella base.

Recommended Treatment

Recommended treatment for Jim would be as follows:

Consider sleep study

Surgery
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and downgraft it posteriorly.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
AP augmentation genioplasty via osteotomy.
Reconstruct bilateral luminal valves.
Surgical narrowing of the columella base.