B101
B101 is 42 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX from Lubbock, Texas.
Except for the head, neck, and jaw problems, B101 is in fairly good medical condition. Her TMJ problems began when she was 17 years old. Prior to that, she had some orthodontic treatment and during the second round of treatment she did have orthognathic surgery. She had orthodontics three times, once as an early teenager, once in high school, and then in her early 20s, all performed by Dr. XXXX. When she was 17 years old (25 years ago), she had orthognathic surgery by Dr. XXXX, who performed maxillary and mandibular osteotomies on her. Her joints started to click and pop right after the jaw surgery. She did wear a splint back in her 20s. For the past year and a half, she has had two splints, but can only wear one as one is too tight for her. She also has had chiropractic treatment that she takes about three times a week for about one year. Her mother does have psoriatic arthritis in fingers, knees, etc. B101 rates her headaches that occur predominantly in the right side at a level of 10 that occur probably a couple of times a week, and she classifies them as chronic migraine headaches. She has had these for many years. She does get a lighter form of headache that get to about a level of 7 on the average that are predominantly on the right side. However, she rates her TMJ pain at a 10 on the left side and only a 4 on the right side. Average daily pain hits a level of 10 for her. She rates her jaw function at 8, diet at 7, disability at 8. She gets frequent earaches, greater on the left side than the right side, but no tinnitus nor vertigo. She does have some hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her right knee (she has a shorter leg on the right side).

She has been diagnosed with bipolar situation. She clenches her teeth when she becomes manic. She does have depression. She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at nighttime and also during the day.

Primary concerns that B101 has would include the following:
TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Severe TMJ pain.
Pain down through the jaws.
Very difficult to each and chew.
Grinding noises in the joints.

She does smoke about ten cigarettes per day. She goes into her manic stages about two times a month and they can last about four or five days. During that time, she tends to smoke more, about a pack a day. In her non-manic stages, she smokes about ten cigarettes per day. She is aware of snoring moderately and she has some moderate daytime tiredness. She is not aware of having been diagnosed with sleep apnea. She does breath through her mouth when she is sleeping.

In frontal view, B101 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm. The maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to the left. The mandible dental midline is a little bit closer to being on the facial midline. The chin is a little bit off to the left about 3 to 4 mm. In profile view, the maxilla is retruded by about 2 to 3 mm at the incisor edge, and the mandible is retruded about 15 mm. The chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not defined. Intraorally, she is missing the right cuspid and left probably first bicuspid with just some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch. Good attached gingiva is present in the lower anterior arch. The transverse width of the arch is somewhat narrow. In the upper arch, she is also missing probably the first bicuspids. She is basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the left side and slight Class II on the right side by about 2 mm. She has about a 3 to 4 mm deep bite. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. The fascial pillars may be somewhat constricted. The tonsils have just a mild enlargement. Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged. The septum is deviated off towards the right side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows evidence of previous orthognathic surgery with stainless steel wire in the mandibular ramus bilaterally and three wires on each side in the maxilla. The sinuses look relatively clear. Joints look arthritic. All four third molars are missing as well as a cuspid on the mandibular right side, bicuspid on the left side, and bicuspid each from the upper arch. She has root canals on the maxillary right central and lateral incisors.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show severe arthritic changes within the jaw joints. There appears to be bone-on-bone contact. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. There are pseudocysts in the head of the condyle and sclerosis present.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is severely arthritic. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. There appears to be bone-on-bone contact in the fossa.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is severely arthritic and somewhat sclerotic. There is decreased joint space with what appears to be bone-on-bone contact. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination and is a little bit longer than the opposite side. There are some pseudocysts on the head of the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is severely arthritic and appears to have a lost a littlie bit more volume compared to the opposite side. There is decreased superior joint space. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Coronal view shows that the right turbinate is somewhat enlarged. The sinuses are relatively clear. It appears that there is a patent airway except the airway is decreased on the right side.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. The nasal septum has a few little bends in it. The turbinates are moderate in size. Right side turbinate is larger than the left side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she may have a little bit of a Class II skeletal relationship and high occlusal plane angle. The oropharyngeal airway, however, is surprisingly reasonably good with an AP dimension of about 8 mm at the soft palate level and about 10 mm at the base of the tongue.

B101 has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and Class II end-on on the left side by probably 2 to 3 mm. She has a posterior cross bite on the right side as well. The maxillary dental midline is shifted 1 to 2 mm to the left of the midline and the mandible is fairly close to being on the facial midline.

Basic diagnoses for B101 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Class II end-on occlusion on the right side, Class I on the left side.
Posterior cross bite on the right side.
Severe TMJ pain. Severe headaches. Myofascial pain. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Sleep apnea symptoms.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Pain management to try to keep her as comfortable as possible until the surgical reconstruction of the temporomandibular joints can be accomplished.
2. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
3. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
4. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction and expand it. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B101 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is severely arthritic. The head of the condyle is sclerotic and small in size with loss of vertical and mediolateral width. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. It is difficult to identify discal tissue on this side, although it appears that there may be some anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has significant degenerative changes, although not quite as progressive as the other side. He has decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 or 3 mm. There is loss of vertical and mediolateral width the condyle. It appears that there may be discal tissue anterior and medial to the condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic and sclerotic. There is anterior beaking and superior peaking. The articular eminence is fairly long and moderately steep. There is decreased vertical joint space. There is discal tissue anteriorly displaced but severely degenerated and deformed. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space, but not too much. On opening, there is significantly decreased translation and the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a docondyle that is severely arthritic with what appears to be loss of volume. There is decreased superior joint space. The articular eminence is moderately steep and not as long as the opposite side. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting almost beneath the articular eminence. The disc is very short anteroposteriorly. There is fluid almost completely surrounding the anteriorly displaced deformed articular disc. On opening, there is significantly decreased translation and the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction and with significant deformation. The patient probable candidate for total joint prostheses.

