SHANNON OBENDORF							03/16/2011

Shannon is 40 years old, birth date 04/11/1970.  Shannon believes her TMJ problems began when she was about 15 in 1985 when she would open her jaws and her condyles would get dislocated and she would have difficulties closing her jaws.  The etiology is unknown.  She became somewhat aware of her facial asymmetry in about 1993, but became more aware of it by 2003 when she began seeking treatment in reference to that problem.  She began orthodontic treatment in March 2007 with Dr. Al Figaro.  On July 7, 2009, she had maxillary and mandibular osteotomies by Dr. David Morris at the University of Illinois at Chicago.  Shannon gets headaches about two times a month at about a level of 4 in the frontal and temporal area and behind her eyes.  She rates her TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 5 primarily in the area of her mastoids.  She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 1, disability at 1.  She gets occasional earaches and tinnitus, but no vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her knees and possibly her neck where there is a problem between C6 and C7.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at nighttime and sometimes during the day. 

In frontal view, Shannon has fairly good left-to-right symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 1 mm on the left and 2 mm on the right.  The maxillary dental midline is fairly much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline about 2.5 mm to the right.  The chin is about 10 mm off to the right.  She has a significant transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 3 mm higher than the left side.  In profile, she has fairly good facial balance, but chin may be retruded about 3 or 4 mm.  Chin neckline is slightly short and chin neck angle is moderately defined.  In profile, she has some slight maxillary AP deficiency of about 3 mm and the chin is back about 10 mm.  When Shannon is in position with Frankford horizontals parallel to the floor, she feels as though her airway is being cut off.  Intraorally in the lower arch, Shannon is missing her first molars and the second molars and third molars have come forward into the first and second molar position.  Teeth are fairly well aligned.  For some reason, there is a spring between the central incisors.  In the upper arch, she is missing first molars and third molars, so she has only one molar in the upper arch.  There is a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side by about 2 mm.  On the left side, she has a Class III end-on relationship by about 3 to 4 mm.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2.5 mm.  The mandible in the frontal view is more prominent on the left side at the body angle area by about 5 to 6 mm as compared to the right side.  There is a posterior yaw in the maxilla and mandible with the mandible being rotated to the left probably about 3 mm and maxilla about 2 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  The uvula is quite wide, but relatively normal in length.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated significantly off towards the left side.  The turbinates are quite large particularly on the right side.  She probably has mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction.  Nostrils are a little bit wide and wider than they were before her surgery.  In frontal view, the left side of the face is about 8 to 10 mm longer in length vertically than the right side.  To palpation, she has mild tenderness in the left styloid area, but nowhere else.  The left condyle by palpation is larger than the right condyle.  The maximal incisal opening is about 56 mm, excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction.  On opening, she has a click in the right joint at about 35 mm and a closing click of 30 mm.  The left side is functioning relatively smooth today, but she does report that that side does have clicking and popping at times.  She also gets some crepitus noises in the left TMJ.  On excursion movements, she has clicking in the right TMJ.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows evidence of previous maxillary surgery with four bone plates and four bone screws in each bone plate with a plate in the peripheral rim area and in the zygomatic arches.  There is evidence of sagittal split osteotomies that have been done posteriorly with four screws in the left ramus and three screws in the right ramus.  There is a slight increased vertical height of the mandibular body with the left side being about 2 mm longer vertically than the right side.  

Coronal view shows the septum is deviated off towards the left side.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  Sinuses are relatively clear.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates are moderately enlarged and the nasal airway is somewhat constricted more so towards the middle and anterior aspect.  The septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side anteriorly.

Left TMJ mandibular sagittal view shows a condyle that has an elongated head and neck dimension.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good morphology, but is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space.  The articular eminence is a little bit steeper on this side than the opposite side.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that elongated vertically.  It has a little small outgrowth below the coronal part of the condylar head.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 4 mm.  There is decreased superior and lateral joint space indicative of probable disc displacement.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost some vertical volume, but otherwise has reasonably good width.  There may be some decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 3 mm and not quite as far as the opposite side.  


Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the maxilla is retruded slightly and the mandible is retruded.  Oropharyngeal airway dimension measures about 5 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  Vertical discrepancy at the occlusal plane is evident as well as at the inferior border of the mandibular where there is a vertical difference of about 7 mm.  

Shannon wants feminization of her jaw structures.  Shannon wants the following changes if possible:  

Chin actually moved backwards a little bit to the position it was prior to her surgery.
The vertical height at the angle of the mandible shortened.
Some increased prominence at the lateral aspect of the rami bilaterally, but not down at the angle area.  
Narrowing of the chin.
Leveling and improved vertical and transverse facial balance.
Decreased prominence of the frontal bone in the brow area.
She would like her nose made smaller as far as projection, tip refinement, and alar bases reduced in prominence.  
Shortening of the upper lip and some increased fullness added to it. 
Missing all four first molars with the second molars forward in the first molar position and in the lower arch third molars are in the second molar position. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.  

Basic diagnoses for Shannon would be as follows:  

Left mandibular osteochondroma and possible articular disc dislocation.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
Mandibular transverse asymmetry with lower incisors shifted 2.5 mm to the right and chin shifted 10 mm to the right and the left cuspid 3 mm lower than the right cuspid.
Maxillary transverse asymmetry with the left side being 3 mm lower than the right side.
Class III end-on occlusion on the left side and just Class II cuspid relationship on the right side.  
Posterior maxillary and mandibular yaw being shifted about 5 mm to the left.

Recommended treatment would include the following:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJs. 
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  
	b.	Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Remove the spring and close 		the spacing between the central incisors. 
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Reconstruct the TMJs by one of the following means.
		i.	Left low condylectomy to remove the osteochondroma and 					bilateral articular disc repositioning and stabilization with Mitek 				anchors or
		ii.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint 				prostheses.  
	b.	Bilateral sagittal split osteotomies to rotate the mandible back onto the 			facial midline by lengthening the right side and decreasing the vertical 			height of the left side and correct posterior yaw.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level it transversely and correct the 			posterior yaw.  
	d.	Resect inferior part of mandibular angle to decrease vertical height and 			improve feminization.
	e.	Consider chin reduction.
	f.	Consider UPPP procedure to decrease her sleep apnea symptoms.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
5.	Craniofacial surgery to reduce the prominence of her brow as well as reconstruct 	her nose to the patient’s specifications.  