JUAN O’CAMPO									10/25/02

Juan is 32 years old and referred by Dr. Petra Schubert.

Patient Concerns

Juan’s primary concerns are as follows:
Teeth and jaws are not lined up properly.
Bite is off.

Patient History

Juan has no problems with headaches or TMJ symptoms or problems. Has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. Juan has been in orthodontic treatment for about 1-1/2 years. 

Other joints that bother him include his neck and back, which he pops on a daily basis and makes him feel better. Has some soreness in the right hand and has some problems with the knees and ankles. He has been a weightlifter, and this may cause some of the joint problems. He does have problems with snoring and will wake up at night with severe mouth dryness and also can wake up with some difficulties breathing through his nose. 

To palpation, he has some mild to moderate tenderness over the temporalis, masseters, and TMJ styloid areas. He has some minimal tenderness in the shoulder area. On opening, he has a definite click in the left TMJ at 35 mm and closing click at about 10 mm. The click only occurs when he starts from a centric relation position in the left joint. Otherwise, he postures his mandible forward on the left side, posturing it off towards the right side, and in this position, the disc is reduced and does not make any particular sounds. He probably has a 3 to 4-mm AP condylar shift and about a 2 to 3-mm transverse shift. Maximal incisal opening is about 50 mm, excursive movement to the right with some help about 6 mm and to the left about 7 mm. He can protrude the mandible probably 7 to 8 mm.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Juan has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Some increased fullness in the face on the left side compared to the right side. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Nasal tip is deviated off to the left side probably about 3 to 4 mm. Maxillary dental midline and mandibular dental midline are about 2 mm off towards the right side, and chin is probably about 3 to 4 mm off to the right side.

In profile view, he has some prominence of the nasal tip. Maxilla may be 1 to 2 mm AP deficient. Mandible is AP deficient by probably approximately 10 mm. 

Intraorally, Juan has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. Teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and leveled. Right cuspid is 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.

In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Right cuspid is 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. Transverse occlusal plane is canted with the right side being 2 to 3 mm higher than the left side. Juan has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by about 2 mm as well as on the left side. In centric relation, the lower jaw is a little bit better aligned to the facial midline as compared to the upper jaw. In centric relation, he tends a little bit towards a buccal crossbite on the right side and is probably at least 4 mm Class II bilaterally. He has an anterior open bite in centric relation. In centric relation, he does have a 1-mm open bite anteriorly. In his centric relation, actually mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. In centric relation, the maxilla is still vertically shorter on the right side by 2 to 3 mm, but the mandible is shorter only 1 to 2 mm. From centric relation, as Juan opens his jaw, he does have clicking and popping in the left TMJ. Intraorally, the oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is hyperplastic.

Intranasally, the turbinates are enlarged and appear to be causing some obstruction. Has some contricture of the luminal valves, and the columella base is wide. Nostrils are relatively narrow. Placing the nasal scope and expanding the nostrils and luminal valve area significantly improved his airway, and he could breathe much easier. 

Current Medications

The only medication Juan takes is Propecia.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Periapical lesion appears to be present at the apex of the left first bicuspid with some root resorption present. Condyles don’t appear too abnormal. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Left sinus, however, is a little bit cloudy compared to the right side. Airway appears to be slightly better on the right side as compared to the left side. Styloid processes are quite thickened and fairly long. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it. Decreased posterior joint space. Moderately steep articular eminence. Vertical joint space looks fairly normal. Styloid process is quite thick and elongated.

Left TMJ tomogram was not taken in centric relation. The condyle is postured forward underneath the articular eminence. The condyle has some anterior beaking present. 

On opening, there is moderate translation of both condyles. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Inferior turbinates appear large with decreased nasal airway. Asymmetry of the lower jaw and particularly the maxilla as noted with the right side being a little bit shorter than the left side. 

Cephalometrically, x-ray was not taken in centric relation. Therefore, the mandible is postured forward. 

Tooth-size analysis shows a Bolton’s different of 1 mm. However, anteroposterior dimension of the teeth is wide, and, therefore, with the best possible fit, Juan is still a little bit Class II by about 2 mm bilaterally. Therefore, the actual tooth-size discrepancy is much greater, probably at least 3 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Significant asymmetry with the maxillary dental midline being shifted 2 to 3 mm to the right.
AP mandibular deficiency and vertical asymmetry.
Occluding primarily on the second molars in centric relation with all other teeth being out of occlusion.
Class II malocclusion.
Anterior open bite.
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 to 3 mm.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Narrow nostrils.
Wide columella base.
Constricture of the luminal valve.
Nasal airway obstruction.
External nasal deformity.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway of approximately 3.5 mm (normal 11 mm).
Hypertrophied uvula.
Severe snoring.
Sleep disorder secondary to nasal airway obstruction.
Rule out periapical lesion at the tip of the mandibular left first bicuspid.

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJs

Evaluation of periapical lesion, mandibular left first bicuspid, with possible requirement for root canal therapy

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth, removing at least 2.5 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the significant tooth-size discrepancy. 

Surgery
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level it transversely, advance it, and downgraft the posterior aspect.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
Partial inferior turbinectomies.
Uvuloplasty.
Reconstruct columella.
Possible reconstruction of luminal valves bilaterally.
External rhinoplasty.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion