LIA OBERSTAR									09-17-03

Lia was referred by Dr. Moody Alexander, 5500 Preston Road, Ste. 360, Dallas, TX  75205.

Patient History

She had an episode of pneumonia when she was much younger but then had a bout of bronchitis about five years ago and then another bout of pneumonia about three years ago. She has osteochondritis dissecans in her right knee and has had two surgeries on that. 

Lia is currently takes no medications and has no allergies.

Lia gets headaches about one time a week in the frontal area and might drift a little bit over into the temporal area. No TMJ pain. She gets earaches but relates that to swimmer’s ear and usually gets that when she switches swimming pools. She gets occasional tinnitus but no problems with vertigo and no hearing loss. No other joints bother her except she does have significant problems with tendinitis and other tendon problems affecting some of her joints due to her swimming. She is not aware of clenching and bruxing at night and, in fact, tends to sleep with her mouth open. Her mother and her grandmother have some significant headache problems.

Patient Concerns

Chin is retruded and less visual
When she smiles, she shows a lot of her gums
Her teeth don’t fit together
The upper teeth appear too far forward
Difficulties getting her lips together

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Lia has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 7 on the right side and 6 on the left side. Left commissure is down probably 2 to 3 mm compared to the right side. Maxillary dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the right. Mandibular dental midline and chin are pretty much aligned to each other. 

In profile view, the lip is a little bit AP deficient right at the point B level by maybe 2 to 3 mm. Upper lip supralabrale might be forward just a millimeter or 2. In profile view, chin appears retruded about 15 mm. With the lips relaxed, lip incompetence is about 13 mm. Lower third face appears somewhat elongated compared to the middle third. Chin-neckline is not well-defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. Has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. Some mild crowding in the upper anterior arch. She has a Class II end-on occlusion bilaterally being at least 5 to 6 mm Class II. She has an overjet relationship of about 8 mm. She has about a 0 to 1 vertical overbite relationship.

Intranasally, she has an enlarged turbinate on the left side and a bone spur on that side. On the right side, the turbinate appears relatively normal in size. Appears that she may have some obstruction on the left side. She can breathe easier through the right side than the left side. Oropharynx appears clear and healthy. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. The rest of the teeth are all present, and there appears to be good bone support to them. Sinuses appear clear. Condyles appear relatively normal. Difficult to tell the morphology of the turbinates on this x-ray.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some anterior beaking on it. It appears that there is a pseudocyst on the condylar head. May be a decreased joint space in some area. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also has some anterior beaking. Appears there may be a pseudocyst on the condyle. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. It looks like there almost might be a small calcification in the posterior aspect of the joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles. Anterior beaking is much more obvious, particularly on the right side. On the open views, the joint space seems a little bit decreased on the left side.

Waters view shows that the left turbinate is larger than the right turbinate. Sinuses appear reasonably clear, although the x-ray may be just slightly overrotated and difficult to determine. Frontal sinuses are quite large, but frontal and ethmoid sinuses appear clear.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph demonstrates vertical maxillary excess and significant AP mandibular deficiency with perhaps some slight asymmetry. Oropharyngeal airway appears quite constricted at the base of the soft palate where it measures about 4.5 mm, and at the base of the tongue in some areas it may be only a couple of millimeters wide. Turbinates appear to extend just slightly beyond the hard palate.

Tooth-size analysis reveals no Bolton’s discrepancy. Hand articulating the models shows that Lia has good transverse width of the occlusions that she can be put into fairly close Class I cuspid-molar relationship with no transverse discrepancies. Still has about a 2-mm anterior overjet, but this may be due to the mild crowding in the lower anterior arch and some malrotations in the maxillary cuspid area. Lia does have about a 0.5-mm tooth-size discrepancy in the bicuspid areas involving all of the teeth with the lowers being larger than the uppers. 

Basic Diagnoses

Vertical maxillary hyperplasia
AP maxillary hyperplasia
AP mandibular hypoplasia
AP microgenia
Class II occlusion
Anterior open bite tendency
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and possible articular disc dislocations
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an airway measurement of 4 mm or less
Overangulation of the maxillary incisors
Overangulation of the mandibular incisors
Anterior mandibular vertical hyperplasia
Hypertrophied turbinates
Partial nasal airway obstruction
Headaches 

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJ

Extractions
Extract maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch closing the extraction space
Align and level mandibular arch closing the extraction space

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors if discs are displaced and still salvageable (will depend on MRI evaluation)
Bilateral partial turbinectomies
Bony augmentation genioplasty

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
