SYDNEY OBERHEIDEN							4/25/2011

Birth date 05/11/1977.  Syndey is 33 years old.  She has had TMJ problems since she was about 18.  She is aware of grinding her teeth when she was 3 to 4 years old to the point that her sisters would not sleep in the same room.  She had migraine headaches during grade school and high school.  It was not until college though that she became aware of clicking and popping in her jaw joints, again at about the age of 18.  Treatment she has had to date includes the following:

Medication since college.
Physical therapy and massage therapy by chiropractors.
Acupuncture. 
Cupping since age 23.
Splints since college until the age of 28 including six splints. 
Teeth rebuilt from fractures from the severe bruxism.  
A nerve block but it was ineffective.
Botox in the face particularly to control twitching of the right eye.

She currently takes the following medications:

Norco 10/325 four times per day and sometimes she will have to take an extra tablet.
Soma 350 mg four times per day. 
Xanax 1 mg three times a day.
Flexeril occasionally at night.
Zanaflex 6 mg tablets occasionally at night.
Adderall 40 mg per day.
Trigger point injections.
Serapin injections into the right jaw and shoulder.

Sydney’s primary concerns at this time are as follows:

Right TMJ, neck, shoulders, back, face and head pain.
Twitching of the right eye with irritated right eye.
Inability to eat foods that require chewing and remaining predominantly on a very soft diet.
Requiring numerous medications to control her pain.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.

Sydney gets headaches at about a level of 3 in the right frontal and temporal area.  She rates her right TMJ pain at a level of 6, right sided facial pain and headaches at a level of 5, jaw function at 7, diet at 8, disability at 7.  She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, gets occasional vertigo, but no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her elbows and her knees.  She fell straight on one time and fractured both of her elbows.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime.  
In frontal view, Sydney has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  In profile view, Sydney has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Sydney has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars and likewise in the upper arch.  She is basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship with about a 2 mm anterior over bite.  To palpation, she has mild to moderate tenderness on the right side predominantly on the right masseter, styloid area, SCM, posterior neck and bilateral shoulders.  On opening, she has a soft click at about 5 mm of opening and closing at about the same level.  As she goes into excursion movement, she has almost an audible popping noise in the right TMJ.  The left joint functions smoothly.  The maximal opening is 55 mm, but only about 25 mm without pain in the right joint.  The excursion movement to the right was 4 mm and to the left 6 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The rest of the teeth are present.  She has crowns on her molars.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged.  

Axial view shows that the septum appears straight in this view, but turbinates are moderate in size.  The right maxillary sinus is quite small and there appears to be some material in it.  Interestingly, the width of the nose on the right side is excessively wide compared to the left side and so the lateral nasal wall is positioned laterally so what would normally by the maxillary sinus is incorporated into the right nasal airway.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology and good joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Right TMJ appears to have perhaps a little bit of anterior beaking present.  The condyle appears to be reasonably well centered.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly and there is a decreased lateral joint space.  

Right TMJ joint space looks fairly well balanced.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has god facial balance and oropharyngeal airway looks normal.  

Basic diagnoses for Sydney would be as follows:

Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction.
Relatively right mandibular hyperplasia.
Right-sided TMJ pain.
Right-sided headaches. 
Right-sided myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.  Place appliances on the maxillary and mandibular teeth 	back through the first molar.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor.
	b.	Right mandibular sagittal split osteotomy to maintain her occlusion.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion and remove appliances. 