ANGELA NOVAK									01/20/2010

Angela is a self-referred patient.  By history, she had a Le Forte I osteotomy done in 1998 by Dr. Roger Kallal in Chicago.  The occlusion turned out good, but there were some aesthetic concerns that Angela had.  Her next surgery was in 2005 when she went to Costa Rica and Dr. Francisco Dittel operated her and he re-performed the maxillary surgery.  He also did osteotomies on the lower jaw.  He also reduced the prominence of the chin.  In 2008, she had cheek implants placed which she felt improved her facial balance, but she had a reaction to the implants and 5 to 6  months later the cheek implants had to be removed.  She saw Dr. Barry Zide who did a mentalis suspension and a bone reduction on the chin.  

The objective was that Angela has at this time would be as follows:

Improve the balance in the cheek bones with widening and elevating the cheeks.
The bite is off and it has shifted upon the left side.  

In frontal view, Angela has reasonably good left-to-right facial asymmetry with a little extra fullness in the right cheek by probably 2-3 mm.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper lip tooth relationship is about 2 m at the tubercle.   The maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin are all about 1.5 mm off to the left side.  As Angele postures her mandible towards her right side about 2 mm, it does improve her midline balance.  The midlines are about 2 mm off to the left side.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 2 mm higher than right side.  There is a yaw in the posterior maxilla and mandible with them being shifted off to the right side about 2-3 mm.  Angela has some lower lip ptosis and with her lip in a relaxed position she measures 7 mm from lower incisor tip to superior aspect of the lower lip.  In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe 2-3 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded about 5 mm.  Chin neckline is somewhat short and she does have some redundant tissue in the chin area.  Intraorally, Angela has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She also has all of her teeth in the upper arch back through the second molars.  There is about a 1 mm vertical overbite relationship.  There is pretty much a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  Mandibular left cuspid is about 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  Likewise in the upper arch, the left cuspid is about 1-2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy.  Tonsils are moderately enlarged.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear as though they have been reduced with previous surgery and Angela seems to remember that Dr. Kallal probably reduced those.  To palpation, Angela has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints function reasonably smoothly.  She has no headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability at 1.  The incisal opening is about 43 mm.  The excursion movement to the left is about 7 mm and to the right side about 7 mm.  She has some significantly decreased sensation in the lower lip and chin area and just some slight decreased sensation in the upper lip.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that she is missing all four third molars, but has the rest of her teeth.  She has an alloplastic implant in the right ramus angle area of the mandible.  There are a lot of bone screws present in the mandible bilaterally and some bone plates in the maxilla as well.  She has 2 bone screws in the chin area also.  

The coronal view shows that she has a yaw in the posterior mandible with the right side being shifted towards the right in both the maxilla and mandible about 3-4 mm.  The angle is much more prominent on that side because of the previous alloplastic implant to the right mandibular posterior body and inferior ramus area.  She has bone plates in the maxilla and numerous bone screws in the mandible.  The screws extend quite a ways through the ramus by probably 6-10 mm.  The yaw is seen in the ramus and is quite prominent on the right side.  Coronal view shows that she has some deviation of the nasal septum.  The inferior turbinates appears significantly enlarged particularly on the left side.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

In the axial view, the sinuses are clear and the right turbinate is moderate in size, but the left one is a lot larger and probably could be contributory to blocking the airway on that side.  The TMJs look reasonably normal with adequate joint space and good morphology of the condyles.  

Basic diagnoses for Angela would be as follows:

1.	Maxillary AP and poster vertical hypoplasia as well as transverse and vertical  
            asymmetry.
2.	Mandibular AP hypoplasia as well as transverse and vertical asymmetry.
3.	Maxillary midline shifted 1.5 to 2 mm to the left.
4.	Posterior maxillary and mandibular yaw being shifted to the right side about 3 mm.
5.	High occlusal plane angle.
6.	Bilateral infraorbital (zygomatic orbital) hypoplasia.
7.	Bilateral buccal fat pad hyperplasia.  
8.	Mandibular anterior vertical hypoplasia (vertical height of 30 mm with normal being 40 	mm).
9.	AP microgenia.
10.	Ptosis of lower lip and mentalis muscles. 
11.	Hyperplasia of the soft tissues in the chin area.
12.	Lingual inclination of lower incisors. 

Angela is very specific about her concerns and priorities.  Therefore, her treatment plan would be as follows:

1.	Surgery Stage 1.
	a.	Zygomatic orbital osteotomies to advance, laterally position, and superiorly 			position the zygomatic orbital complex.
	b.	Bilateral buccal fat lipectomy.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch. 
3.	Surgery Stage 2.
	a.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance, down graft the posterior aspect, and rotate to 			the left to correct the yaw as well as lower it transversely.
	b.	Bilateral ram osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction, lower it 			transversely, and align the midlines.
	c.	Augmentation genioplasty.
	d.	Resuspension of mentalis muscles.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 