ALAN OPENSHAW									     02-14-05

Alan is 16 years old. Birthday is 04/14/88. He was referred by Dr. George Adams, 2845 Parkwood Blvd., #100, Plano, TX.

Patient History

Alan is in good health with no major medical problems. Alan initially had a crossbite apparently in the front. At the age of 7 and then again at 13, he was corrected with a facemask set up to pull the upper jaw forward and push the lower jaw backwards. Each time he wore the facemask for about six months. The treatment was provided to him by Dr. Smart. It wasn’t until about three years ago that he became aware that he had a jaw problem when he went to see Dr. Lee, a dentist. Dr. Lee identified that there was a TMJ problem as well as a jaw alignment problem and referred Alan to Dr. Adams. Alan has been told by Dr. Lee that he could start developing problems on the left side as well because it has to work so much harder because the right side is not working so well. He has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. The only other joint area that bothers him is his lower back at times. He took allergy shots for 18 months when he was younger but is not aware of any specifically identified allergy that he has. He has a depression on the right side of his face and in the masseter muscle area. He is not aware of any clenching or bruxism. He has no significant problems with headaches. He rates his TMJ pain and discomfort at a level of 2. On an average day his pain and headache level is at 1. He rates his jaw function at 3, diet at 0, and disability at 0. Alan is a mouth breather particularly at night when sleeping. He is not aware of problems with snoring. He doesn’t have any problems with sleep apnea. He is tired during the day, but he says for other reasons than breathing problems. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Alan has some decreased fullness in the right side of the face probably about 10 to 15 anterior to the tragus of the ear and extends forward about 30 mm. Vertical length is roughly 60 mm. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm. Maxillary and mandibular midlines are pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin. Deficiency in the right mandibular ramus area gives the impression of asymmetry, but the midlines look pretty much on. 

In profile view, Alan has fairly good facial balance. Could have some AP deficiency of the mandible of perhaps maybe 6 to 8 mm. AP position of the maxilla actually looks fairly good. Chin-neckline is a little bit short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. 

Intraorally, Alan has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. There is a little bit of crowding, lower anterior arch. Has a high attached labial frenulum between the central incisors that comes up right in between the teeth. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has a really severe curve of Spee in the upper arch. Is fairly close to being a Class I cuspid relationship bilaterally. He has an anterior open bite of about 2 to 3 mm. Transversely, the mandibular occlusal plane is fairly flat. Maxillary right cuspid is about 2 mm higher than the left cuspid. Tends to have a posterior crossbite tendency but the right side is a little bit worse than the left side. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is mildly enlarged. Soft palate is a little bit elongated. Faucial pillars appear moderately constricted. 

Holding his nostrils open did improve his abilities to breathe through his nose with better improvement on the right side as compared to the left side. The turbinates appear to be moderately enlarged, although it was difficult to see them because they begin a little bit further posteriorly than usual. Base of the columella is somewhat side, and the nostrils are a little bit constricted as are the luminal valves. 

He does have an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and an increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch. On a flat plane, the incisors are probably 2 mm up off the horizontal plane, and the second molars are up probably about 3 mm off the horizontal plane. The lower arch has an accentuated curve of occlusion as well. Maxillary arch is probably a good 6 to 7 mm transverse deficient. On opening, the mandible deviates to the right side probably a good 8 mm. 

On opening, joints seem to function smoothly, but he does have significant deviation off to the right side probably a good 8 mm. He was unable to pop and reduce his discs at this time. To palpation, he had just some very mild tenderness over the TMJs with the left side being a little bit more tender than the right side but otherwise no significant pain to palpation situation. Maximal incisal opening is 52 mm but that is with extreme deviation of the mandible off to the right side of 8 mm. Excursive movements to the right side are 7 mm and to the left around 3 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars developing and unerupted. Sinuses look relatively clear. Turbinate on the left side looks a little bit enlarged. Vertical height of the mandible on the left side appears a little bit longer than the right side. Ramus on the right side is a little bit more narrow than on the left side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Suspect the patient is developing a dislocated disc on this side. Has significantly increased anterior joint space. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is small anteroposteriorly and significantly posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Appears there may be increased communication between the middle ear and the faucial pillar. Articular eminence is fairly steep and a little bit steeper than the opposite side. 

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the left joint with the condyle coming out over and slightly beyond the articular eminence. On the left side, the condyle stops on the posterior aspect of the articular eminence. 

Waters view shows that the internal nose is fairly wide in dimension. Turbinates appear somewhat enlarged and may be causing some significant airway obstruction. Sinuses look relatively clear. 

Cephalometrically, he has some adenoid tissue remaining in his nasopharynx area that is in close approximation to the turbinates. Oropharyngeal airway looks good. Maxilla appears somewhat AP deficient as does the mandible a little bit. He has an anterior open bite and appears to have just a slight Class III molar relationship. Accentuated curve of occlusion can be seen in both arches. 

Tooth-size analysis reveals that there is no really significant tooth-size problem. 

Facial nerve appears to be intact for all functions. 

Basic Diagnoses

Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and closed lock
AP maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary deficiency
Slight AP mandibular deficiency
Apertognathia (3 mm)
Occludes only on the left bicuspids, molars, and right side molars
Bilateral posterior crossbites being worse on the right side than the left side
TMJ discomfort
Difficulties eating and chewing
Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
Accentuated curve of Wilson, upper arch
Slightly increased curve of Wilson, lower arch
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch in three sections:
Section 1:  Left cuspid through first molar
Section 2:  Left lateral incisor through right lateral incisor
Section 3:  Right cuspid through right first molar
Place brackets on the second molars but do not engage the second molars in the arch wire at this time. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Place a step in the arch wire between the cuspids and lateral incisors to align the four incisors at an elevated plane level compared to the cuspids and posterior teeth. Extrude maxillary cuspids approximately 2 mm to get them level with the rest of the posterior teeth
Align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand, advance, and level the occlusal plane and curve of Spee
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible and align it with the maxilla
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 