JEANNIE ONDREJKO								08/25/2006

Jeannie is 47 years old and is referred by Dr. William Hang.  She has had previous nasal surgery and an appendectomy.   She did have a neck injury due to an auto accident on March 22, 2006.  She takes Zyrtec.  In addition she takes Mobic and she also is taking an anti-inflammatory medicine but she does not know what it is.  She does take Aleve also.  Treatment she has had to date includes orthodontics.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Jaw pain that continues to get worse and at times is unbearable.
Headaches that are horrible.
Pain and headache problems that affect the quality of life.
Difficulties sleeping because of the pain. 
Difficulties eating and chewing.

Jeannie has difficulty sleeping at night because of the pain problems.  She does not believe she has sleep apnea problems but does have severe snoring and severe daytime tiredness.  She does have difficulties breathing through her nose and breathes through her mouth when she sleeps and also during the day.  She believes that the TMJ problems began when she was in her 30s of unknown etiology.  She had orthodontics twice as a teenager including four bicuspid extractions.  She re-initiated orthodontics in March of 2006 with Dr. William Hang.  She rates her headaches at about a level of 8 that occur more predominately on the right side in the frontal, temple and posterior head area and in the left frontal area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain at 8.  She rates her jaw function at 8, diet at 7 and disability is a level of 7.  Her pain levels can fluctuate fairly significantly and currently she is a level of 7 but her disability can escalate to 10.  She has some problems with earaches, tinnitus and vertigo.  She has problems with the bones in her neck and her left shoulder joint that is somewhat problematic.  Her pain is consistent with no dominance in any particular time of the day.

In frontal view, she has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Right orbit is about 2 mm higher than the left side.  Maxillary midline could be off to the left side about 1 mm.  Mandibular dental midline and chin appear a little bit better on the facial midline.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance in the upper lip, nose and cheek area.  Chin appears retruded by probably 10 to 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is somewhat shorter though the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  She does have some fullness of soft tissue in the submental area.  Upper lip length is about 26 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is –2.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth except she is missing lower first bicuspids.  She has a little bit of space in between the bicuspid on either side.  A little bit of crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she is missing probably the second bicuspids.  She has spaces opened up in the second bicuspid area although she has no appliances on at this time.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally being probably about 4 mm Class II.  She has about 1 mm overbite.  She does have a little bit of curvature in the dorsum of the nose with it curving off towards the right side and then back to the left side again.  Oropharyngeal mucosa looks healthy.  The uvula is enlarged.  Soft palate and faucial pillars all look relatively normal.  The nasal septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side.  The turbinates appear moderate in size but maybe posteriorly it could be a little bit larger.  
JEANNIE ONDREJKO			08/25/2006				Page 2

Airway in the left side appears a little bit more obstructed than the right side.  Holding open the luminal valve on the left side significantly improved her abilities to breathe through that side although not quite as significant improvement on the right side.  It does appear to have some collapse of the alar cartilages on the left side compared to the right side.  The right side of the face appears a little bit more full than the left side by probably 3 mm or so.  To palpation, she has severe pain over the shoulders, left posterior neck area, high moderate pain over the TMJs, right masseter, right styloid area and moderate discomfort over the right posterior neck, left styloid and left masseter muscle area.  On opening, the left joint seems to function reasonably smoothly but the right side has crepitation.  Jeannie states that the joint noises now are actually pretty good compared to what they can be.  She also reports a history of closed lock situation.  Incisal opening without significant discomfort is about 30 mm, maximal opening about 41 mm.  Excursive movements about 10 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and four bicuspids that are absent, most likely the first bicuspids as the crowns on the second bicuspids are tipped forward.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  TMJs appear arthritic and appear to have lost volume.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear.  The septum is difficult to evaluate and the turbinates appear enlarged.  There does not appear to be much passable airway.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a joint that has some significant sclerosis present.  Joint space appears to be decreased.  There appears to free calcified body in the joint space.

Right TMJ tomogram shows severe arthritis in the joint and it appears that there is bone-on-bone contact.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II relationship as well as a Class II occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway is actually more open than anticipated with an AP dimension of about 7 to 8 mm at the soft palate level and almost 10 mm at the base of the tongue.  She has a mild high occlusal plan angulation.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocations with significant deformation and non-reducing as well as perforations and bone-on-bone contact on the right side.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
Class II occlusion.
Missing four first bicuspids.  
Spaces open in the upper arch for one bicuspid in each area.
Over-angulation of lower incisors.
Collapse of the nose causing airway obstruction.
TMJ pain.
 Myofascial pain.
JEANNIE ONDREJKO			08/25/2006				Page 2


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up the spaces in the second bicuspid area a little bit more to equal the size of normal second bicuspid.  Be sure lateral incisor roots are tipped mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Close extraction spacing.
CT scans of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. 
Reconstruct the left side of her nose with bone graft (harvest from septum versus posterior maxillary wall.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry for placement of osteointegrated implants in the maxillary second bicuspid area as well as placement of crowns.
