JUSTIN OLSEN									03/10/2010
DATE OF BIRTH:	06/17/1982
AGE:	27 

The patient previously was diagnosed with unilateral right condylar hyperplasia and on April 15, 1994, had a condylectomy performed on the right TMJ.  He apparently has had no other surgical procedures to the jaws.  The primary concerns that he has at this time are as follows:

Jaw pain right side. 
Headaches right side and top of head as well as in the forehead area.
Facial pain and pressure in both cheeks.
Eyes burning and pain behind right eye.

He had a pituitary tumor removed in August 2007 and he was on prednisone until November 7.  Then his jaw started to hurt and he got daily headaches on the right side and top of the head and forehead area since that time.  The headaches occur daily and in addition he has moderate neck pain.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxing at night.  He has no trouble with earaches, ringing in the ears, or lightheadedness or dizziness.  No other joints bother him.  He rates his TMJ pain at 4, headaches at 7, and average daily pain around the head and neck area at 3.  He rates his jaw function at 1, diet at 1, and did not rate his disability.

He takes the following medications:

Diazepam 5 mg tablets.
Magnesium 250 mg tablets.
Prilosec 25 mg.
Unisom sleeping tablet 1 tablet each night.

He is currently suffering from an upset stomach with the use of Tylenol with Codeine No. 3.  He does not appear to have any significant airway issues, although he does have occasional loud snoring and moderate daytime tiredness.  He does have some mild difficulties sleeping at night. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but the rest of the teeth are present.  The right condyle is quite flattened and very short in vertical height secondary to previous surgery.  There is cortical bone across the top of the condyle.  The condyle has a mushroom shape to it.  The articular eminence looks quite flat.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The nasal septum looks good and turbinates appear relatively normal in size.


Left TMJ appears to have a relatively normal architecture.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking on the condylar head.  The joint space may be slightly decreased posteriorly.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is postured somewhat forward in the fossa beneath the flattened articular eminence.  The head of the condyle is quite flat.  There is decreased vertical joint space at the anterior aspect of the condyle.  The articular eminence is fairly flat.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology and width, but there is probably decreased joint space on the anterior left side.  

Right coronal view shows a condyle that is quite flattened with significant loss of vertical volume.  It is fairly close between the fossa and the head of the condyle.  There is good airway.  He has a skeletal and occlusal Class I relationship.  There is a slight vertical discrepancy at the occlusal plane level and inferior border of the mandible with the right side being shorter by about 3 mm.  

Dental model analyses shows that he has a Class I cuspid-molar on the left side and a Class II end-on cuspid-molar relationship on the right side.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted 2 mm off to the right side.  

I suspect he had a low condylectomy performed and the articular disc is probably repositioned over the condyle.  

Diagnoses:

Previously treated condylar hyperplasia of right mandibular condyle with low condylectomy.
Right TMJ pain. 
Right-sided headaches.
Class II end-on occlusion on the right side and Class I occlusion on the left side.
Probable mild facial asymmetry with the chin shifted to the right (no photographs were available for evaluation).

Recommended surgery would be as follows:

Right TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Fat graft to right TMJ.
