MICHELLE “MISSY” OSTERMAN							07-25-03

Missy is 14 years old and referred by Jim Caskey, DDS, MS, 210 E. Lambert Rd., Sherman, TX  75092.

Patient History

Missy had a bicycle accident in 1999 when she was about 10 years of age. She struck her head and her chin. She had stitched in her forehead and also on her chin. She is not aware of having any jaw pain immediately after that. However, about two years after that, she developed headache problems that were fairly significant. She had a CAT scan of her brain and was worked up for possible leukemia and other factors, and nothing was found. She hasn’t had any headaches now for about six to nine months. She was having headaches fairly frequently prior to that time. She also has been worked up for rheumatoid arthritis. Back at the time that she had her headaches and some jaw pain, Dr. Caskey placed Missy into a “TMJ” splint. She wore that just at night. She doesn’t wear it much anymore because she is pretty much symptom-free. Missy apparently has a nocturnal bruxism habit. Nine months ago her headaches sometimes were so significant that she had difficulties getting out of bed. Now she still gets some headaches, but they are not nearly as intense. Prior to nine months ago, she also had some significant TMJ pain as well that occurred almost daily. This has significantly subsided currently. Missy’s mother has noted that Missy’s lower jaw is becoming more retruded. Missy when she was 10 years old had a profile similar to the mother’s with good AP facial balance. Now the chin is significantly more retruded than it was back then.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Missy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Vertical height in the mandible on the right side might be a little bit shorter than the left side. Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 4 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is a little bit off to the right side about a millimeter as is the chin. 

In profile view, Missy has a slightly obtuse nasolabial angle. Maxilla is AP deficiency by probably 4 to 5 mm. Chin is AP deficient by probably 15 to 18 mm. Chin-neckline is short, although the chin-neck angle is reasonably well-defined. Missy does have a slightly head postured forward neck position.

Intraorally, Missy has most of her lower permanent teeth except she has retained primary E’s bilaterally. Still has mamelons. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. The cuspids and the left second bicuspid are erupting into position. She has a Class II end-on occlusal relationship. She has an overjet of about 3 mm. She has a slight open bite of about 1 mm. Cuspids are a little bit locked out labially in the upper arch. As she slides her mandible forward into a better Class I position, she has a tendency to go into a crossbite posteriorly. Oropharynx appears clear. She still has her tonsils present, but they are fairly small in size.

Missy doesn’t have any particular problems breathing through her nose, although her turbinates are moderately enlarged, particularly on the left side. Alar base is somewhat wide as well. When Missy was born, she apparently had a respiratory arrest when she was three days old, and the mother revived her. They gave her the diagnosis of SIDS (sudden infant death syndrome). They actually told the mother they didn’t expect Missy to live, but obvious Missy has done very well. They had to closely monitor her airway for about 18 months when she was an infant. She doesn’t have any observable problems with airway difficulties today.
Missy does have a history of significant previous clicking and popping in her TMJs. She doesn’t hear that as much now as she used to. To palpation, she has moderate discomfort over the left masseter muscle and over both TMJs but otherwise has no tenderness. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly currently, although she does have that previous history of significant clicking and popping. Maximal incisal opening is 52 mm. Excursive movements are about 5 mm in each direction. She rates her headaches that she gets about two to three times a month at a level of 2, and they occur primarily in the temporal area. She also gets TMJ pain a couple of times a month at about a level of 2. On an average day, her overall pain is about a level of 1. She rates her jaw function at 2, diet at 1, and disability at 0. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that sinuses are fairly clear, although there is a little bit of cloudiness in the left one compared to the right one. Turbinates are fairly large, but septum appears relatively straight. She has developing unerupted third molars in all four quadrants. Lower second bicuspids are developing, but retained E’s are still present. Condyles have gone through some significant resorptive changes.

On the submental vertex  x-ray, the left condyle actually looks a little bit smaller than the right condyle.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear in all quadrants. She has a quite large frontal sinus. Turbinates are moderately enlarged, and the airway looks a little bit compromised, although clinically she doesn’t relate any significant nasal airway problems. Septum looks reasonably straight.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite small in anteroposterior dimension and also in vertical dimension. There is obvious evidence of condylar resorption that has occurred. X-rays may not have been taken in centric relation as in one view the teeth are apart and in the others she is not quite in as significant a Class II occlusion and I would expect to see. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. Increased posterior joint space indicative of perhaps hypertrophied synovial tissue. Cortical bone appears a little bit thin over the top of the condyle. Condylar neck is also somewhat thin as well.

Right TMJ tomogram looks relatively similar with a very narrow anteroposterior dimension of the condyle and significant vertical shortening of the condyle indicative of previous condylar resorption. Superior joint space may be a little bit increased and would go along with hypertrophic synovial tissue. Articular eminence is moderately shallow along a little bit longer in length than the opposite side. 

On the open views, there is some fairly good translation of the condyles. The smallness of the condyles is appreciated on these open views. 

Cephalometrically, Missy has a skeletal Class II and occlusal Class II occlusal relationship. She has a high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway, however, looks surprisingly good with an AP dimension in the soft palate of about 7 mm and at the base of the tongue of about 9 mm. Turbinates just extend to the posterior aspect of the hard palate. Tongue appears to fill most of the oral cavity on this x-ray. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption
AP mandibular deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Slight anterior vertical maxillary excess
Transverse maxillary deficiency
Class II end-on occlusion
Anterior open bite (1 to 2 mm)
High occlusal plane angulation
Retained primary lower E’s bilaterally but with permanent successors
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment

Surgery, Stage I
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 

Consider extracting retained primary E’s in lower arch

Presurgical orthodontics
A.	Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially 
	and cuspid roots distally
B.	Align and level maxillary arch  

Surgery, Stage II
A.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to downgraft the posterior aspect, advance it, correct any 
	transverse problems that may be present, and level the occlusal plane
B.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise
	direction
C.	Augmentation genioplasty with HTR chin implant
D.	Surgical removal of four impacted third molars

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 






 

