ERIN OPIE										11/21/2005

Erin is 19 years old, in fact, her birthday is today.  Previous surgery she has had is her adenoids were removed when she was younger.  She is in good health with no major medical problems.  She takes Adderall 10 mg in the morning during school.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Teeth and jaws do not fit together and is getting worse.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Headaches.
Difficulty breathing through her nose.
Mouth breather particularly at night when sleeping.

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  No known allergies.  She has no problems wearing jewelry except she occasionally gets ear infections but she does not believe that it has anything to do with the quality of earrings.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing of her teeth.  She had orthodontics for about 5 years from about the age of 10 to 15 including palatal expanders and full arch appliances.  At one time, her bite fit together much better than it does now.  For the past year, she feels her bite has been getting worse.

She gets headaches about 2 to 3 times per week at a level of 5 that involves the frontal, temporal and posterior head area.  The headaches can escalate to 8.  She is not aware of any specific pain in the TMJs.  In relative to Erin's headaches, she usually feels best in the morning and the headaches develop during the day.  Erin does chew chewing gum but she has not made any correlation as to chewing gum and the onset of her headaches.  Her average daily facial pain is about at level of 8.  She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 4, disability at 5.  In frontal view, Erin has good facial balance in middle and upper third face.  Some asymmetry in the lower jaw.  She has more fullness on the right side of the mandibular angle area by probably a good 4 mm.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  Maxillary dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left side.  Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the left side.  The chin is probably about 5 to 6 mm off to the left side.  In profile view she has a slight C-shaped curvature in the upper lip.  She probably has about 3 to 4 mm of AP deficiency in the upper lip.  Chin actually appears a little bit AP deficient but long vertically.  Intraorally, Erin has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  The lower anterior teeth are tipped to the right at the incisal edges.  Appears to have adequately attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has almost a full Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and an end-on Class III on the left side.  There is probably 4 mm Class III on the left and 6 mm on the right.  There is some significant increased curve of Wilson in the mandibular posterior teeth.  There is an increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch but not as significant as reverse curve in the lower arch.  She has a zero overbite relationship.  She has anterior crossbite and a tendency toward the posterior crossbite on the left side.  On the right side she appears to occlude on the molars and perhaps the cuspid.  On the left side, the molars and bicuspid and the cuspid may touch.  Oropharyngeal airway looks healthy.  The uvula looks relatively normal as does the soft palate and the facial pillars.  
ERIN OPIE					11/21/2005				Page 2

She has moderately enlarged tonsils but no history of tonsillitis or sore throat problems.  Erin does state she has difficulty breathing through her nose and breaths predominately through her mouth when sleeping.  Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged with the left one being a little bit larger than the right side but it appears that there is a relatively acceptable airway.  She gives no history of snoring.  There appears to be slight yaw in the lower arch of about 2 mm to the right.  To palpation, she has some moderate discomfort of the masseter muscles and styloid areas.  The joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Incisal opening is 55 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 9 mm, to the left 8 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the presence of maxillary left third molar but the other third molars are absent.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The condylar head and neck appear long particularly on the right side.  A 3 x 3 retainer on the lower arch.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle head and neck that appears long.  Articular eminence is moderate in steepness.  There appears to be decreased joint space superiorly.  The condyle looks a little flat on top but not too significantly abnormal.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle head and neck that appears elongated.  Joint space may be slightly decreased superiorly and posteriorly but not too significant.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles coming just slightly anterior to the articular eminence. 

Waters view shows that the septum appears to be quite deviated posteriorly.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  The asymmetry in the mandible can be seen with the mandible being shifted off to the left side and the tipping of the central incisors with the crowns off towards the right side relative to the long axis of the roots.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she appears to have some AP maxillary deficiency and mandibular prognathism.  Moderately high occlusal plane angle is present.  Mandible may be long vertically.  Oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal.  Turbinate appears to extend posterior to the hard palate.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia. 
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
Class III occlusion being worse on the right side than the left side. 
Headaches. 
Masticatory dysfunction.
Impacted maxillary right third molar.
Anterior cross bite and tendency towards posterior cross bites.  
Predominately mouth breather.
ERIN OPIE					11/21/2005				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisal roots mesially and cuspid roots distally.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to upright lower incisors which presently are tipped with the crowns leaning towards the right side and root tips towards the left.
Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back on the facial midline. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and expand it transversely. 
Removal of impacted maxillary left third molar.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
