BRIGITTE OLSON									04-11-03

Brigitte is 39 years old and referred by Dr. Scott Clayhold from Seattle, Washington. 

Patient History

She has had problems in the past with postpartum depression and with hypertension. Brigitte has had previous jaw surgery. The previous surgery she had involved a mandibular advancement procedure with sagittal split osteotomies, and she had a submental lipectomy at the same time. Dr. Stephen Rayburn in Plano performed the orthodontics here, although Brigitte began her orthodontics in New Zealand. She does have iritis in her eyes that she says she has been informed is associated with arthritis. She has been told that it may be an autoimmune disease process. Brigitte apparently originally started out with probably a Class II division II malocclusion with an anterior deep-bite where her upper teeth are biting into her lower gums. She had orthodontics performed and then had the mandibular advancement performed. Prior to her surgery, she had longstanding TMJ problems with clicking and popping and episodes of closed lock where she could not open. She first became aware of having TMJ problems back in the ‘80s. She had orthodontics for four years and then had the surgery on October 22, 1998. Initially she did quite well after the surgery and was able to open fairly wide and was not aware of pain in the joints. It was approximately two years later than the pain redeveloped and the limited jaw opening recurred again. The onset was around the time that her second child was born. Her pain now is a little bit more agonizing for her. She feels this may be related some to stress and the fact that she is not getting as much sleep because she is in graduate school and yawning more. Yawning appears to really significantly increase the pain. 

She is unaware of any nocturnal clenching or bruxism. She is more aware of her pain when she is driving her car. Afternoons and evenings are usually when her pain is at its worse. She gets headaches about three to four times per week at a level of 5, and they occur in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. She thinks the headaches are related to her iritis. She does get pain and headaches behind her eyes. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, overall pain on an average day at 5, jaw function and diet at 6, and disability at 1. 

Current Medications

Celexa 2.5 mg 
Prednisone eye drops
Enalapril 2.5 mg (blood pressure medicine)			
Aleve for pain and discomfort

Patient Concerns

Primary concerns that Brigitte has now include the following:

TMJ pain
Headaches 
Pain through the jaws and neck
Difficulties eating and chewing
Limited jaw opening
Occasional earaches 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Brigitte has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Some asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship measures about 3.5 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted to the right 2 mm. Chin is about 3 mm to the right. 

In profile view, Brigitte has some deficiency in AP projection of the maxilla about 3 to 4 mm. Chin is retruded by probably at least 10 to 12 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. 

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth seem to be relatively well-aligned and leveled. Has good attached gingival around all of her teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. Slight reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Fairly close to Class I cuspid bilaterally. Has an anterior deep-bite of probably 5 mm. Transversely, the occlusal planes are fairly level. Oropharynx appears clear and looks relatively normal. Intranasally, there may be a slight deviation of the nasal septum off toward the right side. Right turbinate is moderately large. The left one is moderately large, but the airway on the left side appears much greater than the airway on the right side. Has somewhat of a wide columella base. Opening up the nostrils though did not seem to improve her breathing significantly. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows evidence of previous sagittal split osteotomies as there are bone plates present. She is missing the mandibular left first molar and has a bridge replacing that tooth. Sinuses appear a little bit cloudy, particularly the right one. Nasal airway looks better. Left TMJ condyle appears somewhat arthritis. Right condyle is quite small in size and appears to be arthritic and has undergone at some point in time some condylar resorption. She is missing all four third molars but has the rest of her teeth except the mandibular left first molar.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Shows the mandible is shifted a little bit off toward the right side. Nasal airways may be okay, although the right side is somewhat constricted. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows the presence of significant osteoarthritis in the joint with significant loss of volume of the condyle vertically, anteroposteriorly, and probably also in the third dimension. The articular eminence is moderately steep. May be some degenerative changes on the posterior aspect of the articular eminence but difficult to tell.

Left TMJ tomogram shows the presence of osteoarthritic changes as well with an osteophytic formation extending superiorly probably indicative of a perforation on that side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Flattening of the posterior head of the condyle is present. 

Open views show restricted translation in both joints. 

Cephalometrically, the head is tipped way superiorly so I can’t really evaluate the airway dimensions. Appears to be basically a skeletal Class I, although both the maxilla and mandible may be retruded. Looking at a Panorex dated 10/29/98 shows that there apparently have been further degenerative changes in the right condyle today as compared to then. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral  TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe degenerative changes with adhesions to the articular eminence with evidence of significant condylar resorption on the right side
AP maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Slight Class II cuspid relationship (1 to 2 mm)
High occlusal plane angle
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Anterior deep-bite
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Earaches 
Occasional vertigo

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch
Align and level mandibular arch. May require a bite splint to open up the bite in order to place lower appliances

Surgery, Treatment Option 1
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it posteriorly
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Fat grafts, bilateral TMJs (harvested from the abdomen)

Surgery, Treatment Option 2
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Fat grafts, bilaterally TMJs (harvested from the abdomen)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
