SHOUNA OLSON									10/25/2006

Shouna is 51 years old, referred by Dr. Mike Steffen.  Shouna has had a previous hysterectomy, lithotripsy and also lumps removed from her cheeks x2.  She has had a history of swollen joints in her fingers, achy knee joints, back and shoulders.  Joints were all involved at one time.  She switched to an Atkins diet a few years ago and this significantly decreased her joint symptoms.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Prilosec OTC.
Mobic 50 mg p.r.n. 
Requip 0.5 mg (restless leg syndrome.)
Estrasorb.  

She states the codeine and other narcotics make her nauseated.  

Shouna's problems began at the age of 43 in about 1998 while she was singing.  She developed tingling in her face and significant discomfort to the point that she had to stop singing.  She was involved in an MVA at the age of 16 and is the only traumatic incident that she is aware of in the past.  She did have clicking and popping in her joints but her joints no longer makes those noises.  She has had splint therapy involving at least 6 to 8 splints.  She then had some orthodontics performed to try and align her teeth a little bit better and then caps done on some of the posterior teeth.

She gets occasional earaches, occasional tinnitus but frequent vertigo.  No problems with hearing loss.  The other joints that bother her include her right hip where she has bursitis and her fingers.  She does not believe that she clenches or grinds her teeth.  One of the primary factors affecting her right now is that she cannot sing because her face and jaws get extremely fatigued and it creates a significant amount of discomfort for her.  She gets infrequent headaches but when they occur they tend to radiate from the back of the head and throughout the head at about a level of 3.  She rates her TMJ pain currently at 2 but it can exacerbate to 10.  Her average daily pain and discomfort around the head and neck area is a level of 6.  She rates her jaw function at 1, diet at 2, disability at 9.  She feels her headaches could be higher than recorded but she does not get them very often so she put them at a lower level.  Shouna used to have problems with snoring but since her splint treatment etc., this has significantly decreased.  However, at times when she lies on her back she feels that it cuts her airway off.  She does have daytime somnolence.  She had moderate difficulty sleeping at night.  She is not aware of having sleep apnea.

Her father has a history of upper joint problems with swollen enlarged joints.  Her father and also her daughter have irritable bowel syndrome and her daughter also has TMJ problems.

In frontal view, Shouna has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  A little bit more fullness on the right side but not too significant.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm.  Maxillary and mandibular dental midline as well as the chin midline are all fairly well aligned to the facial midline.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  The chin appears somewhat AP deficient by probably 8 to 10 mm.  Chin-neckline is short although the chin-neckline is fairly well defined.  
SHOUNA OLSON				10/25/2006				Page 2


There is some fullness in the submental area.  Intraorally, Shouna has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has crowns on the mandibular left first molar, mandibular right first and second molars.  Some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has crowns on the first and second molars bilaterally.  She has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship bilaterally.  She has about a 1 mm vertical overbite.  Oropharyngeal areas look healthy.  The uvula is elongated.  The soft palate may be mildly elongated.  Faucial pillars are moderately constricted.  Intranasally, the left turbinate appears larger than the right turbinate.  Nasal septum is deviated off towards the right side.  Nasal airway appears just mildly constricted.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles and TMJs.  Shouna's joints function reasonably smoothly although she has an occasional glitch on the left joint that could be palpated.  Maximal opening is 49 mm but opening reasonably comfortable at 38 mm.  Excursive movements are about 8 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  She has crowns on most of the molars and even the maxillary right second bicuspid.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  Sinuses are difficult to evaluate.  The condyles appear to have a fairly good size.  The left one seems a little bit smaller than the right one.

Waters view shows that the left turbinate must be quite large posteriorly and appears to block a major portion of the airway.  Bony septum appears to be deviated a little bit off to the right side.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic.  A little bit of anterior beaking is present.  Joint space may be a little bit decreased vertically.  The condyle has a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a hockey stick shape to it.  Articular eminence is a little steeper on this side than the opposite side.  Joint space seems a little bit larger on this side compared to the opposite side.  The condyle may actually be postured forward slightly in the fossa.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway space is a little bit less than 4 mm at the soft palate level and about 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  She has a light increase in the occlusal plane angulation.  Shouna does have a little bit of a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1 to 1.5 mm vertically shorter than the right side.  





SHOUNA OLSON				10/25/2006				Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc medially dislocated with anterior dislocation at the more lateral aspect.
Rule out connective tissue autoimmune diseases as well as reactive arthritis.
Posterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia. 
High occlusal plane angle.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Nasal airway obstruction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Laboratory tests.
Rheumatoid factor.
ANA.
Sed rate.
C-reactive protein.
Citrulline antibody.
Chlamydia antibody group titer.
Mycoplasma antibody group titer.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level upper arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction depending on the results of the laboratory tests to include bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Total joint prostheses using TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses to include mandibular advancement.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance slightly and down graft posterior. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction if disc-repositioning procedures are used.
AP augmentation genioplasty with horizontal mandibular osteotomy.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
