DARBY OWENS									08/12/2010

Darby is 14 years old.  Darby is referred by Dr. Tom Lowder, 2709 W. Huntsville Avenue, Springdale, Arkansas 72762.  Darby had a liver transplant in 1999 when she was 3 years old.  She currently takes ProGraf 1 mg twice daily.  The primary concerns that Darby has include the following:

Upper jaw is growing too fast. 
Excessive gum showing particularly when smiling.
Difficult to play her clarinet.
Difficulties eating and chewing because she cannot get her lips together.

Darby has no problems with headaches, TMJ problems or issues, no signs or symptoms.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, hearing loss or other joint problems.  

In frontal view, Darby has some slight facial asymmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 9 mm.  The nasal tip is off to the right side about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is off to the right side about 3 to 4 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline, but the chin is off to the right side about 2 or 3 mm.  In profile view, Darby has an elongated lower third face.  She has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip.  The maxilla is retruded about 5 to 6 mm and the mandible is retruded about 15 to 18 mm.  The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  She has some hyperfunction of the mentalis muscle.  Intraorally, Darby has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some crowding particularly in the posterior left side with a little bit of a lingual inclination of the second bicuspid and first molar.  There is mild crowding in the upper anterior arch, but she has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has an extra tooth in the upper left side with two lateral incisors.  She is basically Class I bilaterally.  She has a buccal cross bite of the left second bicuspids.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 7 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy except she does have a moderately enlarged right tonsil.  Intranasally, she probably has moderately enlarged turbinates, at least as best can be seen from the front.  She has a wide columella and narrow nostrils.  She has no pain to palpation around the head and neck area.  Joints function smoothly.  The incisal opening is 49 mm and excursion movements are 8 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of developing third molars on the right side but not on the left side.  She has a root canal in the mandibular left first molar.  She may have a mucous retention cyst in the left sinus perhaps.  
Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology to it with a little flattening towards the outside of the joint, but otherwise it looks pretty good.  The joint space looks balanced and articular eminence is moderately shallow.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit more flat on the anterior surface.  There may be slight increased posterior joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased lateral joint space which means the disc could be somewhat medially displaced.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  There is decreased lateral joint space indicative of perhaps medial displacement of the articular disc.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Darby has anterior vertical maxillary excess, AP mandibular deficiency and a moderate high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway however looks very good.  She has some adenoid tissue remaining in the cranial base area.  The maxilla also appears retruded anteroposteriorly as well as does the mandible and there is AP microgenia as well.  

The coronal view shows that there is deviated nasal septum off towards the left side.  The left inferior turbinate has a moderate hyperplasia and the right side has more significant hyperplasia.  There is a little mucocele on the anterior aspect of the left maxillary sinus.  

Basic diagnoses for Darby would be as follows:

Maxillary anterior vertical hyperplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary midline shifted about 3 to 4 mm to the right of the facial midline.
Supernumerary maxillary left lateral incisor.
Anterior deep bite of about 7 mm.
Excessive tooth to lip exposure of 9 mm.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Impacted right maxillary and mandibular third molars (x2).
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Extract one of the maxillary supernumerary lateral incisors with probable removal of the 	more anterior one since the more posterior one has a slightly larger crown.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Close the extraction space on right side.  Keep 			about 1 mm of space between the cuspid, lateral incisor, lateral incisor, and 			central to compensate for the tooth size discrepancy of 3 mm.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 			about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract to keep from flaring the lower incisors 			too far forward.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly 7 mm, decrease     
                        the occlusal plane angle, and correct any other arch discrepancies.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance it forward approximately 15 			mm.
	c.	Augmentation genioplasty with a Medpor implant.
	d.	Surgical removal of right-sided impacted third molars x2.
	e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 