RITA O'NEILL									03/30/2007

Rita is 57 years old.  She is in good health except for her jaw problems.  She has an allergy to Latex.  Rita's TMJ problems began on the left side in 1985 when she had the articular disc repositioned and it failed.  She then had proplast Teflon placed and this failed.  In 1986, she had a total joint prosthesis placed using the Vitek total joint prosthesis.  I saw Rita in 1984 and I removed the Vitek total joint prosthesis.  In 2001, she had a left TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis placed.  She has done very well with that prosthesis.  However, the right side now has begun to give her problems.  The significant problems began in August of 2006 when she was in San Diego and getting out of a taxi.  It was windy and the door was open and blew shut and struck her on her on the left side of the face.  Since that time she has had problems on the right side her jaw joint.  

CURRENT PROBLEMS: 
Significant right TMJ pain,
Right-sided headaches.
Decreased jaw function.
Difficulties eating and chewing.  
Grinding noises in the right TMJ.
Mandible at times wants to shift off towards the left side.

She does get some right-sided earaches but no tinnitus and she has no problems with tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her at this time.  She is allergic to latex.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain and headaches at 7, jaw function at 7, diet at 7, disability at 5.  Headaches are on the right side involving the frontal, temporal and posterior head area at about a level of 7.  

In frontal view, Rita has some good facial symmetry and balance.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 0.  Maxillary, mandibular and dental midlines are pretty close to being on the facial midline.  Chin may be just a touch to the left side but not too significant, maybe 1 to 2 mm.  In profile view, she has fairly good facial balance.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer with some spacing and some rotation of the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has just a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally being a Class II by about 3 mm.  She has about a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship.  As Rita opens, the mandible deviates 10 mm to the left.  Oropharyngeal areas look relatively normal.  She has a slight cant to the occlusal plane with the left side being up 1 to 2 mm likely related to the longterm event of not having joint on the left side for approximately 7 years.  To palpation, she has high moderate to low-severe pain over the right temporalis masseter, TMJ, styloid and SCM area.  On the left side she has some mild to moderate discomfort over the left TMJ.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis on the left side.  A 3 x 3 retainer is seen.  All 4 third molars are absent.  She has a root canal in the mandibular left second molar.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  Difficult to evaluate the right TMJ.
RITA O'NEILL				03/30/2007				Page 2

Left TMJ tomogram shows the presence of a prosthesis that appears well adapted at the fossa area as well as at the ramus area. 

Right TMJ tomogram was taken with her mouth somewhat open with the condyle postured forward in the fossa as it was not taken in centric.  The condyle appears arthritic.  There is sclerosis on the top of the condyle.  There is some anterior beaking present.  The condyle is postured forward about 4 to 5 mm in the fossa.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a prosthesis on the left side.  Left side mandibular body and angle area are significantly shorter than the right side with at the first molar area the body being about 4 mm longer on the right side than the left side and at the angle almost 12 mm longer.  Angle also is rotated forward on the left side compared to the right side by about 11 mm.  These imbalances are all due to the previous surgical interventions.  Oropharyngeal airway looks a little bit constricted, but this may be due to tongue posture as she has her tongue postured low when this radiograph was taken.  It shows her airway to be about 4 or 5 mm.  

Rita says that when she had her surgery done that the esophagus was perforated somehow and she was told to tell people that she has a narrow airway at the back of her throat.  On lateral cephalometric radiograph it does show that the lower incisors are significantly over-angulated.  Rita is not aware of any snoring problems or sleep apnea problems.  She is somewhat tired during the day but she says that is due to just the chronic and significance of the pain factors she is currently under with the right TMJ problems.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Right TMJ severe arthritis.
Left TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis.
Right TMJ severe pain. 
Severe right-sided headaches.
Masticatory dysfunction.
Myofascial pain.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Right TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Right TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). 
Application of arch bars with probable removal at completion of surgery. 

