PATRICIA ORNESS									10/22/2010

Patricia is 37 years old and referred by Dr. William Hang, 101 N. Westlake Blvd., Suite 202, Westlake Village, CA 91362-7049.

Tricia believes that her TMJ problems began when she was 14 years old in 1987.  This started during orthodontic treatment.  She had popping in her joints, locking, headaches, TMJ pain, etc.  She had orthodontics from 1986 through 1987.  She had splint therapy in 1987.  She subsequently had orthodontics again from 2003 to 2005.  In March 2003, she had bilateral TMJ disc repositioning procedures as well as some kind of osteotomy in the mandible.  Her bite was over corrected into a Class III position and then she was allowed to settle backwards.  She was in splint therapy again from 2002 to 2003.  She had physical therapy in 1987 and also from 2002 to 2003, although she still gets physical therapy treatments.

Tricia rates her headaches which are constant at a level of 5 in the temporal and posterior head area, but they can get up to 8.5.  Average daily pain is at 7, TMJ pain is 1, jaw function is 6, diet is 3, disability is 6.  She gets moderate earaches, occasional tinnitus, and she has moderate vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her elbows and sometimes her neck.  

Tricia was diagnosed with psoriasis approximately 2 years ago.  She also has been diagnosed with ulcerative colitis and B12 deficiency.  She is not aware of nocturnal clenching and bruxing.  She does not snore.  She has moderate daytime somnolence and she has no sleep apnea symptoms.  She believes that she may breath through her mouth or her nose at nighttime.  

Primary concerns that Tricia has include the following:

Her body goes into yawning fits and she has to yawn 5 or 6 times to get enough air in.
These yawning fits cause severe TMJ pain to the point that she cannot eat or function at normal levels.
Canker sores cause hypersalivation causing muscles and jaw to lock down resulting in ear infections.  
Headaches.
TMJ pain.

Current medications that Tricia takes include:

Olux-E.
Tazorac.

In frontal view, Tricia has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are fairly well aligned to the facial midline.  In profile view, Tricia has some AP deficiency with the maxilla or upper supralabrale posterior to subnasale by about 2 to 3 mm.  The maxilla is probably retruded by a good 6 mm.  The chin appears to be retruded about 15 to 18 mm.  The chin neckline is quite short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids.  In the upper arch, she is likely missing first bicuspids as well.  Transversely, the arches appear somewhat narrow.  She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with a slight open bite on the right side by about 1 to 1.5 mm.  She has about a 2 mm over bite anteriorly.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal except the uvula is slightly enlarged.  The posterior fascial pillar and soft palate on the left side hangs inferiorly about 1 or 2 mm lower than the right side.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  The right turbinate is enlarged, although the left one looks relatively normal at least anteriorly.  On palpation, she has pain over the TMJs and right retromandibular area.  The maximal incisal opening is 36 mm, opening without pain 26 mm.  The excursion movements are about 4 mm in each direction.  Transverse occlusal plane looks relatively level. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all first bicuspids.  It is possible in the upper arch it could be the second bicuspids that have been taken out instead of the first.  The condyles look somewhat arthritic.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  The septum appears reasonably straight back in the bony area.  The left turbinate appears quite large in this view and the right one looks a little bit more normal in size.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the septum is reasonably straight and turbinates are moderately enlarged with the left one being larger than the right one.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show some advanced arthritic changes within the joints.  There are some erosions on the head of the condyle.  There is significant decreased vertical joint space and out laterally it appears there is almost bone-on-bone contact.  The condyle appears to have lost vertical dimension.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 1 to 2 mm, and it appears that there is almost bone-on-bone contact.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears quite arthritic.  There is a large pseudocyst in the head of the condyle.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral pole of the condyle is located significantly lower than the medial pole.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite small in size anteroposterior and appears to have lost vertical dimension.  Towards the middle and medial side of the joint, there appears to be an increased joint space.  There is some anterior beaking of the condyle and some sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant degenerative changes.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is slightly increased posterior and vertical joint space.  The condyle is narrow anteroposteriorly.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Tricia has a Class I occlusal relationship, Class II skeletal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 8 mm and at the base of the soft palate about 3 mm.  She does have a lip incompetence of about 7 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Tricia would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ advanced psoriatic arthritis.
Mandibular hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
TMJ pain. 
Constant headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
High occlusal plane angle of 19 degrees (normal angle  degrees).
Hypertrophied turbinates creating nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch. 
2.	CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts 			total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction.
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	e.	Bilateral coronoidotomies. 
	f.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.