JAYESH PANCHEL									03/09/2006

Jayesh is 45 years old and is referred by Dr. Michael Steffen in Edmond, OK.  Jayesh is in good health with no major medical problems.  His primary concerns are his overbite and overjet as well as the poor sagittal projection of the chin.  His objectives would be to correct his overbite and overjet and increase the projection of the chin.  

MEDICATIONS: 
Lipitor.
Tricor.
ASA.

He has had previous hernias repairs.  Jayesh has no problems with earaches tinnitus vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  He has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain or pain around the head and neck area.  Jayesh has normal jaw function.  He eats a regular diet with no problems and has no disability.  Jayesh has had his orthodontic appliances on for about 1 month.  Jayesh reports no problems with snoring, daytime somnolence nor sleep apnea problems.  

In frontal view, Jayesh has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 26 cm.  Upper tooth-to-lip is about 1 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline and chin.  In profile view, Jayesh has fairly good balance of the upper lips, cheeks and nose.  The chin appears deficient by approximately 20 mm.  Chin-neckline is not well defined and chin-neck angle is not defined.  Intraorally, Jayesh has all of his teeth back through the second molars except he is missing the lower first bicuspids.  He has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Jayesh had previous orthodontics done and had 4 first bicuspids extracted.  Jayesh has a full Class II cuspid relationship.  He has about a 5 mm anterior deep bite relationship.  He has a mild accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch incisors being probably at least a couple of mm higher than the posterior teeth.  The right cuspid is elevated significantly more than the left cuspid.  Transverse occlusal plan is fairly level.  He has some moderately enlarged uvula.  Soft palate and faucial pillars are relatively normal.  Tonsils are relatively normal in size.  Intranasally, the septum in one area is deviated a little bit off towards the left side.  Turbinates are fairly large but the airway looks as though it could be a little bit constricted but he reports no significant difficulties breathing through his nose.  To palpation, Jayesh has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Incisal opening is 55 mm.  Difficult to complete the excursive movements but probably within normal limits.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four first bicuspids.  Also, the right maxillary mandibular third molars are absent but the left ones are present and erupted in.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The condyles look relatively normal.  Articular eminences look a little bit elongated and steep.  Has root canal in mandibular right first molar.  He does have relatively short roots on the maxillary molars.


JAYESH PANCHEL				03/09/2006				Page 2


Waters view shows that there is some nasal septal deviation back in the bony aspects of the nose.  Turbinates are moderately large.  Particularly on the left side it appears it may create some airway obstruction.  The sinuses look clear. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the posterior aspect.  A fairly steep articular eminence.  The condyle is displaced posteriorly and superiorly in the fossa.  Probably disc displacement on that joint. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit of flattening on the anterior head.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  Superior joint space appears to have a little bit more room than the opposite side.  On opening, there is good translation of the left joint but the right one did not translate well but clinically appears to have good movement.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Jayesh has a high occlusal plane angle and a retruded mandible with a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship.  He has a decreased airway of about 6 mm between the base of the tongue and the posterior pharyngeal wall area and the soft palate about 6 to 7 mm at the base of the uvula.  Dental model analysis shows that there is at least a 2 mm tooth size discrepancy.  Jayesh also has some turbos on the maxillary first molars.  Mandibular right first molar appears that it is missing the buccal cusps.  There is some significant wear facet on the teeth indicative of probably some clenching and grinding sometime in the past.  Lower incisors appear overangulated.  There is also some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch of probably about 3 to 4 mm.  There is some mild crowding in the upper arch also about the same. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
Severe AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II occlusion.  
High occlusal plane angle.
Missing four first bicuspids and the right maxillary mandibular third molars.
Malaligned maxillary and mandibular left third molars.  
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT AND PLAN:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 to 3 mm of tooth structure and retract.

JAYESH PANCHEL				03/09/2006				Page 3


Surgical option I:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft posterior aspect and advance slightly. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Augmentation genioplasty.
Extract the maxillary and mandibular left third molars. 
Surgical option II
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
Mandibular advancement.
Augmentation genioplasty (implant versus osseous genioplasty.)
Extract maxillary and mandibular left third molars.  
 Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
