JINSUN PARK									05/09/2008

Jinsun is a 41 years old, referred by Calvin A. Fritzsche, DDS, 404 Brookside Avenue, Redlands, CA 92373.  
Jinsun has been aware of clicking and popping kind of noises in her jaw joints all of her adult life.  However, it was only in approximately September 2006 that she began developing pain of unknown etiology.  The tinnitus began at the same time.  She has seen three different ENT specialists.  She has had MRIs done and the anatomy appears normal.  In June 2007, she received an orthotic and this has provided only about 10% improvement.  It has caused her occlusion to change.  She currently takes no medications.  She gets earaches, left side greater than right side, and she has continuous tinnitus, no vertigo and slight decreased hearing.  No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching, although she may do some at night because her bite has changed since wearing the orthotic.  She has had TMJ chiropractic treatment from November 2007 to February 2008.  She had short-term improvement with that, but it did not provide any permanent help for her. 
She rates her headaches at a level of 3 and they occur usually on the left side in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area.  She gets TMJ pain that can reach a level of 5 particularly when chewing.  Her average daily pain is about a level of 4, jaw function at 4, diet at 3, and disability at 4.  
Primary concerns that Jinsun has include the following:
Constant tinnitus.
Vision change and eye pain with the pain predominantly on the left side. 
Headaches.
Neck and shoulder pain.
Jaw pain.
Occludes only on her very back teeth.
Unbalanced chewing and difficulty chewing. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Jinsun has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.   Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm.  Maxillary and mandibular dental midline is maybe about 1 mm off towards to the left side.  Chin may be about 2 mm off  to the left side.  In profile view, the anterior lower third of the face is elongated.  Upper lip subnasale may be just slightly deficient, but not too significant.  The chin appears slightly retruded by probably 8 to 10 mm.  Vertical height of the mandible appears elongated.  Intraorally, in the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She hits only on the mandibular left second molars.  She actually has all of her teeth back through the third molars present and it is actually the third molars on the left side that touch and all other teeth are out of occlusion.  She has about a zero vertical overbite relationship.  She has  basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and just slightly Class III on the left side.  There is a crossbite tendency on the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal. There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm lower than the left side.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged, but the transverse with the nose is pretty good.  There is just a small spur off the septum at the base on the right side, however, there appears to be adequate airway.  Lip incompetence is about 9 mm.  She is not aware of snoring.  She has moderate daytime somnolence, but is not aware of sleep apnea.  She says she never gets into a deep sleep.  To palpation, she has mild to moderate pain over the shoulders, left masseter, right temporalis muscle, and minimal tenderness in the posterior neck area.  On opening and closing the jaws, her mandible seems to deviate just slightly to the left side on opening maybe 2 to 3 mm.  On opening, there appears to be a little bit of a glitch in the right side, but some fine crepitus apparently is present in left joint.  To palpation, the right condyle feels significantly enlarged compared to the left side.  Maximal incisal opening is 47 mm, but opening without discomfort 32 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 9 mm, to the left 7 mm.  The excursion movements created pain and discomfort in the left TMJ area.  Several jaw manipulations that we did today for the evaluation created a fairly significant headache for Jinsun predominantly on the left side in the temporal area. 
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the left maxillary third molar, but all the rest of the teeth are present including all other third molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Right mandibular condylar head and neck appears elongated significantly compared to the left side which appears a little bit more blunted.  The left condyle appears wide anteroposteriorly.  
Waters view shows a slight asymmetry in the maxilla and mandible.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  The bony septum appears straight.  Turbinates are fairly large in size.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears large vertically as does the condylar neck.  There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately inclined.  There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space.  
Left TMJ tomogram may be affected by a rotational factor, but the condyle appears fairly broad anteroposteriorly and the articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is relatively minimal translation particularly with the left joint.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has almost a bimax protrusion condylar morphology.  Vertical mandibular height appears excessively long.  There is lip incompetence.  Both maxillary and mandibular incisors are over angulated.  The oropharyngeal airway, however, looks very good.  She may have a moderate high occlusal plane angle.  Vertical height of the mandible even in the body area is fairly excessive.  
Jinsun is not aware of whether she has a progressive developing facial asymmetry.  She says that most of her life she has chewed predominantly on the left side and this may account for some of the changes that we see within the jaw joints.
Basic diagnoses for Jinsun would be as follows:
Left TMJ condylar deformity with bony exostosis developing off the posterior head of the condyle.  
Rule out right TMJ osteochondroma/osteoma.
Severe tinnitus.  
Left side headaches, TMJ pain, and myofascial pain affecting the muscles of the neck and shoulders. 
Occludes only on the right third molars with all other teeth being out of occlusion.
Facial asymmetry with a transverse cant of the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm lower than the left side.
Vertical maxillary excess. 
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
AP microgenia.
Anterior vertical mandibular excess.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:	
 
Bilateral TMJ injections with Marcaine to evaluate effects on tinnitus and left-sided headaches and TMJ pain.
Coronal MRI of left and right TMJs.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgical Option 1.
Left TMJ arthroplasty to remove the posterior aspect of the condylar head and other bony exostoses that may be identified on the coronal MRI view.
Left TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen). 
Surgical Option 2. 
Left TMJ arthroplasty to remove the posterior aspect of the condylar head and other bony exostoses that may be identified on the coronal MRI view.
Left TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral sagittal split osteotomies to transversely level the mandible, decrease the occlusal plane, and shift it posteriorly.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to transversely level the occlusal plane, level the AP occlusal plane, and upright the incisors.
Vertical reduction AP augmentation genioplasty.
Consider removal of mandibular third molars and maxillary right third molar. 
Right TMJ surgery if indicated from further evaluations to be completed.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.




JINSUN PARK									05/09/2008

I injected the left TMJ with about 1.8 cc of Marcaine.  This took her headache away and did decrease the tinnitus.  She still had her usual hypersensitivity to certain sounds, particularly male voices seem to create sensitivity to her, but the tinnitus particularly in moving her left arm was decreased.  She is to keep a diary and keep me informed and to call me next week to let me know the results.  
