EMILY PARKER									09-16-02

Emily is 15 years old and referred by Dr. Grant Giles, 4214 Andrews Highway, Midland, TX  79703.

Patient History

Emily’s problems began on February 14, 2002 (St. Valentine’s Day), during an asthma attack. She was in a hospital room and went into a severe coughing spell with her asthma, and it caused her lower jaw to become dislocated. She started clicking and popping in the jaw joints after that and started developing her headaches and jaw pain. In March, she was placed into a bite splint by Dr. Grant Giles. She also has had physical therapy as well. Neither the splint nor the combination with physical therapy has been able to reduce her pain and headache levels. In fact, the PT made the pain worse. The only medications she has been on for her joint problem is Tylenol. The other medications that may be of benefit to her are contraindicated because of the potential for triggering another severe asthma attack.

She has no problems with earaches. She gets tinnitus about every week or two, and she gets occasional vertigo. Other joints:  She has very mild scoliosis, but it is asymptomatic. Her hips pop but otherwise are asymptomatic. She has a little bit of problem with her ankles. 

SHE IS ALLERGIC TO AUGMENTIN, AND SHE ALSO HAS SOME FOOD ALLERGIES SUCH AS BANANAS, AVACADOS, PECANS, ETC. She is not aware of any jewelry problems, although her sister has a fairly significant reaction to jewelry.

She does have a history since early childhood of asthma. She is aware that she has nocturnal clenching. 

She usually wakes up with headaches in the morning. In the past, her headaches have been in a severe range, although currently they run at about a level of 4 in the frontal and temporal areas. Her headaches occur daily. She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 8 on the right side, 5 on the left side, overall pain at 6, jaw function at 8, diet at 9, disability at 6. 

She is having some conjunctivitis that has been present for about two weeks. She apparently had a bout of this six weeks ago. The conjunctivitis is worse this time as compared to six weeks ago.

Patient Concerns

Closed lock situation.
Popping in the jaw joints.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Difficulty sleeping and the fact that when she rolls over on her side, it can trigger pain and discomfort that will awaken her.

Current Medications

Zyrtec 10 mg q.d. 
Advair 500/50, 1 puff b.i.d.
Singulair 10 mg q.d. 
Albuterol p.r.n. 
Tylenol.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, she has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 17 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is probably about 3 mm. She does have fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry but a little bit increased fullness on the right side as compared to the left side. Maxillary dental midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin are fairly well aligned with each other. 

In profile, she has good facial symmetry and balance.

Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Has adequate attached gingiva. The labial frenulum is quite highly attached. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars as well. Upper lateral incisors have significant rotations. She has retained primary C in the left upper quadrant, and the permanent cuspid is above it and erupted through. She has just a slight Class II cuspid relationship. 

Intranasally, the septum is deviated off the left side slightly. Left turbinate is fairly enlarged and seems to have some constricture of the airway on that side. Airway on the right side looks better. Doesn’t seem to be any significant inflammatory response with the turbinates.

Oropharynx appears clear.

To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the TMJ areas and styloid areas, and she has mild pain over the posterior neck, SCMs, and very mild pain over the masseters and medial pterygoids. Maximum incisal opening is about 23 mm and opening without significant pain about 15 mm, excursive movement to the right about 4 mm, and to the left 5 mm.

On opening, she has a demonstrable audible pop in the right TMJ at about 15 mm of opening and a closing click on that side at probably about 10. On the left side, the opening is about 20 mm and 15 mm of closing. Jaw deviates off to the right then back to the left prior to opening. Mandible deviates off to the left probably about 4 or 5 mm on her opening.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars. She also has a retained maxillary left C with a permanent cuspid erupting in over top of that tooth. Sinuses look relatively clear. Left nasal airway looks clear, although there appears to be some obstruction on the right side. Condyles look as though they may be flattened a little bit on the anterior aspect but otherwise look fine. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is positioned superiorly and posteriorly in the fossa. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that may be a little flattened on the superior aspect but for the most part appears to have reasonable architecture with just some mild degenerative changes. Decreased superior joint space is present. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

On opening, there is severe restriction of translation in both TMJs.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. The septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side, and the left turbinate appears large compared to the right side.

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class I relationship with just a slight Class II occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway looks good. Appears to have reasonably good facial profile.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption and articular disc dislocations with closed lock.
Mandibular hyperplasia.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4.
Significantly malrotated maxillary lateral incisors.
Retained maxillary left primary cuspid and malaligned maxillary left cuspid.
Slight Class II end-on occlusal relationship.

Recommended Treatment

Continued splint therapy

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch, trying to correct the malrotations in the maxillary lateral incisors. Extract the maxillary left primary cuspid and begin to bring the left cuspid into occlusion.
Place orthodontic appliances on the lower teeth just prior to surgery so that Emily can benefit from the splint therapy until that time.


Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to correct the occlusion (this may or may not be necessary).
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion