ASHLEY PAIRITZ									05/07/2007 

Ashley is 22 years old.  She has a skin condition and some foot problems.  She has had a hernia repair when she was 5.  She has a skin condition that would come and go.  She has eczema on her left hand.  She finally went to a dermatologist who treated it and that condition has not returned since the spring of 2006.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Pain in the jaws on a daily basis with chewing and even talking.
Headaches.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Difficulties breathing through her nose and predominately a mouth breather.
Mild snoring and daytime tiredness.

Ashley's problems began as far as she is aware of when she was about 19 years old.  This was when she started college and the stresses of college she believes caused her to clench and grind her teeth.  It was at this time that she developed some of the pain problems.  However, previous to that time she had orthodontics at the age of 12 with a Herbst appliance and a palatal expander.  She was then placed in full braces from the age of 13 to 16.  She developed the problems as mentioned above and then she went back into braces in October of 2006 and these were placed by Dr. Kingdon Brady, in West Lafayette, Indiana.  She has had several splints starting in October of 2004.  She even had acupuncture performed in September of 2006 but this gave her very short-term relief.  

She currently takes aspirin p.r.n. for pain and she takes birth control pills.  She gets occasional earaches, occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  The only other joints that really bother her include her right hand.  She has an allergy to penicillin.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night and also she clenches during the day.  

She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 6, jaw function 5, diet at 5, disability at 5.  She gets headaches 3 to 4 times per week at a level of 6 that occur behind her eyes and probably involve the frontal and temporal areas. 

In frontal view, Ashley has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  There may be just a slight orbital dystopia with the right side being about 2 mm higher than the left side.  In the profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably about 3 mm.  Maxilla is AP deficient by probably a good 6 to 8 mm.  Chin is retruded by about 15+ mm.  Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, she is missing the first bicuspids in all 4 quadrants.  She has some buildups on the crowns of the second molars.  She has braces on all the lower teeth except for the left second molar.  She has appliances on all the upper posterior teeth.  In centric relation she has an end-on Class II cuspid relationship being about 3 to 4 mm Class II.  She has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm.  Slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1 mm higher than the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  The uvula and soft palate are relatively normal.  
ASHLEY PAIRITZ				05/07/2007 				Page 2

Faucial pillars look moderately constricted.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated just slightly off to the right side at the base.  Turbinates appear fairly large and a little bit boggy that seems to cause some significant airway obstruction.  She does have some mild to moderate snoring.  Apparently the history of snoring was greater when she was younger as compared to now.  She does have daytime somnolence of probably a moderate amount.  She is not aware of overt sleep apnea problems.  To palpation, she has really severe pain over the TMJs and high moderate pain over the styloid area, masseters, moderate pain over the temporalis, SCMs and milder tenderness over the medial pterygoids at the posterior neck area.  Maximal incisal opening is 45 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is 7, left 10 mm. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars and all 4 first bicuspids.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  Condyles appear small and a little bit arthritic.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The bony septum is reasonably straight with a little bit deviation off to the right side. Turbinates are enlarged particularly on the left side.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned and superiorly positioned in the fossa.   A little pseudocyst in the condylar head.  Articular eminence is quite long and fairly steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have undergone some resorption.  There is decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is extremely long and more vertical than the opposite side.  There appears to be some anterior beaking on the condyle.  There may be a pseudocyst in the head of the condyle.  On opening, there is restricted translation although the condyles come down to the posterior aspect of the slope of the eminence.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Ashley has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology and anterior open bite.  She has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway is significantly decreased.  She appears to have significant adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx.  Oropharyngeal airway between the turbinate and the adenoid tissue appears to be about 4 mm.  Airway space at the base of the tongue of the posteropharyngeal wall is about 4 to 5 mm and the base of the tongue appears to be approximately 6 to 7 mm.  She has a head postured forward neck position.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction.
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP mandibular deficiency.
High occlusal plane angle.
ASHLEY PAIRITZ				05/07/2007 				Page 3

Class II end-on occlusion. 
Anterior open bite.
Occluding only on the second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion. 
 Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Hypertrophied adenoid tissue.
 Nasal airway obstruction. 
 Prominently a mouth breather.
 Missing all 4 first bicuspids and all 4 third molars.
 TMJ pain.
 Headaches.
 Myofascial pain.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomy to advance the mandible forward in a counterclockwise direction (approximately 18 mm.)  
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 8 mm and downgraft it posteriorly to level the occlusal plane.
Bilateral inferior turbinectomies. 
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
