RENEE PACE								02/21/2011

Renee is 48 years old.  Primary concerns are she has difficulties opening her mouth wide, difficulties chewing and jaw locking as well as headaches and TMJ pain.  Renee has had clicking and popping in her joints for many years, but it has only become problematic since about 2006 at the age of 43.  The only treatment she has had is a bite splint that she has had for about 3 years.  She gets headaches about a level of 4 two to three times per week in the temporal area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 7, diet at 6, disability at 5.  She does take ibuprofen and Aleve for her headaches.  Renee gets occasional earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo.  She has a mild hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her right hip and knees, which are all bothered by degenerative arthritic condition.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime.  Renee has essentially a Class I occlusion.  She had orthodontics as a teenager with four bicuspids extracted.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She had second bicuspids removed in all four quadrants.  Sinuses look clear.  Turbinates appear enlarged.

Coronal view shows that she has a deviated septum off towards the left side.  The turbinates are fairly large and appear to block most of the airway.  Sinuses appear clear.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear, but the turbinates are quite large and fill most of the oral cavity.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a fairly good shape with just some slight anterior beaking.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  The joint space appears fairly well balanced.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology, but with anterior beaking present.  The joint space is reasonably balanced.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship with an anterior deep bite.  Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat decreased in dimension, but she may have her head tipped downwards excessively.  

Diagnoses for Renee would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations.
Relative mandibular hyperplasia. 
Anterior deep bite of 6 to 7 mm.
Missing maxillary and mandibular second bicuspids.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism.

Treatment plan would be:

1.	Medications:  Klonopin 1 mg tablet, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x3.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion but create 			space for the discs.  