RHONDA OWENS									07-08-02

Rhonda is 40 years old.

Patient History

Rhonda is in good health except for joint problems. She has allergy and sinus problems pretty much year around. She also has some difficulties breathing through her nose. She has arthritis in the left jaw joint and left elbow. She has a past history of stomach ulcers but nothing recently. She has had some problems with anemia but is on an iron medication now and not having much difficulty with that currently.

Current Medications

She takes the following medications:

Paxil 40 mg, 1 per day.
Celebrex 200 mg per day.
Iron 50 mg q.d.
Calcium 600 mg.
Multivitamins q.d.

Patient Concerns

Primary concerns that Rhonda has include the following:

Left TMJ pain.
Bilateral headaches.
Decreased ability to open the jaws particularly involving the left side.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Some difficulties breathing through her nose.
Daytime and nighttime clenching and bruxing.

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. She gets daily headaches at a level of 5 that occur in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain at 9, overall pain at 8, jaw function at 7, diet at 5, disability at 1. 

Rhonda believes her TMJ problems began in the teenage years when the joints started to click and pop, although they didn’t really cause her any significant problems. The onset was of an unknown etiology. Approximately two years ago, she was involved in an MVA and since that time has developed the pain factors as well as the significant difficulty in opening her mouth. She was placed on splint therapy approximately three years ago, and this was made by Dr. Edward Lutz. She then had equilibration, some physical therapy, and an additional splint made by Dr. Callison. She then was referred to Dr. Jim Bates, who made yet another splint for her. The last splint is an anterior bite appliance that just occludes the posterior teeth, and this does help keep her from grinding her teeth at night.
Clinical Evaluation

Rhonda has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 5 mm. Maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin.

In profile view, she has some AP deficiency in the maxilla of probably about 3 mm or so. Mandible and chin appear somewhat retruded. Chin-neckline is short and not well defined. Chin is probably about 10 mm AP deficient.

Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the third molar on the right side and second molar on the left side. Some significant wear on the lower anterior teeth. She has good attached gingiva. Lower teeth appear to be in a lingual inclination, and there is some moderate crowding there. In the upper arch, she is missing first bicuspids and the left central incisor but has a four-unit bridge to replace the left central incisor. She also is missing the left second molar, but the third molar is in the third molar position. On the right side, she still has her right third molar. She has an accentuated curved of occlusion in the lower arch and reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch resulting in probably an 8 to 9-mm deep-bite relationship. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship. Oropharynx appears clear. 

Intranasally, she has a significantly deviated nasal septum off towards the left side that blocks some of the nasal airway. Turbinates are of moderate size, but the left nasal airways appears to be somewhat blocked because of the deviated septum and moderate-sized turbinate on that side. 

She has a transverse cant with the left side of the maxilla and mandible being about 2 mm lower on the left side than the right side. Incisal opening is maximally about 34 mm counting her deep overbite but only about 28 mm without significant pain and discomfort. Excursive movement to the right 8 mm and to the left 9 mm. To palpation, she has some moderate discomfort over the left masseter, left TMJ, and some mild tenderness over the left temporalis muscle. On opening, she has definite clicks in both TMJs at probably about 15 mm on the left side and 20 mm on the right side with closing clicks at about 10 mm. There is some crepitation particularly on the left side. She is aware of having nocturnal and nighttime clenching and bruxism. Other joints that bother her include her left elbow and her knees. Her mother also had a history of TMJ problems.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows a deviated nasal septum and decreased airway on the left side. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Missing maxillary left central incisor, first bicuspid, second molar, with the third molar in place and missing the right first bicuspid. In the lower arch, she is missing bilateral first bicuspids and left third molar with the right third molar in position. She has a root canal on the maxillary left lateral incisor. She has a full unit bridge to replace the missing left central incisor. TMJ joints show some arthritic changes particularly on the left side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some sclerosis on it. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. There appears to be a pseudocyst within the condylar head indicative of just alteration of the trabecular pattern.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears small in size and perhaps some evidence of previous condylar resorption. It is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Increased superior joint space at least at the level that these cuts were performed. A little sclerosis on the head of the condyle and some mild anterior beaking.

Open views show there is slightly better translation of the right condyle as compared to the left one, which does not quite reach the inferior aspect of the articular eminence.

Waters view demonstrates septal deviation off towards the left side and a relatively large turbinate on that side with significantly decreased airway on the left side as compared to the right side. Sinuses, however, appear relatively clear. She has large frontal sinuses. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph evaluation shows that Rhonda has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship and a Class II skeletal relationship. Airways appear reasonably good.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with the left side being worse than the right side.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Severe anterior deep-bite of 9 mm.
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch.
Accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch.
Reverse curve of occlusion, upper arch.
Missing maxillary left central incisor (replaced with a pontic), left first bicuspid and second molar, missing maxillary right first bicuspid, missing mandibular left first bicuspid, third molar, and mandibular right first bicuspid.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Significant attrition of the lower anterior teeth.
Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism.
Deviated nasal septum.
Moderately hypertrophied left turbinate.
Left nasal airway obstruction.


Recommended Treatment

Medications to try to control nocturnal and daytime clenching and bruxism (i.e. Klonopin, Parafon Forte, Soma, etc.

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Try to decrease the accentuated curve of occlusion.
Align and level mandibular arch. Try to decrease the accentuated curve of occlusion. May need a bite splint to open the bite adequately to achieve the presurgical orthodontic movements because of the severe deep-bite relationship.

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward, reduce the accentuated curve of occlusion, and correct any transverse problems that may be present.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Nasoseptoplasty.
Left partial inferior turbinectomy.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

Other Systems

She does have problem with the left elbow and with her knees. She had a lot of urinary tract infections in her late teens and early 20s. She has some polyuria and nocturia x 1 to 2. Periods are currently irregular. She has three children, ages 18, 15, and 6. She recently was told that she has either an ovarian cyst or fibroid tumor of the uterus but not sure how significant that is. She had a conization in 1984 for a cervical lesion. She did have frequent vaginal yeast infections in her 20s. She has been told she has mild periodontal disease. No problems with her eyes, and she has had previous Lasik surgery. She has some chronic sinus problems. She has some loss of hearing on the left side but no other ear symptoms. She gets some recurrent sore throats and about once a year gets hoarseness or laryngitis. She had pneumonia times one two or three years ago. No GI problems and no reported STDs. She does have some chronic fatigue problems. She has some short-term memory loss. No significant association with birds, although her mother-in-has a parrot that she was around about once a week for about five years. No cats. She has had dogs most of her life but is not aware of any of them catching birds and eating birds. There are some horses on the adjacent properties to hers but no other exposure to hoofed animals. No history of implants. I gave Rhonda a prescription for Klonopin 0.5 mg, disp. 20 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x 3. She is to call next week and let me know how she is doing on the medication.