SORINGA PARKS									    02-02-05

Soringa is 34 years old. Soringa is referred by Dr. Al Bishop.

Patient History

Soringa was born with a unilateral left cleft lip and dentoalveolus but not a palate. She had some repairs as an infant. Soringa had her first surgery when she was three months old. She had initial lip repair done when she was three months old. Then at the age of 8 she had some additional work performed. Then at the age of 16 she had work done on her lip and nose by Dr. Jack Gunter. Then when she was 30 but had two additional procedures by Dr. Steve Byrd. She has seen other doctors including Dr. Al Bishop, Dr. Louis Miller, Dr. Danny Dugan, and Dr. Tom Wilson. Soringa has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo and no hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her knees. She has some seasonal allergies and has had a reaction to PENICILLIN. She can’t wear cheap earrings. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime, and she may do that also during the day. Soringa smokes five cigarettes per week. She has have five cleft lip and nose repairs and revisions. She did have ortho in her early teens and maybe as early as the age of 10 to straighten up some of the teeth. Her most recent orthodontics began in the summer of 2004. She is unaware of when her jaw joint problems may have begun, and the etiology is also unknown. She gets headaches about once or twice a week that she rates about a level of 4, and they occur predominantly in the frontal and temporal areas. She is not aware of having any significant pain in the jaw joints. She rates her average daily pain at 1. She rates her jaw function and diet at 2 and disability at 0. 

She currently takes no medications. 

Soringa is aware of snoring problems at a moderate level. She is not sure if she has daytime tiredness any more than anyone else, and she is not aware of having any sleep apnea problems. 

Patient Concerns

Teeth and jaws are not aligned and do not fit together well
Unrepaired cleft in the upper jaw on the left side
Instability of the upper left lateral incisor
Difficulties breathing through the nose
Snoring
Lower jaw is retruded
Headaches
Discomfort in the jaw joint area

Clinical Examination

Soringa has a really nice repair on her upper lip and nose. Upper lip length is 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -2 mm. Maxillary midline is 1 mm to the left and the mandibular dental midline and chin are 3 mm to the left. As Soringa shifts her mandible 4 mm toward the right side, her facial symmetry improves.

In profile view, Soringa has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose, but the upper lip could be posteriorly positioned maybe a couple of millimeters. Chin is AP deficient by probably about 15 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short, and chin-neck angle is poorly defined. She doesn’t have too much distance between her trachea and her chin, although there is probably about 30 mm from chin point back to the soft tissues over the trachea. As Soringa postures her mandible forward as far as she can, and with a little extra fill out of the upper lip of probably 2 to 3 mm, it significantly improves her overall facial balance. She does appear a little bit vertically short in the mandibular height.

Intraorally, Soringa has all of her lower teeth. Teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and leveled. Anteroposteriorly, she appears to have fairly good symmetry. Has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has a deformed maxillary left lateral incisor, and the tooth appears quite small in size as does the other lateral incisor. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being probably about 4 to 5 mm Class II on the right side and about 5 to 6 mm Class II on the left side. She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm. Oropharynx appears clear, and tissues appear healthy. Uvula, soft palate length, and faucial pillars all appear relatively normal. 

Intranasally, the turbinate on the left side is moderately hyperplastic and may cause a little bit of airway obstruction more posteriorly. Nasal septum is deviated off toward the right side at the anterior portion and actually is visible in the right naris area. She has a relatively wide columella base but in part this is due to flaring of the alar base on the left side and to the septal cartilage being deviated off to the right side. Holding the left nostril open with the scope enabled Soringa to breathe much easier through that side. On the right side, it did improve her but not quite as dramatically as it did on the left side. 

Maximal incisal opening for Soringa is about 50 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 10 mm and to the left 8 mm. On opening, initially the joints seemed to function very smoothly, but then I had her open extremely wide, and she did have an opening pop on the right side at approximately 45 mm and a closing pop at about 15 mm. This is indicative of displaced disc but reducing on wide opening. In the left joint, she had crepitus on that side. She had no tenderness around the muscles in the head and neck area with just some mild tenderness in the TMJ areas. She does have a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1 to 1.5 mm higher than the right side. 

Soringa has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of probably at least 2.5 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. These were removed about a year ago. Sinuses are probably reasonably clear. Left nasal airway may be obstructed. Maxillary left lateral incisor has a very short root and appears malformed. There may be a continuity defect in the alveolar bone in the area. Soringa reports that Dr. Dugan was able to identify an oronasal fistula present in the area. Appears to have significant bilateral TMJ arthritis with the left side worse than the right side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has rather advanced arthritis present with sclerosis and significant flattening of the head of the condyle. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Appears to be decreased vertical joint space, although the posterior joint space doesn’t look too bad. 

Right TMJ shows a condyle that also has some arthritic changes. There is a pseudocyst on the head of the condyle. Decreased vertical joint space. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. A little sclerosis on the head of the condyle. 

On opening, there is good translation of both joints. Clinically, on the right side the disc does reduce; on the left side, it does not. Condyles come anterior to the articular eminence. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear and appear fairly healthy. Bony septum at least is straight, although clinically the cartilaginous septum is off to the right side. Turbinates are moderately enlarged, although there could possibly be some air space there. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a fairly significant Class II occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway is significantly reduced with an AP airway at the soft palate/uvula area of only about 3 mm. At the base of the tongue, it ranges from about 4 mm to about 6 mm. Down by the hyoid bone, the AP dimension is only about 3 mm. She has a skeletal and occlusal Class II jaw relationship and high occlusal plane angle and high mandibular plane angle. 

Basic Diagnoses

Repaired unilateral left cleft lip and dentoalveolus
Maxillary left alveolar cleft
Oropharyngeal fistula, left anterior maxilla
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe deformation
AP maxillary deficiency
Vertical maxillary deficiency 
AP mandibular deficiency
Mandibular vertical deficiency
High occlusal plane angle 
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of about 3 mm
Snoring
Rule out sleep apnea
Class II occlusion 
Malformed maxillary left lateral incisor
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction 
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm+

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Tip maxillary incisor teeth forward approximately 2 mm by opening up space around the upper lateral incisors to equal about 1.5 mm in each lateral incisor area
Continue to align and level mandibular arch

CT scan of jaw joints and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it
Closure of oronasal fistula
Bone graft to maxilla and maxillary alveolar cleft
Harvest bone graft from iliac crest
Bilateral partial turbinectomies
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy with HA grafting

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Osseointegrated implant to maxillary left lateral incisor area

Dental reconstruction of maxillary left lateral incisor