PATRICIA PARK									01/07/2011
DOB:	07/08/1984
AGE:	26

Patricia is a first year orthodontic graduate student.  She has had previous orthodontics with maxillary first bicuspid extractions.  She has also had her wisdom teeth removed.  Primary concerns she has are:

Retruded maxilla and mandible.
Difficulties breathing through her nose.
Myofascial pain.

She gets headaches about once every 2 weeks at a level of 4 in the temple area.  She has no direct TMJ pain.  She rates her average daily pain at about 3.  She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability at 0.  The incisal opening is normal with good excursion movements.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  She has not trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and also some during the day.

CLINICAL EXAM.  Upper lip length is 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 4.5 mm.  The maxillary midline is shifted about 1 mm to the right as is the mandibular dental midline.  Chin is shifted 2 to 3 mm to the right.  There is a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 1 mm vertically shorter than the left side.  She is basically a Class I cuspid relationship and is missing maxillary first bicuspids.  In profile, upper lip is retruded about 2 to 3 mm and chin is retruded about 15 mm.  She has about 8 mm of lip incompetence.  She has a Class I occlusion and 0 overbite relationship.  She has bilateral posterior cross bites.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Turbinates are enlarged and she likely has some moderate nasal airway obstruction.  Patricia is not aware of snoring, daytime somnolence or sleep apnea.  She is a mouth breather particularly when she sleeps.

Radiographic evaluation shows the absence of all four third molars and maxillary first bicuspids.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are quite large and appear to obliterate most of the airway. 

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates are quite large and appear to block most of the airway.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condylar head and neck that are larger than the opposite site.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  There is decreased posterior joint space.  The disc might be just slightly anteriorly displaced.  Out laterally, there is an increased anterior joint space and further decreased posterior joint space and some flattening on the head of the condyle.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology and is smaller than the opposite side.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  There is decreased posterior joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is narrower than the opposite side.  The joint space appears fairly reasonable.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is actually wider than the left side.  There is a little lateral extrusion of the lateral pole of the condyle.  The fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  The joint space looks fairly reasonable.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  There is anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia.  The mandible is retruded.  There is AP microgenia.  The lower incisors are over angulated.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate measures about 5 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 7.5 to 8 mm.  She does have some lip incompetence.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Rule out bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations.
Maxillary anterior vertical hyperplasia and AP and transverse hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral posterior cross bites.
Anterior open bite tendency. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJs.
2.	Orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots 			distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at 			least 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly, decrease the occlusal plane 			angle, and expand.
	b.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies to rotate in a counterclockwise direction.  
	c.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
	d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
	e.	Consider TMJ surgery if MRI confirms articular disc dislocations.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 