B104
B104 is 20 years old. B104 is a self-referral by her mother. B104 states that her TMJ problems began when she was about 14 of unknown etiology. She had had some orthodontics beginning about the age of 8 with various appliances for palatal expansion, etc. At age 12, fixed appliances were placed. She had orthognathic surgery in 3 years and 2 months ago to include maxillary osteotomies and a bony chin augmentation. Appliances were removed 2 years ago. Her bite was good at that time and then started to shift and change about a year after the surgery. She was placed in retainers after orthodontic appliances were removed and then she has been in a splint for the past 8 months. Apparently, she had her orthodontic appliances removed prior to her surgery, but then the bite began to change so they were put back on again. She was then placed in retainers. She gets headaches at a level of 10 about 3 times per week. She rates her TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 5, diet at 2, disability at 5. There are times when she is at school that she has to go to the emergency room for pain relief. She has no earaches but gets occasional tinnitus and does get some vertigo. No other joints bother her. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. She takes the following medications:

Vivanesse 50 mg q.d.
NuvaRing (for birth control).
Axert p.r.n. pain.
Bone maker (vitamins and calcium). Hydrocodone as needed for severe pain.
In frontal view, B104 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 4 mm. The maxillary midline is just slightly off to the right about 1 mm. The mandibular dental midline and chin are pretty close to being on the facial midline. She has a lip incompetence of about 9 mm. She shows some of her lower incisors. In profile, she has maxillary AP deficiency of probably a good 6 to 8 mm. The chin is retruded about 20 mm. The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is moderately well defined. She does have a head postured forward neck position. She does have some nasal dorsal prominence. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch. She has very thin tissue around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has a little bit of crowding developing in the upper arch. She has an anterior open bite of about 3 mm. She is slight Class II occlusal relationship by about 2 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. Turbinates may be moderately enlarged. She does report mild snoring, but no daytime somnolence or sleep apnea. She has some mild sleep disorder and at nighttime breathes predominantly through her mouth. To palpation, she has some moderate pain over the TMJs and very mild tenderness over the masseters and retromandibular area. Maximal opening is 45 mm. The excursion movement to the right is 8 mm, to the left 9 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars. Four bone plates are present in the maxilla and a bone plate in the chin area. A 3 x 3 retainer is present in the lower arch. The condylar head and necks look severely arthritic and very narrow anteroposteriorly. The right turbinate appears somewhat enlarged.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. The right turbinate is quite large, but the left one is a little bit more normal in size. The septum appears reasonably straight.

Axial view shows that the septum is fairly straight and the right turbinate is hyperplastic. There appears to be increased mucosal thickening along the right posterior sinus wall.

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has undergone significant condylar resorption. The condyle is very narrow anteroposteriorly. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. There is decreased posterior and posterior superior joint space and the anterior joint space is excessive. There is significant evidence of loss of vertical and anteroposterior condylar volume.

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram show a condyle that is very narrow anteroposteriorly. There is significant evidence of loss of vertical and anteroposterior condylar volume. The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost of vertical volume and there is decreased mediolateral dimension. The joint space appears fairly normal. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost significant vertical volume and mediolateral dimension as well. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B104 has a retruded maxilla and mandible. She has a high occlusal plane angle and an anterior open bite. The lower incisors may be over angulated as well as the uppers to a certain degree. There is a decreased oropharyngeal airway space with an AP dimension at the soft palate level of about 6 mm and at the base of the tongue about 3.5 mm. She does have a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.

Basic diagnoses for B104 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis (adolescent internal condylar resorption: AICR).
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia as well as anterior vertical hyperplasia. Slight Class II end-on occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle of 24 degrees (normal angulation 8 degrees).
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of 3 mm (normal airway dimension 11 mm).
Over angulation of maxillary and mandibular incisors.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Removal of mandibular third molars x2.
2. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to accommodate interdental osteotomies. b.	Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Consider slenderizing lower anterior teeth removing 1 or 2 mm at the very most of tooth structure and retract to decrease the over angulation.
3. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
4. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect upwards, posterior aspect downwards, level the occlusal plane, and upright the incisors. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B104 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is very narrow mediolaterally with significant loss of vertical condylar volume. Articular disc is seen to be medially displaced and anteriorly displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is very narrow in transverse width with significant loss of vertical volume. The lateral rim is quite flat. There appears to be discal tissue medial and anterior to the condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes with loss of vertical volume and anteroposterior volume as well. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is short anteroposteriorly and somewhat thickened. There is amorphous tissue surrounding the condyle. The condyle is posteriorly and superiorly positioned in the fossa with decreased superior and posterior joint spaces. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle, but the disc is non-reducing and remains anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has lost a lot of vertical height and anteroposterior dimension as well. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. The articular disc is anteriorly positioned and sitting beneath the articular eminence. There is a little bit of fluid in the inferior joint space. The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with a decreased sp and posterior joint space. There is amorphous tissue that appears to be surrounding the condyle. There is good translation of the condyle, but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced, non-reducing, and significantly deformed.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ condylar resorption and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction and with significant degenerative and deformation characteristics. MRI findings are compatible with AICR. The discs may be salvageable yet, although the condyles are quite small in size.

