ELLEN PATERNAL								08/11/2011

I suspect Ellen is in her 40s or perhaps early 50s.  Frontal view shows that she has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  She appears to have a slightly long upper lip.  Tooth lip relationship is unknown as her lips are not relaxed in the frontal view.  Midlines however appear to be fairly good.  In profile, she has a retruded maxilla and retruded mandible.  Chin is slightly strong compared to the AP position of the mandible, but the chin neckline is short and the chin neck angle is not well defined.  She appears to have a scar in her neck likely from previous surgery.  Occlusally, she had upper first bicuspid extractions, but the lower teeth are all present.  The transverse width of the mandible is somewhat narrow.  She appears to have an end-on incisor relationship with a zero anterior overbite.  She has a Class I cuspid relationship bilaterally.  She has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva, although she does have some gingival retraction particularly around the lower bicuspids and first molars.  She may have a tooth size discrepancy.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the maxillary first bicuspids.  She has a chin plate in position from a previous chin advancement.  She has root canal treatment on the maxillary left first molar and mandibular right first molar.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  Chin is strong relative to the rest of the mandible.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  She has basically a Class I occlusal relationship but Class II skeletal relationship.  She has a decreased oropharyngeal airway and possibly sleep apnea problems.  She may also have difficulties breathing through her nose just based on her facial morphology secondary to hypertrophied turbinates.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation and likely non-reducing.  I suspect the TMJ pathology has been present for many years.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
AP macrogenia secondary to previous genioplasty.
Class I cuspid, Class II molar occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.  
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Probable hypertrophied turbinates.
Crowding in lower anterior arch.
Possible tooth size discrepancy.
Possible hypertrophied turbinates and nasal airway obstruction.
Probable headaches, TMJ pain, and myofascial pain. 
Possible ear symptoms such as earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo.
Probable sleep apnea symptoms. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJs to determine TMJ pathology.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize lower anterior teeth 				removing probably about 2 mm of tooth structure to correct the tooth size 			problem and to decrease any more flaring.  Consider widening the lower 			arch some orthodontically.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	TMJ surgery depending on MRI findings, but could include either Mitek	 		anchors to reposition articular discs if they are salvageable versus disc 			replacement versus total joint prostheses.
	b.	Mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction with either total 			joint prostheses or mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies (dependent 			on MRI findings).
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward in a 					counterclockwise direction and probably some moderate expansion.
	d.	Possible bilateral reduction turbinectomies if obstructing the nasal airway.
	e.	AP reduction genioplasty.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.