ASHLEY PATRIACCA								09/20/2010

Ashley is 41 years old and referred by Dr. Al Bishop from his office in Edwards, CO.  Ashley’s primary concern is jaw pain.  Her problems began when she was about 19 years old in 1991 when her joints began to click and pop of unknown etiology.  She did chew lots of gum, several packs per day.  She has had problems since that time, but did not really undergo any treatment until January 2010 when a splint was made for her.  This did decrease her pain levels and also has decreased the occurrence of the popping.  She has no trouble with headaches.  She rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 4, diet at 0, disability at 3.  She takes no medications.  She has no trouble with earaches, vertigo, or hearing loss.  She gets occasional tinnitus.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching her teeth at nighttime and also during the day.  She chews one or two pieces of gum per day now.  

In frontal view, she has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxillary and mandibular midlines are pretty much aligned with each other.  The mandibular dental midline is 1 mm off towards the left side.  The chin is shifted a little bit off to the left side probably about 3 mm.  In profile view, she has fairly good facial balance vertically and anteroposteriorly.  Intraorally, Ashley has all of her teeth back through the second molars except she is missing what appears to be the right central incisor.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has lingual inclination of the maxillary central incisors.  She basically has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and just Class II on the left side by 1 to 2 mm.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  She basically has a division 2 malocclusion.  She has a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1.5 to 2 mm higher than the right side.  Oropharyngeal structures look normal.  Ashley used to have loud popping in both of her joints before she got the splint.  The right joint functions fairly smoothly.  On the left side, there is an inconsistent pop at about 20 mm of opening and 10 mm of closing.  To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the right masseter and milder pain over the left masseter, right retromandibular area, and right shoulder.   The maximal incisal opening is 37 mm.  The excursion movements are about 7 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the mandibular right central incisors. The turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  


Coronal view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear except some slight thickening of the sinus membrane, particularly in the left sinus floor.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear, but the turbinates have a moderate size.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with a decreased posterior and superior joint space.  The anterior joint space is decreased.  The articular eminence has a fairly steep inclination at the medial aspect of the joint and  becomes more elongated with a lesser of a slope at the lateral aspect of the joint.  There is a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle and a little bit of anterior beaking present.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa but not quite as far as the opposite side.  There is increased anterior joint space.  There is some alteration and shift of the condyle and a little sclerosis on the head with some slight anterior beaking.  The articular eminence is steeper towards the medial side of the joint, but longer and lesser slope towards the lateral aspect.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width and may actually extend beyond the lateral rim of the fossa about 2 or 3 mm.  There is decreased superior joint space, particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a little bit greater space, although still decreased.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  There is decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the fossa.  The condyle extends beyond the lateral rim of the fossa probably 2 to 3 mm. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has perhaps a slight skeletal Class II relationship and a slight occlusal Class II relationship.  The upper incisors are vertical in orientation.  The oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal. 

Basic diagnoses for Ashley would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Mandibular hyperplasia.
Slightly Class II occlusion with division 2 relationship. 
Myofascial pain.
TMJ pain.
Missing mandibular right central incisor and all four third molars. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Treat anterior mandible with missing incisor by 			one of two means:
		1)	Tip lower incisors forward opening space for subsequent bonding or 				veneers.
		2)	Open up space in the right central incisor area with subsequent placement 				of an implant and crown.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. 
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to establish good occlusion.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
4.	Restorative dentistry to rebuild the three lower incisors or to place an implant and a 	crown if it is elected to replace the maxillary right incisor.