KYLE PARSONS									05-02-03

Kyle is 13 years old and referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich, Legacy Drive, Plano, TX.

Patient History

Kyle had a hernia repair at the age of 2 years. Kyle has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, headaches, TMJ pain, etc. He states that occasionally in the morning when he starts to open up he will have a pop in his joints. 

Patient Concerns

Kyle’s primary concerns are that his teeth and jaws don’t fit together well.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Kyle has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship would be probably about 3 mm or so. If the teeth were straightened up, it could be as much as 4 mm of tooth-to-lip relationship. Maxillary dental midline is shifted just about a millimeter to the left as is the mandibular dental midline and chin midline. Tip of the nose may be deviated just a little bit off to the right side 1 to 2 mm. 

In profile view, he has good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Chin appears to be deficient probably by about 8 mm or so. Chin-neckline is short, although chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, Kyle has his teeth erupted from the first molars around. Second molar on the left side is starting to erupt through but not much on the right side. Some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch. Attached gingival is quite thin around the lower anterior teeth. Has a high attached labial frenulum. In the upper arch, he has some significant crowding; in fact, the right second bicuspid is blocked lingually. Has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side but Class II end-on by about 5 mm or so on the left side. Has an anterior deep-bite of approximately 8 mm. Has a significant transverse cant in the occlusion with the left cuspid being about 3 mm higher than the right cuspid. Lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. Right maxillary cuspid may be a couple of millimeters posterior to the left cuspid. Oropharynx appears clear. Tonsils are present but just of moderate size.

Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit toward the left side, but turbinates appear relatively small, and he appears that he has a good functional airway. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates are moderate in size. Has a mesiodens between his two central incisors. Maxillary right second bicuspid is blocked out of the arch. Has developing maxillary third molars with really no room for them to erupt in. Lower arch shows that he has all of his teeth down there, and the second molars are developing and erupting in. Third molars are developing, and there will be no room for them to erupt in. It appears there is some crowding in the lower anterior arch. Right condyle looks a little bit flat on top, and the left one appears a little flat at the posterior aspect.

Left TMJ tomogram is a little hard to read, but articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle appears a little bit flattened at the posterior aspect, but it appears there may be adequate joint space around the condyle. 

Right TMJ tomogram again is not a really good image, and it appears that it may not have gotten deep enough in the joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Difficult to evaluate the joint space from this radiograph. May need to repeat those with some deeper cuts. Translation shows fairly good movement of the condyles on both sides. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Nasal septum looks relatively straight. Turbinates appear a little bit enlarged particularly on the right side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Kyle has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship. Has a significant anterior deep-bite of about 8 mm. Has a Class II division II malocclusion. Has a mesiodens in the anterior part of the maxilla. Oropharyngeal airway is a little bit constricted but not too much. Airway measures about 8 mm at the base of the tongue and soft palate area. Does have a large adenoid mass in the nasopharynx that extends probably almost 15 mm beyond the posterior wall of the fossa and comes within 5 mm of the posterior aspect of the turbinates. He has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of about 3.5 mm in the anterior six teeth and probably a good 0.5 mm of tooth-size discrepancy with the lower bicuspids. 

Re-shoots of the tomograms show that there is good joint space present in both joints.

Basic Diagnoses

AP mandibular deficiency
Class II, division II malocclusion
Class I cuspid, Class II molar on the right side and Class II cuspid, Class II molar on the left side
Significant crowding, upper arch, with the right second bicuspid blocked out of the arch in a palatal direction
Moderate crowding, lower anterior arch
Accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch
Anterior deep-bite of about 8 to 9 mm
Mesiodens between the roots of the incisors, but the predominant part of that tooth is on the palatal aspect
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars
Second molars not yet erupted completely in the lower arch
Lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid
Upper arch AP asymmetry with the right cuspid being about 2 mm posterior  to the left cuspid
Cant in the transverse occlusal plane with the right cuspid being about 3 mm lower than the left cuspid, but the first molars may be fairly level
Decreased angulation of the maxillary incisors
AP microgenia
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3.5 mm in the anterior teeth and at least 0.5-mm tooth-size discrepancy in the lower bicuspid area compared to the upper bicuspids

Recommended Treatment

Surgical removal of mesiodens from maxillary anterior palatal aspect

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Increase angulation of maxillary incisors. Try to distally position the right first molar 3 or 4 mm if possible to help make room for the right second bicuspid
Align and level lower arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing up to 2.5 to 3 mm of tooth structure. Can also strip lower bicuspids removing about 0.5 mm of tooth structure from each tooth. This should prevent overangulation of the lower incisors and provide room for eliminating the crowding

Surgery
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
Genioplasty to augment the chin
Surgical removal of four impacted third molars

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

If we can get Kyle setup orthodontically as designed, we may be able to avoid performing maxillary osteotomies and have to work with only the advancement of the mandible. This would make his surgery much easier for him as well as it would allow us to correct his problems perhaps next summer (summer of 2004) as compared to waiting four or five years if he requires maxillary surgery also.