KATHERINE PARNELL								11/09/2006

Katherine is 16 years old, referred by Dr. Clifford, Albuquerque Craniofacial Center 7520 Montgomery NE, Bldg. D #2, Albuquerque, NM 87106.  My conversation today was with Katherine's mother, Margie.  Katherine apparently has had clicking and popping in her TMJs since she was 10 to 11 years of age but was asymptomatic.  Her joints did stop clicking and again she had no symptoms or problems.  On 05/22/2006, Katherine was a victim of an aggravated assault sustaining multiple blows to the face and head.  This started her TMJ problems.  On 08/11/2006, she was involved in a motor vehicle accident that yet worsened her particular problems with her jaws and TMJs.  

PRIMARY PROBLEMS:
Constant pain in the neck, face and jaws.
Inability to eat and chew. 
Unable to attend school or participate in any normal outside activities.
She could only get out of bed for 2 to 4 hours maximum per day.  
No pain medication has been of any help to give her even temporary relief.  
All treatments to date including medications, physical therapy, splint therapy etc. have failed. 
Significant sleep disorder is worsening and she is only able to get 2 to 4 hours of sleep per night.
Increased pain with swallowing.
Nausea. 

She has had previous arthrocentesis performed and her mouth was cracked open to 51 mm.  She suffered severe pain after that manipulation.  Apparently she was unable to open her jaw more than a few mm.  At one time she was either heavily sedated or put asleep and impressions were obtained and a splint made.  However, she was unable to open wide enough to even get the splint in her mouth.  She will be undergoing myofascial therapy in the very near future.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Ativan.
Valium 5 to 10 mg.

She has taken a steroid pack for a week without effect.  She has taken cyclobenzaprine, pain medications, sleeping medications, and antidepressants that have had apparently no effect on her at all.  She has had an adverse reaction to amoxicillin, penicillin and has had adverse reactions to antidepressants.  Anti-inflammatory medications upset her stomach.  She apparently has had fainting spells associated with amoxicillin and Wellbutrin.  

PREVIOUS SURGERIES: 
Removal of wrist ganglion in September of 2005.
Bilateral arthrocentesis September 15, 2006.



KATHERINE PARNELL			11/09/2006				Page 2

OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS:
Depression.
Anxiety.
Insomnia.
Hiatal hernia. 
Acid reflux.
Muscle spasms in the back, neck and shoulders. 

She is aware of clenching at night and also during the day.  She gets occasional ringing in her ears and has lightheadedness and dizziness.  She does suffer from depression.  Other joints that bother her include her hips and her back but she says that everything hurts.  She rates her headaches at a level of 8 throughout her head in all areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 9, jaw function and diet at 9, disability at 10.  She gets vertigo and occasional tinnitus but no earaches.  

Apparently she hears grinding kind of noises in the right TMJ.  She does report having severe daytime somnolence but is unaware of having sleep apnea problems.  She has severe difficulty sleeping at night.  She does toss and turn a lot.  Her legs and arms jerk at night.  

PREVIOUS TREATMENTS:
Braces from 1998 to 2000.
Arthrocentesis in September of 2006.
Splint made but cannot insert as the patient cannot open wide enough.
Physical therapy 2 to 3 times per week.
TMJ treatment with attempts at discal capturing.
Cervical work from August 16 though October 28, 2006.

Katherine is quite desperate and in significant need of help.  She does try to open her jaws.  Her lower jaw shifts towards the left side.  She cannot open her jaw at all straight.  She has to shift it a little bit towards the left side before she can open the minimal amount that she can open.  She currently does not go to school because of her severe pain problems and inability to get out of bed.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of all 4 third molars.  The sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size and the bony septum appears reasonably straight.  She has 4 bony impacted third molars.  

The left condyle appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The left condyle appears arthritic with flattening on the anterior aspect with a little bit of anterior beaking.  




KATHERINE PARNELL			11/09/2006				Page 3

Right TMJ shows flattening on the anterior head of the condyle with some anterior beaking present. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a slight Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship.  A little bit of an overjet of about 2 to 3 mm is present.  Oropharyngeal airway looks good.  Increased occlusal plane angle.

Left TMJ coronal view shows flattening on the lateral aspect of the condyle with what appears to be some erosive changes.  There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows presence of obvious erosions on the lateral two-thirds of the condyle with loss of vertical height.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with erosive changes though not as severe as the opposite side.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant erosive changes particularly at the lateral aspect of the condyle.  Vertical joint space is actually increased in some of the views but it appears more normal towards the more medial aspect of the joint.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There could be some erosive changes in the fossa as well.  

Axial view shows that the condyles appear somewhat arthritic.  Sinuses are clear and nasal airway looks reasonably clear.  There are no pictures of her occlusion.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ reactive arthritis with erosions being worse on the right side compared to the left.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations without reduction and severe degeneration particularly on the right side.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Severe myofascial pain.
Severe masticatory dysfunction.
Sleep disorder.
Rule out connective tissue autoimmune disease.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Laboratory test to help rule out connective tissue autoimmune disease (i.e. rheumatoid factor, ANA, ESR, chlamydia antibody titers, mycoplasma antibody titers, C-reactive protein, etc.)
CT scan of TMJs and jaws, (TMJ Concepts protocol.)

KATHERINE PARNELL			11/08/2006				Page 4

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and small mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
Application of arch bars.
Fat grafts of bilateral TMJs (harvest from the abdomen.)  

I believe this is the best treatment available for her to try to eliminate her severe pain and dysfunctional problems.  