LINDA DARLENE PARROTT							12/12/2006

Linda is 53 years old and is referred by Dr. Riley Lunn, 5323 Brainerd Rd., Ste 106, Chattanooga, TN, 37411.  Her primary concerns are pain affecting the TMJs, jaws, ears and head and headaches.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: 
Lotrel 5/40 mg.
Zoloft 100 mg daily.
Levothyroxine 75 mcg daily.
Crestor 10 mg daily.
Carisoprodol (Som) p.r.n. 

Darlene's problems began at the age of 14 in about 1995 or 1996.  She had sinus surgery around 1995 or 1996 and was put to sleep for that surgery.  It was shortly after that when she became aware of having TMJ problems.  Additional surgeries she had included her gallbladder around 1980 and then in March of 2006, she had a uterus and gallbladder suspension procedure performed.  

Her right joint has always been worse than the left side until very recently where the left side now hurts more than the right side.  Previous treatments include treatment by Dr. Hammond who used splints beginning in about 1995 or 1996.  She has been wearing splints for 11 years.  Dr. Hammond also put her on exercises.  She was not doing well but unfortunately in October of 2005, she fell off a ladder while painting and broke a bone in her right leg, injured her right ankle, bruised up her right side and hit the back of her head.  Following that incident, her TMJ problems got worse.  She did begin seeing Dr. Lunn approximately 3 months ago.  He made new splints for her.  He also placed her in physical therapy.  The physical therapy has been ineffective for her.  Dr. Lund used four or five different modalities of treatment for her.  This includes:
Splint therapy.
Myo-Monitor treatment.
Laser treatment.
Injections.
Cranial manipulation.

None of these treatments have improved Darlene's situation.

She currently gets severe earaches bilaterally and gets vertigo but no tinnitus but she does have some loss of hearing.  She does have problems with depression that she relates to the jaw problems.  She is very much aware of clenching and bruxing at night and during the day.  She really does not have any other joint problems.  She has been told that she has some arthritis at C6-7.  One of her knees occasionally would give her a little bit of trouble but not too significantly.  




LINDA DARLENE PARROTT		12/12/2006				Page 2

She rates her headaches at a level of 7 that occur in the frontal, temple and posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain at 9, jaw function, diet and disability at 9.  She is not aware of any numbness and cranial nerve 7 appears to be intact.  Darlene does feed wild birds almost only on a daily basis but she has never been around domesticated birds.

In frontal view, Darlene has good facial symmetry in middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is mandibular dental midline.  Chin is deviated off towards the side probably about 3 to 4 mm.  In profile view, Darlene has some AP maxillary deficiency of about 3 mm or so.  Chin appears quite retruded and chin-neckline is extremely short.  Chin-neck angle is not well defined.  Chin may be retruded approximately 12 to 15 mm.  Intraorally, Darlene has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has crowding in the lower anterior arch of probably about 4 or 5 mm.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has some moderate crowding in the upper anterior arch of probably about 4 mm.  Transverse narrowness in the upper arch in the bicuspid area.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side of probably 2 to 3 mm, left side probably about 4 mm.  She has essentially a crossbite in the bicuspid area bilaterally.  She has an open bite from the left central incisor to the second bicuspid.  She has a transverse cant to the occlusal plane with the right side being about 2 or 3 mm higher than the left side.  Vertical overbite is about 0 on the right side and 1 to 2 mm on the left side.  Intraorally, the soft tissues look healthy in the oropharyngeal area.  The uvula may be a little bit enlarged.  The soft palate looks relatively normal as does the faucial pillars.  Intranasally, the turbinates are mild to moderately enlarged but she does not appear to have any significant airway obstruction that she is aware.  She does have some moderate snoring.  She has moderate daytime somnolence sometimes worse depending on how well she sleeps at night.  She is not aware of having sleep apnea syndrome. She does not sleep well at night.  She does have a sleep disorder that may be related at least in part to the pain factors.   She says that sometimes when she takes the Soma that she can with some time go back to sleep.  To palpation, she has high moderate to low severe pain over the TMJs, styloid areas, high moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters and mild pain over the medial pterygoids and right shoulder.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is about 35 mm, 22 mm without discomfort.  Excursive movement to the right is about 10 mm, left about 8.  Darlene relates that her TMJ pain and headaches are pretty much continuous with no predisposition to time of day.  It has been this way for about the last 7 to 8 months.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of impacted mandibular third molars.  Maxillary third molars are missing but all other teeth are present.  She has crowns on the mandibular left first and second molar, maxillary left first molar and right first molar.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Nasal airway appears adequate.  The left condyle appears relatively normal architecturally with just some slight anterior beaking.  The right condyle appears significantly diminutive in size and it appears to have lost at least half of its volume.  


LINDA DARLENE PARROTT		12/12/2006				Page 3


Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  The bony septum appears relatively straight.  Turbinates appear moderate in size but there appears to be adequate airway.  Significant facial asymmetry is evident with the left inferior border being probably about 5 to 6 mm lower than the right side.  Chin seems to be deviated off towards the right side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows diminutive condyle that is quite small anteroposteriorly and it appears to have lost vertical dimension as well.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  There appears to be decreased joint space.  On opening, there is moderate translation. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little flattened on top and a little bit of sclerosis present.  Increased anterior joint space and decreased posterior and posterosuperior joint space.  This is compatible with anteriorly displaced disc.  On opening, the left condyle has moderately good translation.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the mandible appears retruded anteroposteriorly.  There is significant discrepancy in the vertical heights at the angle of the mandible with a vertical difference of almost 10 mm of the right angle compared to the left angle.  At the occlusal plane level there is about a 4 to 5 mm vertical difference in the second molar area and probably about 3 mm in the cuspid area.  Surprisingly the oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good with airway dimension of about 8 mm at the base of the tongue and about 9 mm at the soft palate level.  However, she does have a high occlusal plane angle and the mandible does appear to be retruded.  Tooth size analysis shows that there is a Bolton's difference of about 4 mm plus.  Also a significant tooth size discrepancy in the second bicuspid area with the upper second bicuspids being about ½ mm to 1 mm smaller than the mandibular second bicuspids.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Right TMJ reactive arthritis with significant bone resorption with loss of vertical height as well as AP and mediolateral dimension, as well as a displaced articular disc with significant degenerative changes.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. 
Left maxillary vertical hypoplasia. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
AP maxillary hypoplasia. 
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia. 
Class II end-on occlusion with the left side being worse than the right side.
Anterior open bite.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 3 mm higher than the left side.
 Crowing in lower anterior arch.
 Crowding in upper anterior arch. 
 Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4+ mm. 
 Bilateral crossbite tendencies in the bicuspid areas.
 AP microgenia.
LINDA DARLENE PARROTT		12/12/2006				Page 4


 Severe headaches.
 Severe TMJ pain. 
 Myofascial pain. 
 Snoring.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 3 mm of tooth structure from the anterior 6 teeth.  Slenderize the lower bicuspids as well and try to maximize posterior anchorage to try and minimize forward tipping of the lower incisors.
Expand both arches in the bicuspid area. 
CT (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement as well as transverse leveling with bilateral TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it posteriorly and expand.
Bilateral TMJ coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the mandible.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.


