BRANDI DICHELE PARSON						12/30/2011

Dichele is 23 years old and birth date is 05/10/1988.  She is referred by Dr. Christine Coke, 107 Suncreek Drive #200, Allen, TX 75013.  In October 2010, Dichele was involved in a motor vehicle accident and sustained a fracture of the left mandibular ramus.  Dr. Coke treated her and wired her jaws together for 13 weeks.  She subsequently had 9 root canals and some crown work done on her teeth.  Dichele is congenitally missing the maxillary second and third molars bilaterally and the mandibular first and second molars bilaterally.  She had orthodontics from the age of 12 to 13 and was put in retainers after that and she continues to wear those retainers at nighttime. 

Dichele gets headaches 2 to 3 times per weeks in the frontal and temple areas bilaterally at about a level of 7.  She complains of no pain in the TMJ joints, but her rates her overall jaw pain at about a level of 7.  She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 3, and disability at 3.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, hearing loss and has no other joints that are involved.  She is aware of clenching her teeth at nighttime, but not during the day.  

In frontal view, Dichele has good facial balance and symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  She may have just a slight increased fullness in the left side of the mandible of about 2 and at the most 3 mm.  In profile, she has good facial balance.  There may be just some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe about 3 mm.  Intraorally, she is congenitally missing the mandibular left and right first and second molars, but has her anterior 8 teeth and these teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and leveled with the lower incisors in slightly more inclination.  In the upper arch, she is missing the second and third molars.  She has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the left side being probably about 2 or 3 mm Class III and on the right side she is a little bit closer to Class I.  The maxilla transversely is narrow and she tends to go into a cross bite in the first bicuspid area on the left side and perhaps the second bicuspid on the right side.  Transversely, the arches are fairly level.  The right eye may be just slightly elevated compared to the left by probably 1 to 2 mm.  TMJ joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  She has some moderate tenderness over the masseter muscles, but no other significant discomfort around the head and neck area to palpation.  The incisal opening is 51 mm and excursion movement to the right 10 mm and to the left 9 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular first and second molars bilaterally and the maxillary second and third molars bilaterally.  She has impacted mandibular third molars that are vertically oriented in the rami of the mandible.  The left side is elevated higher in the ramus than the right side.  She has root canals on the anterior 6 teeth and on the mandibular right central incisor, left central and lateral incisors.  The fracture in the left ramus area appears to be fairly well healed.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight and the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Sinuses appear relatively clear with just some slight increased thickness of the sinus membrane along the floor, medial and lateral walls.  

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight.  The turbinates are moderate in size.  There is generalized thickening of the mucosal lining throughout the maxillary sinuses, being a little bit thicker on the left side as compared to the right side.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology with some sclerosis on top and some anterior beaking more towards the medial aspect of the joint.  Towards the lateral aspect, the lateral condyle is more narrow anteroposteriorly and appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  It is possible that the disc could be displaced and oriented in a vertical position.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology with good joint space.  There is some slight anterior beaking tendencies.  The joint space seems fairly well balanced in this joint.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is a decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat and curves inferiorly only about 1 to 2 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  There appears to be good joint space throughout the joint, although slightly decreased towards the medially aspect of the joint.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is probably some AP maxillary hypoplasia and the mandible appears to be in a more normal position.  Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good.  Oropharyngeal airway measures 9 mm at the soft palate level as well as at the base of the tongue.  She appears to have an end-on incisor relationship.  

Basic diagnoses for Dichele would be as follows:

History of previous fracture of the mandible occurring in October 2010 where she sustained a vertical fracture through the left ramus of the mandible treated with closed reduction.
Rule out TMJ pathology.
Mandibular hypoplasia.
Congenitally missing bilateral mandibular first and second molars and maxillary second and third molars.
Vertically impacted third molars in the ramus of the mandible.
End-on incisor relationship.
Slight Class III cuspid relationship on the left side but basic Class I on the right side.
Posterior cross bite on the left side.
History of nocturnal clenching. 
Headaches.
Facial asymmetry with posterior maxillary and mandibular yaw of about 2 to 3 mm to the left.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Medications:   Klonopin 1 mg tablet, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill 	x2.
2.	Consider MRI of TMJs if medication unsuccessful in eliminating the headaches.
3.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
4.	Surgery.
	a.	Consider maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward			b.         Consider mandibular bilateral ramus osteotomies to correct the facial 			asymmetry.
	c.	TMJ surgery if indicated based on the MRI.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
6.	Reconstructive dentistry to include:
	a.	Placement of dento-osseus implants x2 bilaterally in the mandible and one 		in each of the posterior maxillary dental alveolar areas bilaterally.  
	b.	Placement of crowns on implants. 