COE PASSMORE									03/14/2007

Coe is 21 years old and is referred by Dr. Clint Barrett, 2420 Quaker Ave., Ste. 102, Lubbock, TX.   Coe previously went to Dr. Barrett because of some facial swelling on the right side.  A biopsy was taken and the diagnosis came back as dentigerous cyst of the right mandible.  This diagnosis was taken from a biopsy taken on February 2, 2007.  On February 21, 2007, Dr. Barrett went back in and removed a large portion of the cyst.  This time it came back as an ameloblastoma.  She is here for diagnosis and management of her tumor.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Presence of an ameloblastoma in the right mandible.
Protecting her mouth and tongue and facial cosmetics.  
She is scheduled to graduate from Texas Tech in May and is concerned whether that would be jeopardized.

She has problems with vasovagal syncope and tachycardia.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Pindolol.
Clindamycin. 

Radiograph that was sent by Dr. Barrett dated January 31, 2007, prior to his surgery shows that she has a multiloculated lesion in the right ramus extending from the distal of the first molar up into the body of the ramus and within about 1 cm of the sigmoid notch.  There is a possibility of a lesion actually being up in the coronoid process but difficult to ascertain.  The condyle appears clear although there is an area just below the condylar neck that is a little bit suspicious.  In addition, she has a lesion in her right maxillary sinus that could be related to a mucous retention cyst or another type of tumor.  She has mandibular third molar that is severely displaced posteriorly away from the second molar.  The second molar appears to have only bony stability along the mesial root which has undergone significant resorption.  The distal root of the first molar also has undergone a little bit of resorption.  She has all 4 third molars present but the left ones appear to be erupted but the maxillary right ones are unerupted.  She has had previous orthodontics.  She is missing mandibular first bicuspids but has all of her maxillary teeth.  Her occlusion is a Class I cuspid on the right side and Class III molar.  On the left side, she has a Class II end-on cuspid by about 3 mm and Class III molar but to a lesser extent as compared to the opposite side.  

Coe is unaware when her jaw problem began but she did have a Panorex taken about 2003 or 2004.  It showed that the mandible was clear at that time.  She felt a bump in the right mandible in mid January of 2007.  An x-ray was taken on January 31 that showed the tumor in the right mandible.  It originally was biopsied and felt to be interpreted as a dentigerous cyst.  Then following Dr. Barrett's surgery, it came back as ameloblastoma.  She was on antibiotics initially after the surgery and then it was stopped.  She then began to develop some swelling again and she was placed back on clindamycin 150 mg 4 tablets per day.  She has no trouble with earaches.  She does get some tinnitus but no vertigo in the last few months.  She has no hearing loss.  

COE PASSMORE				03/14/2007				Page 2

She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain or myofascial pain around the head or neck area.

In frontal view, Coe has a little bit of facial swelling on the right side with just a slight increase of probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Otherwise, she has fairly good facial symmetry.  In profile view, she has good balance.  Intraorally, she is missing what appears to be actually the second bicuspid.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  She has good attached gingiva in the lower anterior teeth.  She is missing the right second and third molars but has the left second and third molars.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars erupted in.  She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side by about 3 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is just about 1 mm to the left of the maxillary midline.  Intraorally, she has some slight expansion of the mandible on the right side.  It is difficult to determine but there does not feel to be any real significant expansion that can be felt externally.  Radiographically, however, it does show some expansion.  She does have her maxillary left third molar that appears to have erupted in but the right third molar appears to be impacted.  She does have a mucous retention cyst in the maxillary right sinus.  She does have an anterior deep bite of about 3 to 4 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues including the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear normal.  Intranasally, she has moderate hyperplasia of the turbinates.  They do appear somewhat inflamed.  The septum appears relatively normal.  To palpation, she has very minimal tenderness over the right masseter but no other tenderness.  Maximal incisal opening is 43 mm, excursive movement to the right 8 mm, left 7 mm.  The size of the lesion measures 5 cm AP to 4.5 cm vertical.  

TREATMENT PLAN:
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Place maxillary and mandibular orthodontic appliances and archwires.

Surgery Stage 1.
 Reset ameloblastoma tumor.
 Try to preserve integrity of the inferior alveolar nerve. 
 Reconstruct the mandible with bone grafting.
Surgery stage 2.
 Osseointegrated implants.
Dental reconstruction. 
