SHIRLENE PATTERSON								06-14-04

Shirlene is 47 years old and referred by Dr. Steven J. Hill, 4211 85th St., Lubbock, TX  79423.

Patient History

Shirlene has had previous problems with bronchitis. She has had tonsils removed and had her tubes tied. Other than her jaw problems, Shirlene is in good health. She takes no medications. She has had an adverse reaction to BIAXIN, DOXYCYCLINE, AND VICOPROFEN. She has seen Dr. Joe Mayes, 4601 50th St., Lubbock, TX  79423. 

Shirlene believes her jaw problems began about 10 years ago, or at least that is when they first noticed that she was developing some facial asymmetry but may have started earlier than that. The etiology is unknown. She has no problems with earaches or hearing loss but gets occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her elbows, hips, and knees. She has no problems wearing jewelry of any kind. She is aware of clenching at nighttime and sometimes does it during the day as well. No problems with headaches or TMJ pain. She rates on an average day pain levels at about a level of 2, jaw function at 2, diet at 1, and disability at 0. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Shirlene has fairly good balance between the middle and upper third face. Nose is deviated a little bit off to the left side. Lower third of the face demonstrates some significant asymmetries. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline, and the nasal tip is about 2 mm off to the left side. Mandibular dental midline is shifted off to the left about 4.5 mm. Chin is close to being about 14 mm off toward the left side. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is -1 to -2 mm.

In profile view, she has just some slight AP maxillary deficiency with upper lip supralabrale being about 2 mm posterior to subnasale. Maxilla, therefore, is probably about 3 to 4 mm AP deficient. Chin is prominent by probably 6 mm or so. Chin-neckline is long, although chin-neck angle is not really well-defined. A little bit of fullness in the submental area.

Intraorally, Shirlene is missing the mandibular right second and third molars and mandibular left probably second molar with the first molar slightly distally drifted and with the third molar in horizontal angulation with a significant mesial tipping. She has a fairly large diastema between the lower central incisors created in part by her malocclusion.

In the upper arch, she is missing the maxillary right lateral incisor, but there is a pontic there attached to a cuspid crown and she is missing the maxillary left second and third molar and right third molar. Anteroposteriorly, the upper arch is fairly symmetric. The lower arch likewise is fairly symmetric anteroposteriorly. In centric relation, she has a crossbite on the entire left side from the central incisor all the way back through the posterior teeth. On the right side, she tends a little toward a buccal crossbite and has a posterior open bite in the molar area. She has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship on the right side as well as on the left side. There is a transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being 3 to 4 mm higher than the right side. At the inferior border of the mandible, the right side is 15 to 20 mm lower than the left side. 

Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off toward the right side. Turbinates are moderate-size. She says that she breathes through her mouth and nose when she sleeps and her husband says predominantly through her mouth.
Intraorally, the soft tissues appear normal. Soft palate appears normal in size and shape as does the uvula. Posterior faucial pillars do insert into the posterior pharyngeal wall area, and this may decrease the oropharyngeal airway in that area slightly. Shirlene has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. There is an occasional click kind of noise of the right side. The left side at least today functioned relatively smoothly. Anteriorly Shirelene has a 2-mm overbite relationship. Incisal opening is 50 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 11 mm and to the left 4 mm. As Shirlene opens, her jaw shifts significantly toward the right side probably about 5 or 6 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear fairly large in size. Some deviation of the nasal septum present. In the upper arch, she is missing the right lateral incisor replaced by a pontic attached to the cuspid and the third molar on the right side. On the left side, she is missing the second and third molars. In the lower arch, she is missing the left second molar with the third molar in significant mesial angulation. On the right side, she is missing the second and third molars. Left condyle shows some arthritic changes with some flattening and anterior beaking on the condyle. On the right side, she has an enlarged condyle and condylar neck compatible with probably an osteochondroma or osteoma kind of formation. She has some bone loss around the incisors and left second bicuspid as well as around the right first molar and second bicuspid. In the upper arch, she has significant bone loss around the right cuspid and molars. 

Waters view shows that the angle of the mandible on the right side is probably 25 mm lower than the left side. Sinuses appear clear. Septum appears deviated. Turbinates appear enlarged and seem to block off a good part of the nasal airway. This could account for the reported mouth breathing.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa with the condyle actually against the posterior wall of the fossa. Decreased superior joint space and increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep, image compatible with anteriorly displaced articular disc.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is extremely large anteroposteriorly and flat across the top. Increased superior joint space. Condyle extends from the posterior pharyngeal wall where it appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact there and extends almost onto the articular eminence. The condylar head and neck are extremely elongated. Inferior border of the mandible appears to be increased in vertical height in the alveolar area on the right side as compared to the left side. 

On opening, there is good translation of the left condyle and restricted translation of the right condyle. Some anterior beaking is present on the left condyle.

Cephalometrically, the mandible appears somewhat prognathic. May be some slight AP maxillary deficiency. Significant vertical difference in the inferior border of the mandible with a vertical difference of about 20 mm at the angle area. A little bit more difficult to determine the vertical discrepancy at the occlusal plane level. Oropharyngeal airway looks very good and well within normal range. Appears to have a significantly low occlusal plane angle on the left side and a negative occlusal plane angle on the right side. Shirlene actually has a reverse tooth-size discrepancy mainly due to small lower central incisors. 

When placing Shirlene’s models into a Class I cuspid relationship, she has an anterior open bite and a posterior crossbite on the right side. 

Right maxillary lateral incisor pontic is angled buccally.

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Vertical maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary deficiency
Right mandibular condylar large osteochondroma/osteoma
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction
Severe mandibular asymmetry with the right inferior border being 20 mm lower than the left side
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 4 mm lower than the left side
Mandibular dental midline shifted 4.5 mm off to the left side and chin shifted 14 mm off to the left side
Right mandibular vertical hyperplasia with the inferior border being approximately 10 mm longer vertically than the left side 
Class III end-on occlusion
Anterior crossbite extending from the left central incisor all the way through the third molar
Diastema between the central incisors created by the deformity
Missing maxillary right lateral incisor, third molar, left second and third molar, mandibular left second molar, right second and third molar
Diastemata between the molars posteriorly in the lower arch
Oversized lateral incisor pontic and cuspid crowns on the maxillary right side
Vertical asymmetry in the soft tissues with the right commissure being 5 mm lower than the left side
Transverse asymmetry with the left side of the mandible being about 6 to 8 mm more laterally displaced as compared to the right side
Periodontal problems in both maxillary and mandibular arch
Small mandibular incisors
Excessive wear on the anterior teeth particularly because of the abnormal occlusal relationship
Decreased translation of the right condyle

Recommended Treatment

Periodontal treatment to stabilize the teeth, supported bone structures, and gingiva to their best possible healthy condition

Initial restorative dentistry
Remove maxillary right lateral incisor pontic and cuspid crown
Place temporary crown on the right cuspid equal to a normal size crown
Place temporary bonding on the lower incisors to make them a more normal size and to help decrease the diastema width between the incisors

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Place a pontic tooth in the upper right lateral incisor area to maintain that space. . The current space is relatively normal in size, and if that could be maintained, that would be beneficial in her overall treatment management. On the left side, be sure to tip the lateral incisor root mesially and cuspid root distally to make room for interdental osteotomy

Align and level mandibular arch. Try to lose posterior anchorage by having the molars move forward and try to minimize retraction of the lower incisors. Do not include the left third molar in the arch wire as that tooth will have no counter occlusion, and, therefore, can be extracted at the time of surgery

Surgery
Right mandibular low condylectomy, shape condylar neck to function as a condyle, and reposition the articular disc with a Mitek anchor
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back onto the facial midline and increase the occlusal plane angle
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to transversely level off the occlusal plane and advance forward
Mandibular inferior border ostectomy to remove about 8 or 9 mm of bone structure at the inferior border
Extract mandibular left third molar

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

Surgery, stage II
Consider osseointegrated implants in the mandibular right second molar area
Consider implant in the right maxillary lateral incisor area
 
Restorative dentistry to place final restorations