CHRISTOPHER PAVICIC								01/15/2007

Christopher is 35 years old and is referred by Dr. Nelson Diers, 1251 Nilles Rd. #14, Cincinnati, OH 45014.  Chris is in good health except for his jaw-associated problems.  He takes no medications.  He has no known allergies.  Chris' problems began really of unknown time, but at the age of 10 he had a bicycle accident and fractured his maxillary central incisors.  He subsequently has had those rebuilt.  Sometime around 1983 through 1985, he opened his mouth as wide as he could and developed some significant pain in the right side.  Things got progressively worse for him after that.  He did see a Dr. Cartwright, an orthodontist, who said he had TMJ and jaw problems.  Chris has had no orthodontics to date.  In 2003 through January of 2006 he underwent splint therapy with Dr. Diers.  This did help him some.  However, Chris still had to use cork from wine bottles to place on the right side to help separate the jaw and get it reduced back into position.  He gets about 40 minutes of muscle spasms periodically and seems to have undone that all the work that the splint therapy had accomplished.  In December of 2005 he was in a motor vehicle accident and was hit on the right side of his car.  He did not hit his jaw but it created a lot of muscle problems and pain on his right side.  

He gets torquing on the right side of his jaw, face, neck and shoulder area.  At times he feels the right side feels like cement.  The left side has problems now also.  In fact, he has some significant TMJ pain on the left side currently.  His right shoulder, side and hip are also affected.  

Chris rates headaches in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area at about a level of 6.  He rates left-sided TMJ pain at about 8, average daily pain 6, jaw function 7, diet at 5 and disability at 9.  Prior to his splint therapy, his pain levels were even higher and the headaches would escalate to a 10.  He gets earaches, occasional tinnitus, vertigo but no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother him include his hips, right side worse than his left, elbows, left wrist, and neck.  He has been diagnosed as having mild Meniere's disease.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  Apparently the diagnoses of mild Meniere's eventually was proved to be negative.  

In frontal view, Chris has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  There is some asymmetry in the mandible.  Upper lip length is 23 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Nasal tip may be just slightly to the right by about 1 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm or 2 off to the right side and chin is about 3 to 4 mm off to the right side.  In profile view, Chris has fairly good AP facial symmetry.  The left mandibular angle may be about 2 or 3 mm more prominent than the right side.  Left inferior border of the mandible may be about 3 to 4 mm lower than the right side. Transversely there is a cant in the occlusal plane mainly in the lower arch with the lower left cuspid being 2 mm lower than the right cuspid.  The maxilla is actually fairly level.  Intranasally, the septum may be deviated just slightly off to the right side.  Turbinates are of mild to moderate size.  I do not believe there is any significant nasal airway obstruction.  He apparently has no sleep apnea symptoms or problems.   Chin-neckline is relatively normal and chin-neck angle is relatively well defined.  While examining him, his lower jaw shifted off to the right side even more with the lower midline being 4 to 5 mm off to the right and chin about 5 to 6 mm off to the right.  In centric relation, he can get a vertical overbite of about 1 to 2 mm.  In as close of concentric relationship that he could possible get is Class II on the right side and perhaps slightly Class III on the left side.  
CHRISTOPHER PAVICIC			01/15/2007				Page 2

In as good as centric relation as we could establish, he has a crossbite tendency on the right side and a buccal crossbite on the left side.  Chris has bilateral posterior open bites being about 3 to 4 mm on the left side and about 2 to 3 mm on the right side.  Uvula is elongated.  Soft palate, faucial pillars and tonsils all look relatively normal.  Incisal open is about 30 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is about 3 mm, left about 7 mm.  Trying to establish a centric relation developed muscle problems and posturing is difficult but it does appear that the mandibular dental midline is shifted 3 to 4 mm off towards the right side and chin probably 4 to 5 mm off towards the right side.  In manipulating the mandible and having him shift his mandible off towards the left side, excursive movements had a definite pop in the left TMJ.  To palpation he has moderate tenderness over the temporalis muscles, shoulders and moderate tenderness over the styloid areas.  No particular tenderness over the TMJs with palpation.  He gets referred pain down through the neck and into his chest and shoulder area and around into his arm and down his right side.  There is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of all the third molars.  Sinuses look clear.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  Condyles appear moderate in size.

Waters view shows that the septum is deviated just slightly to the right side but not too significant.  Left turbinate appears larger than the right turbinate.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite large compared to the size of the fossa.  Condyle is actually too large to fit inside the fossa.  Articular eminence is steep.  Significantly increased joint space vertically between the condylar head and the depth of the fossa likely due to the significant differences in size between the condyle and fossa.  The condyle is postured forward along the posterior inferior aspect of the articular eminence.  

Left TMJ shows a condyle that likewise is larger than the size of the fossa.  The fossa has an unusual shape and contour to it.  It is a little bit more distorted than the opposite side although both are somewhat distorted.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  Condyle is postured down and forward even more so on this side than compared to opposite side.  Significantly increased vertical joint space between the depth of the fossa and the top of the condyle.  Significant posterior open bite is noted on this side.  On opening, there is some translation although it appears to be more restricted on the right side as compared to the left side.  On the sagittal views the right condyle actually looks larger than the left condyle.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a fairly close skeletal Class I relationship.  He has about 1 mm vertical overbite and has bilateral posterior cross bites.  Inferior border of the mandible probably on the left side is lower than the right side by probably about 3 mm anteriorly and about 6 mm posteriorly.  Oropharyngeal airway looks good.  Maxillary incisors appear to be somewhat vertically oriented.  Lower incisors may be slightly over angulated.  



CHRISTOPHER PAVICIC			01/15/2007				Page 3

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Enlarged condyles bilaterally. 
Small glenoid fossas bilaterally.
Displaced disc in centric relation of the left TMJ and possibly the right joint as well.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Referred pain down through right neck, shoulder, chest, side and arm.
Retained third molars x4.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm. 
 Probable previous left-sided condylar hyperplasia.
 Mandibular deviated prognathism.
 Bilateral posterior open bites being worse on the left side as compared to the right side. 
 Mandibular dental midline 3 mm to the right of the maxillary dental midline and facial 
             midline and the chin is about 4 to 5 mm to the right. 
 Class II occlusion on the right side, slight Class III tendency on the left side.  
 Crossbite on the right side and buccal crossbite on the left side. 
 Vertical inclination of the maxillary incisors. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up about 1 mm of space around each upper lateral incisor to correct for the tooth size discrepancy and to slightly increase angulation of the maxillary incisors.
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with eminectomies, debridement of the joints and reposition of the articular discs with Mitek anchors. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization.
Removal of 4 malaligned third molars.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to build up maxillary laterals and/or central incisors.
