DOLORES ANGELA PELLEGRINO					12/30/2011

Angela is 49 years old, birth date 07/28/1962.  Referred by Dr. Bill Hang.  

Angela was first aware of having TMJ problems at about the age of 17 in 1980 of unknown etiology.  She originally had orthodontics from the age of 10 to 12 years done mainly to the upper teeth with a removable retainer.  She then went into orthodontics from the age of 16 to 20.  During that time, she had a bicuspid extracted from all four quadrants, probably the first bicuspids, and she also had her wisdom teeth removed.  Because of the outcome of the orthodontics, she then had jaw surgery that sounds as though the maxillary may have been advanced and inferiorly repositioned as well as she had an anterior mandibular subapical osteotomy to tip the lower teeth back forward again.  She had TMJ splint therapy from 1986 to 1999.  She started ortho once again with Dr. Hang in August 2009.  

She gets headaches about 2 times per week in the frontal and temporal areas at about a level of 6.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 4, diet at 5, and disability at 4.  She takes no medications.  She gets some earaches, but no tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss and no other joints bother her.  She does get a clogged feeling in her ears however.  She is aware that she clenches her teeth during the day, but does not believe she does so at night.  She has had some facial implants placed that she thought was underneath her upper lip and cheek area.  On the Panorex, it shows bone screws up in the anterior cheek and piriform area where may have been some augmentation performed.  There is some evidence of bone grafts in the maxilla as well at the level where an osteotomy would be performed.

In frontal view, Angela has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Nasal tip may be must a touch to the right about 1 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the left.  The chin appears to be slightly to the right.  The mandibular dental midline is to the left of the chin midline by probably a couple of millimeters.  Angela has had a previous rhinoplasty.  Nasal tip is elevated.  She has an obtuse nasolabial angle.  Point A appears to be retruded about 3 mm.  However, filling out point A area elevates the nose slightly more.  Upper lip is somewhat protrusive compared to point A.  She has a very prominent labial mental fold.  She has very tense mentalis muscles.  Chin neckline appears a little bit short.  The mandible may be retruded about 5 mm.  Chin neckline is a little bit short, but chin neck angle is well defined.  She does have quite a prominence of the labial mental fold.  Lower lip is everted.  She has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars except for the first bicuspids.  She has spaces that are being opened up in that area.  The space is greater on the right side than the left side.  The mandibular left cuspid is about 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  She has some buildups on the lower cuspids that are almost like half tooth attachments and on the left side eliminating that attachment she has probably about 4 mm of space whereas on the right side she probably has 6 to 7 mm of space.  In the upper arch, she is missing first bicuspids and has spaces opened in that area and has springs on the arch wires.  She has spaces between the upper lateral and cuspids.  It appears she may have a tooth size discrepancy so this may be a good space.  The spacing in the bicuspid area is a little bit larger on the right side as compared to the left side.  In the upper arch, the left cuspid is about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being a little bit greater on the right side as compared to the left side.  The cuspids in the upper arch are expanded out significantly.  She has a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the right maxillary cuspid being about 2 mm higher than the left side and the mandibular being 1 to 1.5 mm higher than the left side.  She has a overjet of about 5 to 6 mm and about a 0 vertical overbite relationship.  She does have a slight cross bite tendency in the second molar areas.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side.  The right turbinate is moderately enlarged and there appears to be fairly significant obstruction in the right nasal airway.  The left turbinate has a moderate size but because of the deviated septum at least anteriorly, there appears to be adequate airway space.  To palpation, she has mild to moderate discomfort over the masseters, medial pterygoids, TMJs, retromandibular areas, SCMs and shoulders.  On opening, joints function reasonably smoothly particularly on the left side.  On the right side, she reports that she frequently hears an opening click and a late closing type of click.  The maximal incisal opening is about 43 mm.  The excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.   Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars as well as the maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids.  The mandibular spacing is larger on the right side than the left side in the mandible and the maxilla  also on the left side is less open as compared to the right side.  There has been a root canal performed on the maxillary left cuspid and mandibular right bicuspid as well as the right cuspid.  There are wires on the mandible I guess to support the previous subapical ostectomy.  In the upper arch, there are 3 bone screws placed in the right maxilla and 4 bone screws placed in the left maxilla.  There are interosseus wires placed at the posterior area of the horizontal osteotomy cut and also to support what appears to be bone grafts bilaterally in the anterior maxillary area.  It is difficult to evaluate the TMJs.

Coronal view shows in the back of the bony septal area that the septum is straight.  Turbinates are relatively normal size back in that area.  Sinuses are relatively clear with just a little thickening of the mucosal lining in the left floor of the sinus.  

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight and the turbinates are moderate in size with a good airway and sinuses appear clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head.  There is also a little touch of beaking present.  The joint space appears fairly well balanced. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  In this x-ray, the mandible is postured forward with the condyle in closer approximation with the articular eminence and increased superior and posterior joint space.  There is some anterior beaking present on this condyle. 

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width.  The joint space appears pretty good except at the lateral aspect where there is a little bit of reactive bone present with a downward curvature of the lateral rim of about 3 to 4 mm.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite flat across the top and there is definitely decreased joint space at the lateral rim of the fossa.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the mandible is slightly retruded.  The oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm at the soft palate level and about almost 9 mm at the base of the tongue.  The occlusal plan is moderately increased.  Pogonion is reasonably strong.

Basic diagnoses for Angela would be as follows:

Right TMJ articular disc dislocation with early reduction.
Maxillary slight AP hypoplasia and transverse asymmetry with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and transverse asymmetry.
Spacing in the lower arch between the cuspid and second bicuspid that equals 6 mm on the right side and about 4 mm on the left side.  
Spacing in the first bicuspid area in the upper arch measuring about almost 8 mm on the right side and about 6 mm on the left side as well as spacing of about 2 mm between the upper lateral incisors and cuspids.
Maxillary AP asymmetry with the right cuspid being 2 mm anterior to the left cuspid. 
Slight mandibular asymmetry with the mandibular left cuspid being 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. 
AP macrogenia along with anterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Right TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
External nasal deformity.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Reduce the spacing in the right maxillary arch between the cuspid and 			second bicuspid by 1 to 2 mm to improve upper arch symmetry.
	b.	Open up left mandibular space between the cuspid and bicuspid by 1 more 		millimeter to equalize it to the opposite side.
	c.	Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth 
                        structure to help eliminate the minor crowding and correct for the tooth 
                        size discrepancy.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward slightly, increase the 		prominence at point A, level it transversely and expand the 
                         posterior aspect.
	c.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			slight counterclockwise direction.
	d.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to reduce the prominence of the 		chin anteroposteriorly but lengthen it vertically.
	e.	External rhinoplasty.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
4.	Restorative dentistry to include possible implants and placement of crowns, 		bridges and/or veneers.  