COLLIN PEEL								10/26/2011

Collin is 24 years old, birth date 05/01/1987.  Collin was referred by Jennifer Elbert, the mother of a former patient.  Primary concerns that Collin has are:

Under bite.
Difficulties eating.
Self conscious of the jaw and facial imbalances.

Collin has no trouble with headaches, no TMJ pain or myofascial pain problems.  He rates his jaw function at 3, diet at 7, disability at 3.  He has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  The only other joint area that bothers him his is lower back.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  

The onset of Collin’s problems was in his teenage years as he was going through puberty.  He had orthodontics from the age of 13 to 15 by Dr. Frank Stich.  At the end of treatment, his bite was pretty good.  He has 4 bicuspids extracted.  It was within about a year after the orthodontics was completed that his jaw began to grow.  Collin does not believe it has gotten much worse since he was about 18 or so.  

In frontal view, Collin has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are pretty close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, the maxilla is probably about 6 mm AP deficient.  The chin is actually in fairly good AP facial balance.  Intraorally, he is missing probably the lower second bicuspids.  The first bicuspid and first molars are in a little bit of lingual inclination.  He has good attached gingiva.  His lower incisors may be in just slight lingual inclination.  In the upper arch, he has had a bicuspid extracted on each side as well.  He has bilateral cross bites.  He is a super Class III cuspid relationship, being probably at least 10 mm Class III.  He has reverse anterior cross bite of approximately 10 to 12 mm.  He has a reverse deep bite of about 1 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal except the uvula is moderately enlarged, but otherwise the structures look relatively normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The septum may be deviated just a little bit off to the right side.  The columella is wide and the nostrils are narrow.  Holding open the nostrils with a nasal speculum enabled Collin to breathe easier through his nose.  Collin has no tenderness around the head and neck area to palpation.  Joints seem to function smoothly.  The maximal incisal opening is 56 mm and excursion movements are 8 mm in each direction.  

Basic diagnoses for Collin would be as follows:

Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia (growth appears to be complete).
Mandibular prognathism.
Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia.
Hypertrophied turbinates with nasal airway obstruction.
Lingual inclination of mandibular bicuspids and first molars. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 4 mm.  
Super Class III occlusion (10 mm Class III).

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up at least 1 mm of space between 			the upper laterals and cuspids.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially 			and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Tip the bicuspids and first molars 			labially.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly 			approximately 5 to 6 mm.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 7 			mm and expand it approximately 6 mm.  
	c.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.  
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 