B105
B105 is now 32 years old. B105 was first treated by me with surgery on 6 years and 7 months ago. She had AICR and maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia. Procedures performed included:

Bilateral TMJ disc repositioning with ligament repair with Mitek anchor. Mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible. Maxillary osteotomies to reposition the maxilla. Anterior mandibular augmentation with HTR grafting.
Removal of impacted third molars x4.

B105 was 16 years old at the time of the surgery. B105 was last seen for a follow-up 2 years and 11 months ago. B105 currently works for the FDA and lives in San Diego.

Primary concerns that B105 has at this time are as follows:
Pain in the jaw joints. Popping and other noises in the joints. Locking.
B105 does not have a real problem with headaches. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 6, diet at 2, disability at 0. She has no earaches, but gets tinnitus and vertigo at times. No hearing loss and no other joints bother her. She is hypothyroid. She gets neck, shoulder, and back pain.

She takes the following medications:
Yasmin.
Synthroid.
Claritin.
Motrin.
She has tenderness over the TMJs and masseters. On opening, she has an audible crepitus popping kind of noise AT about 30 mm on the left joint and at about 5 mm of closing. The right side seems to function reasonably smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is 40 mm, but it was painful on the right side. The excursion movement to the right is 6 mm and to left 5 mm.

Clinical examination shows she has an upper lip length of 20 mm, upper tooth lip relationship of about 3 mm. There is slight transverse asymmetry with the left side being about 2 mm higher than the right side. Profile looks good. She has a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship, but is missing 4 bicuspids. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy, although the uvula is moderately eated. Intranasally, the turbinates are moderate in size. The septum is fairly straight. Basic diagnoses for B105 would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis, being worse on the left side, and with partial displacement of the articular disc on the left side as well as degenerative changes with both discs.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Medications: Klonopin 1-mg tablet 1/2 to 1 tablet at bedtime to control clenching and bruxism.
2. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
3. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts. c.	Application and removal of arch bars.

B105 MRI AGE: 32/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears narrow mediolaterally. There is the presence of a Mitek anchor in the condylar head. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit wider in width. I believe there is also a Mitek anchor in this side. The joint space looks a little bit better on this side, although there appears to be some discal tissue over medially.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat sclerotic in some views. There is anterior beaking on the condyle. The articular eminence is quite steep. In one view, it appears that there is discal tissue over the top of the condyle. In other view it appears that there is a decreased superior joint space and there may be discal tissue anterior to the condyle. On opening, there is restricted translation of the condyle and it is difficult to identify discal tissue.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit better morphology. It appears there may be still discal tissue in position. There appears to be better joint space on this side than the opposite side. The disc appears degenerated. There is a Mitek anchor in the neck of the condyle. On opening, there is restricted translation, but the disc appears to be in position. There is some anterior beaking on the condyle.

On the cine films, it appears that the disc on the left side is in place, at least in one area, and that the disc seems to translate reasonably well with the condyle. On the cine on the right side, the disc appears to be in position in the closed view, but on opening the disc does not move well indicative of adhesions to the fossa area.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis with degeneration of the articular disc by previously placed Mitek anchor with significant sclerosis in the head of the condyle. Right TMJ arthritis with degeneration of the articular disc, but the disc appears to be in reasonable position.

