JORDAN PATTON									04/16/2008

Jordan is 13 years old.  She is referred by her mother, Blaire McDonald Patton.  Blaire is a former patient from 21 years ago.  Jordan has had tubes in her ears, but no other surgery.  Primary concerns are as follows:  
Jaws popping.
Gummy smile.
Difficulties breathing through the nose.  
Headaches.

Her problems began in reference to the TMJ area about 2 years ago.  In 2006, she had a Herbst appliance and about a year-and-a-half ago she began full orthodontics.  She takes no medications.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  The only other joints that bother her some are her knees.  She does have difficulties breathing through her nose.  She gets headaches sometimes 3 or 4 days per week at about a level of 5 in the frontal and temporal area.  She has some TMJ pain at about a level of 2, but states she has relatively normal jaw function at zero, diet at zero, and disability at zero. 

CLINICAL EVALUATION.  In frontal view, upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 5 mm.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned on the facial midline.  Maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to the left side.  In profile view, upper lip is retruded about 3 mm and chin is protruded about 10 mm.  Chin neckline is a little bit short, but the chin neckline is reasonably well-defined.  The lower third face appears elongated.  Lip incompetence is about 7 mm.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth are nicely aligned and leveled.  She has good attached gingiva around the lower arch.  There is a little hyperplasia of the gingival tissues.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars present.  She has significant gingival hyperplasia in the upper ache.  She is very close to being a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  She has some spacing on the right side between the lateral incisor and cuspid.  It appears that she probably has a tooth size discrepancy.  Transversely, occlusal plane is fairly level.  She has less than 0.5 mm of vertical overbite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Uvula is slightly elongated, but soft palate fascial pillars are normal and tonsils may be just mildly enlarged.  Intranasally, the septum may be deviated slightly off to the left side at the inferior aspect anteriorly.  Turbinates are fairly large in size.  She has difficulties breathing through her nose.  On opening, she has a pop on the left side at about 30 mm and closing at about 20 mm.  Right side seems to function reasonably smoothly. To palpation, she has moderate discomfort over the masseters, TMJs, and shoulders and milder tenderness over the temporalis muscles.  Maximal incisal opening is 46 mm.  Excursion movement in each direction is only about 4 mm.
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of developing unerupted third molars.  Sinuses look clear.  Condyles look relatively normal.  
Waters view shows that the bony septum at least is reasonably straight.  Turbinates appear quite large though.  Sinuses appear clear. 
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Joint space looks fairly well balanced.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows there may be a little bit of flattening on the top of the condyle.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  Joint space looks reasonable.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints.  
Lateral cephalogram shows that she has an anterior vertical maxillary excess and some AP macrogenia.  Oropharyngeal airway measures 8 mm at the soft palate level and about 5 mm at the narrowest part of the base of tongue.  Occlusal plane angle may be slightly increased.  She does have some lip incompetence.  
Basic diagnoses for Jordan would be as follows:
Left TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP macrogenia.  
High occlusal plane angle.  
Over-angulation of lower incisors.  
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of probably 2 to 3 mm (models were not available at the time of analysis).    
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Impacted third molars x4.
TMJ pain. 
Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:	

MRI of left and right TMJs. 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Place about 1 mm of space between each upper lateral and incisor and cuspid.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the low anterior teeth, removing at about 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
Surgery. 
Unilateral or bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors (dependent on MRI findings).
Multiple maxilla osteoarthritis to move the maxilla superiorly and decrease occlusal plane angle.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible in proper position.
Anterior augmentation genioplasty with slight vertical reduction.
Bilateral inferior turbinectomies.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.