MEGHAN PAYTON								04/28/2011

Meghan is 14 years old, birth date 03/21/1997.  Referred by Dr. Monte Collins in his Southlake office, 1422 Main Street, Suite 230, Southlake, TX 76092.

Meghan had previous orthodontics from the age of 10 to 12 for about 18 months.  This was done in Louisiana.  She switched orthodontist and the new orthodontist noticed that there was a problem with the bite with the lower jaw being somewhat retruded.  She began orthodontics again in September 2010.  The family has since moved back to Texas.  Meghan has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 0.  She takes no medications.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.

In frontal view, Meghan has fairly good left-to-right facial balance.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Meghan has good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  She has a lip incompetence of probably about 5 to 6 mm.  Chin appears retruded about 4 or 5 mm.  As Meghan slides her lower jaw forward about 4 to 5 mm, it improves her AP facial balance, although it does increase the vertical length some.  Intraorally, Meghan has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has bands around the first and second molars.  Teeth appear to be nicely aligned and level.  Teeth are a little bit prominent through the radial cortex and the attached gingiva is very thin, particularly over the central incisors.  In the upper arch, Meghan has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has bands on the first and second molars.  Meghan has a slight Class II end-on occlusion being probably about 2 to 3 m Class II.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  There is no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, she has a click in the right joint at about 20 mm and a closing click at about 10.  On excursion movements, the click is much more noticeable in the right joint, but the left joint seems to function rather smoothly.  The maximum opening is 59 mm and excursion movements to the right are 10 mm and to the left 8 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  Turbinates look moderately enlarged.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is fairly straight.  Turbinates are enlarged.  

Axial view shows just a slightly increase thickening of the sinus membrane in the anterior aspect of the right sinus.  The septum has a little bit of a curvature to it.  Turbinates appear quite large and there appears to be constricture of the nasal airway.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Joint space appears fairly well balance.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little flattening on the anterior head.  The condyle appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  There appears to be an increased anterior joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with moderately good mediolateral width.  The joint space is fairly well balanced, but could be slightly decreased at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Meghan has a Class II skeletal relationship and a slightly increased occlusal plane angle and slight vertical maxillary excess.  Oropharyngeal airway looks good.  Nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue is still present, but is not too significant.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR).
Maxillary anterior vertical hyperplasia. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia. 
Slight Class II end-on occlusion. 
High occlusal plane angle. 
Impacted third molars x4.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Lack of attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch.
Lip incompetence of 6 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJ. 
2.	Periodontal evaluation with possible gingival grafting in the lower anterior arch.
3.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Try to narrow the transverse 			cuspid-to-cuspid width. 
	b.	Continue to align and level the lower arch.  Try to expand the transverse 
                        cuspid-to-cuspid width as well as the bicuspids slightly to be in concert 
                        with the width of the upper arch in a Class I occlusal position. 
4.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect superiorly 2 or 3 mm to 		establish a good tooth lip relationship. 
	d.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
	e.	Partial inferior turbinectomies.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.