ALLISON PATTON 									08/11/2006
Age: 17

Allison was referred by Dr. Ronald Quintia in Tucson, AZ and also Dr. Peter Kay, plastic surgeon in Tucson. 

Allison has had some previous surgery for removal of a bone spur from the left side of the nasal septum.  Apparently following the surgeries is when her TMJ problems began.  The problems actually began that same day.

PRIMARY CONCERNS: 
TMJ pain and dysfunction.
Bite is way off and getting worse.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Headaches.

ADDITIONAL MEDICAL CONDITIONS:
Gastroesophageal reflux disease.
Gastritis.
Cutis laxa. 
Muscle weakness.

There are five people in the family that that the cutis laxa including Allison, her brother (20 years old), mother (age 51), aunt (age 42) and grandmother (age 81.)

MEDICATIONS: 
Amitriptyline 10 mg two tablets q.h.s.
Wellbutrin SR 150 mg one daily. 
Naproxen 375 mg p.r.n. severe pain. 
Nexium 40 mg every other day. 
Nasonex nasal spray p.r.n. 
Aleve p.r.n.
Tylenol p.r.n. 
Roxicet for severe pain ½ tablet.

Previous treatment for the TMJ problem that she has had has been with Dr. Luis Cueva beginning in June 2005.  He constructed splints in upper and lower, however, Allison's bite has continued to shift and change.  She also has had some physical therapy.  

In frontal view, upper lip length is 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm in the middle and probably 3 mm lateral to the tubercle.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline shifted just slightly to the right about 1 mm and the chin is about 1 to 2 mm to the right.  In profile view, she has a slight C-shaped curve to the upper lip.  Upper lip projection is actually fairly good.  It could be maybe 1 to 2 mm deficient at soft tissue point A.  Chin is retruded about 10 mm.  She has as neck postured forward head position.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  
ALLISON PATTON   			08/11/2006				Page 2


She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  No crowding present in the lower arch.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a small upper left lateral incisor and the right looks a little bit small as well.  When she bites together she occludes only the second molars.  All other teeth are out of occlusion.  She has an anterior open bite of about 5 mm.  She has a  Class II end-on cuspid relationship.  Transversely, the maxillary occlusal plane appears fairly level.  In the lower arch the left cuspid may be 1.5 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  The upper arch may be a little bit more symmetric.  Turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  The septum is deviated significantly off to the left side.  She still appears to have adequate airway on the left and increase airway dimension on the right side.  There does not appear to be any airway obstruction.  Columella is moderately wide and nostrils are somewhat narrow but opening them did not seem to affect her breathing abilities.   She does not snore.  She has some mild daytime somnolence and she has no sleep apnea symptoms.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars.  The right third molar is less developed than the rest of the teeth.  The crowns are formed  so far.  The rest of the teeth are all present.  Good root length.  The sinuses appear clear.  The septum is deviated off to the left but airway otherwise is reasonably clear.  Condyles appear to have undergone resorption as they appear short in length.  The left side may appear a little bit more short than the right side.  It appears to occlude only on the second molars.  

Waters view shows that she has a little thickening in the sinus membrane lining in the left sinus compared to the right sinus.  The rest of the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The bony septum is reasonably straight.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone resorption with loss of vertical height and volume.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space looks slightly increased in thickness.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that likewise has lost volume.  There is a pseudocyst filling up most of the head of the condyle.  Articular eminence is a little bit more shallow on this side as compared to the opposite side.  Joint space is slightly increased.  On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyles with some restricted translation.  In the open view it appears that there is a pseudocyst in the left condylar head as well as the right side.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Allison has as significant anterior open bite and a retruded mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 5 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 8 mm.  Occlusion plane is high.  Occludes only on the second molars.  To palpation she has quite high moderate pain over the TMJs, high moderate over the masseter muscles, posterior neck, moderate pain in the shoulders, temporalis area and milder tenderness in the SCMs and right medial pterygoid area.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  She said they stopped clicking and popping about six months ago.  
ALLISON PATTON 				08/11/2006				Page 3


DENTAL MODEL ANALYSIS:  She has had some shifting of her teeth.  It very well could be that the cutis laxa syndrome may also affect the periodontal ligaments.  Allison's mother states that it is difficult for the older family members to chew and they also have pain in their teeth.  Which could mean that the periodontal ligament may be involved in the process.  She also has a tooth size discrepancy of about 4 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:  
Cutis laxa.
Traumatically induced idiopathic condylar resorption with articular disc dislocation nonreducing.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.  
Anterior open bite (5 mm.)
Class II end-on occlusion.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
  Severe masticatory dysfunction.
  Occluding only on second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion.
  Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4 mm.  The patient has   
        small upper and lateral incisors.
13.  High occlusal plane angle facial morphology.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Surgery stage 1.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning of ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Presurgical orthodontics.  Use bonded brackets: No bands necessary.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up about 1 mm of space on each side of each of the maxillary lateral incisors to correct for the significant tooth size discrepancy.  Expand cuspids and bicuspids to create a more symmetric arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery stage 2.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect, expand and upright the incisors. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
Restorative dentistry to build up lateral incisors with bonding, Veneers or crowns. 