JOY PAYTON										06-02-04

Joy is 48 years old and referred by Dr. Kevin Porter, 4610 N. Garfield, Ste. A-6, Midland, TX  79705 and Dr. Lou Ann Gray, 3000 N. Garfield, Ste. 220, Midland, TX  79705. She also has seen Dr. James Compton, 4610 N. Garfield, Ste. A-9, Midland, TX  79705. 

Patient History

Joy has had a previous appendectomy, and she also has had two C-sections. Otherwise she is in good health except for arthritis in multiple joints, and she has painful swollen joints. She does drink a lot of ginger water and does have some Celebrex on hand for when she has flare-ups. She also takes meclizine for dizziness, but this only occurs about every six months or so. 

Joy has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, but does have vertigo that be quite severe causing nausea and vomiting, but this only occurs about every six months. Other joints that bother her include her wrists, hands, fingers, hips (left greater than right), ankles, feet, and toes. She has no known allergies and no known problems wearing jewelry. She is not aware of any clenching or bruxism. 

She did have orthodontics from the age of 15 to 17. 

Joy feels that her problems began about two years ago of unknown etiology. It was then that she noticed that her bite was changing and occluding only on her left posterior teeth. In approximately 01/2003, she did get a splint that she wears essentially all the time except at mealtimes. This keeps her fairly comfortable. She gets headaches about two times a month that she rates at about a level of 4 in her head with no specific delineation in the outside where those headaches occur. These headaches can last as long as 2 to 3 days. Her more severe headaches which she gets about twice a year can escalate to about 8 to 9. She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 3, overall pain on an average day at 1, jaw function at 3, diet at 2, and disability at 0. 

Patient Concerns

Her teeth don’t fit together very well
Difficulties eating and chewing
Painful to yawn
Pain in the jaw joints particularly if she doesn’t wear her splints and goes through jaw function

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Joy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 0.5 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm off to the left side. Chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.

In profile view, she has an obtuse nasolabial angle. Upper lip supralabrale is just slightly posterior to subnasale. Slight C-shaped curve to the upper lip. Chin appears AP deficient by probably about 6 to 8 mm. Chin-neckline is somewhat short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. She has some significant crowding, lower anterior arch, of probably about 4 mm or so.
Has a little gingival retraction around the lower incisors, although she has had a gingival graft done there. The left cuspid is probably 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. In the upper arch, she likewise has had first bicuspids extracted. In centric relation, she occludes only on the second molars on the left side, and all other teeth are out of occlusion. She has an open bite on the right side of probably a couple of millimeters. Mandible appears to be shifted a little bit toward the left side. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side and right side as well. In the upper arch, the left cuspid is a millimeter posterior to the right cuspid. Oropharynx appears clear, although the dimension of the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall may be slightly reduced. 

Intranasally, the septum appears to be deviated just a little bit off to the left side. Right turbinate is larger than the left turbinate but appears to be adequate airway on both sides. Joy gives a history of predominantly nose breathing. She does have some problems with snoring, and she goes through periods where sometimes it will be much more regular and other times where it won’t be quite as noticeable. It may be more noticeable when she sleeps on her back. She usually starts sleeping on her stomach but then eventually will end up on her back because it is more comfortable for her hips.

Maximal incisal opening is 40 mm but opening without significant discomfort 30 mm. Excursive movements to the right is 3 mm and to the left 6 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. Sinuses look relatively clear except there is a little mucocele in the maxillary right sinus. The airway looks reasonable good. She has severe arthritis in the left TMJ and also significant flattening of the articular eminence. In the right joint she has some significant arthritis although not nearly as severe as the left side. There is some anterior beaking present. Appears to be a little calcification in the left mandibular lingular area. Sinuses dip way down and around the root structures. 

Waters view shows a mucocele in the right maxillary sinus. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged. A little vertical asymmetry with the left side being about 2 to 3 mm shorter vertically than the right side at the angle area. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows severe arthritis affecting both the fossa and the condyle. Decreased joint space. Significant flattening of the articular eminence. Posterior protrusion of the condyle is present. Condyle appears sclerotic with what is left of it. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is arthritic but not nearly as severe as the opposite side. Some anterior beaking is present. Decreased joint space vertically and particularly at the anterior aspect between the articular eminence and the condyle. 

On opening, there is restricted translation of the left TMJ but relatively normal translation of the articular TMJ. Styloid process is fairly long on the right side and not as obvious on the left side. 

Cephalometrically, Joy appears to have some AP maxillary deficiency and some AP mandibular deficiency. Some vertical asymmetry in the mandible with the left side at the angle being about 5 to 6 mm shorter vertically than the opposite side. Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted with an airway dimension of less than 5 mm at the soft palate level. At the base of the tongue, the AP dimension is more like 9 to 10 mm. There is an anterior open bite present, and she occludes only on the second molars on the left side. Has a moderately high occlusal plane angulation. Head is tipped upward and not in a level position which actually increases her airway more than what it probably really is. Joy demonstrates a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1 although it is probably greater than that because she has some veneers on the anterior six teeth. This makes the incisal edges significantly wider by probably an extra millimeter or so. I suspect there is probably about a 3-mm tooth-size discrepancy. 

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ severe resorptive arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe deformation and nonreducing
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe deformation and nonreducing
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Missing all four first bicuspids
Class II end-on occlusion being worse on the left side
Mandibular dental midline shifted to the left 2 mm from the midline of the mandible and the facial midline 
Occluding only on the right second molars
High occlusal plane angle
Veneers on maxillary anterior six teeth
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of probably a couple of millimeters
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Snoring problems
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Vertigo

Recommended Treatment

General dentistry
Remove veneers from maxillary six teeth

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward and help correct for the tooth-size discrepancy

CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it and downgraft the posterior aspect
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)
Bilateral coronoidectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
