SHANNON PENCE									02/06/2008

Shannon is 27 years old.  Referred by Dr. William Hang.  She is in good health.  Shannon has had previous orthodontics in 1994 through 1996.  She has had four bicuspids extracted during that process.  She had a periodontal graft in 2003.  Shannon is not sure when her TMJ problems began, but maybe as early as 15.  She used to chew a lot of gum.  When she was about 16 or 17, she developed some earache problems and went to an ear specialist who told her that the problems were not with her ears, but this continued for a while.  The only medication Shannon currently takes is Yaz.  She gets regular headaches about once or twice a week primarily on the right side in the frontal and temporal area and behind her eye.  She has developed some migraine headaches that have developed over the last 2 years, but she has only had about 3 or 4 severe ones.  She does not really have any pain in her TMJ area and rates her average daily pain at about a level of 1.  She rates her jaw function at 1, diet at 0, disability at 0.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing of her teeth.  She has no problems with earaches, but gets occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  Primary concerns that Shannon has includes the following:

	1.  Clicking and popping in the joints. 
	2.  A gummy smile.
	3.  Facial asymmetry.
	4.  Difficulties breathing.

Shannon feels that her face has become elongated over the last few years compared to what it was.  She feels that her lips do not fit together as easily as they used to and she feels as though she has a more gummy kind of smile.  She has to strain her lips more to get them together.  She feels that there is some facial asymmetry and associated dimension as well as her smile pattern that is more obvious.  Shannon states that when she was younger she did not have as much of a gummy smile or the difficulties getting her lips together like she currently has.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Shannon has a little bit of increased fullness on the left side of her face compared to the right side probably about the AP angle area.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 5.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is shifted from left to the right.  In profile view, she may have some slight AP maxillary deficiency about 3 mm subnasally.  She has an obtuse nasolabial angle.  Chin is retruded probably about 8-10 mm.  Chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  Dorsal length of the nose appears a little bit of short, and she has a significant obtuse nasolabial angle.  Nasal tip is probably about 3 mm.  Intraorally, Shannon is missing the lower first bicuspids.  She has some mild chronic lower anterior arch crowding.  An accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch is present.  She has the rest of her teeth back to the third molars.  She is also missing the first bicuspids, but has all of her other teeth.  She has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has a crossbite with the maxillary lift cuspid.  She has a posterior yaw with the maxillary mandible being shifted towards the left side about 2 mm.  The oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy and normal except she has fairly large tonsils.  She does have a history of getting recurrent tonsillitis.  She does get tonsillitis about 3 times per year.  Intranasally, the septum has a few curves in it.  The right turbinate is extremely large and almost touching against the septum.  Left turbinate is moderately enlarged at least anteriorly.  Shannon does believe that she is predominantly a mouth breather particularly when she is sleeping.  She breathes through her mouth during the day as well.  Shannon’s lip incompetence is about 8 mm.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness of the masseter muscles and TMJs.  Maximal size is 49 mm, opening without discomfort at 21 mm.  Excursion movement to the right is 9 mm, to the left 6 mm.  On opening, she has a prominent pop in the left joint at about 15 mm of opening and at about 5 mm of closing.  On the right side, there may be a very soft click there at around 5 mm of opening and closing.  On excursion movements, she also had clicking particularly in the left joint and it felt as though there was some in the right side as well.  After clinical examination, Shannon did state that her jaws were quite sore and uncomfortable from the relatively simple manipulations that we did.  This is indicative of the TMJ pathology that she has present.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four first bicuspids.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  It is difficult to evaluate condyles.  No disc pathology noted.  Waters view shows that there is some distortion of the nasal septum.  Right turbinate appears extremely large and blocking the airway.  The left side is moderately enlarged with a somewhat narrow residual airway.  Right TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle may have a little sclerosis on top, a little bit flattened on the anterior head.  There appears to be decreased vertical and posterior joint space.  The articular eminence appears flatter on this side than the opposite side.  Left TMJ tomogram along the anterior aspect and maybe posterior aspect as well, there appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is in an inclination.  On opening, there is moderate translation in both joints.  Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Shannon has anterior vertical maxillary excess.  Mandible appears retruded.  The maxilla appears to slightly AP retruded.  She has a good oropharyngeal airway.  Shannon has a moderate occlusal plane inclination. Some views on Shannon’s i-CAT shows that she has enlarged turbinates particularly on the right side.  The right turbinate appears to be almost twice as large as the left one.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Nasal septum is deviated.  Shannon has no significant tooth size discrepancy.

The basic diagnoses of Shannon would be as follows:

1.  Total vertical maxillary excess.
2.  Slight AP maxillary deficiency.
3.  Slight transverse maxillary deficiency. 
4.  AP mandibular deficiency. 
5.  Anterior mandibular vertical excess. 
6.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with reduction.
7.  Moderately high occlusal plane angle.
8.  Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s disturbance of approximately 2 mm.  
9.  A crossbite of maxillary right cuspid.
10.  Headaches.
11.  Myofascial pain affecting predominantly the masseter muscles.
12.  Lip incompetence of 8 mm.
13.  Missing all four first bicuspids, but has all four third molars.
14.  Hypertrophied turbinates.
15.  Nasoseptal deviation.
16.  Nasal airway obstruction.
17.  Predominantly mouth breather.
18.  External nasal deformity with the nose deviated about 3 mm off to the right side and 
       with significant nostril show.
19.  Maxillary-mandibular yaw with posterior aspects being rotated 2 mm to the left. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

	1.  Presurgical orthodontics.
a.  Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies (lateral incisor roots currently are tipped distally).
b.  Align and level mandibular arch.   Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy and to keep from flaring the incisors any further forward. 
	2.  Surgery.
	     a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to move the mandible superiorly, decrease  occlusal plane angle and correct the posterior yaw.
c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect superiorly, upright the centrals and correct any transverse discrepancy.
d.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
e.  Possible nasoseptoplasty.
f.  Mandibular anterior horizontal osteotomy to shorten the mandible vertically and augment at pogonion. 
g.  External rhinoplasty to straighten the nose and lengthen it slightly to decrease nostril show.
	3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.