DEBORAH PEACOCK								02/05/2007

Debbie is 52 years old and referred by Dr. Jim Compton and Dr. Beau Boren, 4610 N. Garfield, Ste. A-9, Midland, TX.  Debbie has had previous tonsillectomy, C-section, appendectomy and ovary removed.  Debbie has been told by Dr. Charles Holt that she has arthritis in her jaw joints as well as in her neck.  She says she has other joints that feel like she has arthritis there. 

MEDICATIONS:
Zetia 10 mg daily.
Prilosec 20 mg daily. 
Zyrtec 10 mg daily.
Steroid ointment.
Multivitamin.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Teeth do not meet.
Difficulty chewing.
Painful yawning.
Headaches.
Jaw joint pain.
Jaw fatigue.

Date of onset for Debbie's problems may have began as long as 30 years ago when she was involved in a motor vehicle accident when she was about 16.  She apparently had a whiplash injury but was unaware of jaw problems at that time.  It was only about 2 years ago that she really began developing problems when she would get a closed lock situation.  She had a nightguard in 2005 to try to relieve some of the symptoms.  Her problems got worse about 1 year ago.  She had physical therapy from November of 2005 to January 2006.  The physical therapy got the locking undone and she could open wider but continued to have locking problems.  She then underwent splint therapy from January through August of 2006.  The splint therapy did change her occlusion.  She stopped the splint therapy in August then about 3 months later her bite shifted back into where the teeth did begin to meet again.  

Debbie gets headaches that occur predominately in the temple area but can come to the frontal area about 5 times per week although more recently they have decreased slightly from that occurrence rate that she registers at a level of 5.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain 5, jaw function at 7, diet at 5 and disability at 1.  

She gets earaches bilaterally but no problems with tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her neck, wrists, fingers and toes.  She has no known allergies and no problems wearing jewelry.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION: 
In frontal view, Debbie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1.  Maxillary mandibular dental midlines are pretty much on the facial midline.  Chin may be just slightly off to the right side a couple of mm.  
DEBORAH PEACOCK				02/05/2007			Page 2

In profile view, Debbie has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  Chin appears somewhat retruded of probably about 10 mm.  Chin-neckline is a little bit short.  She has a head postured forward neck position.  Chin-neck angle is moderately well defined.  Intraorally, Debbie has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, Debbie has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being about 3 to 4 mm Class II on the left side and maybe 4 mm on the right side.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm.  Intranasally, the septum appears reasonably straight.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged but Debbie does not complain of difficulties breathing through her nose.  To palpation she has moderate pain over the left masseter and very mild tenderness over the SCMs, shoulders, left styloid area and left TMJ.  On opening, she would inconsistently have an audibile pop on the left side with probably about 35 to 40 mm of opening.  She had a closing pop of probably 30 mm.  The right side seems to function relatively smoothly.  Debbie has a transverse cant to the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 to 1.5 mm higher than the left side.  She has some lower arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being about 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  She has some fairly significant crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Debbie has had her wisdom teeth removed.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Turbinates appears moderately enlarged.  Condyles appear a little bit arthritic with the right one appearing much smaller in size compared to the left one. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. There appears to be some deviation in the nasal septum particularly in the bony area.  The turbinates look moderately enlarged.  Vertical asymmetry is appreciated in the mandible where the right angle is probably 4 to 5 mm higher than the left angle.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a hockey stick shape to it.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  Perhaps some decreased superior joint space.  Otherwise, the joint space does not look too bad.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is much smaller in size.  There appears to be pseudocyst in the condyle.  There is anterior beaking present.  Significantly decreased vertical joint space.  Articular eminence is much more shallow than the left side.  On opening in both joints there is fairly good translation with there actually being a little bit greater translation on the left side than the right side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Debbie has a skeletal Class II and an occlusal Class II malocclusion.  Suprisingly, the oropharyngeal airway actually looks to be in better dimension than anticipated although the airway at the soft palate level is only about 6 mm as well as at the base of the tongue.  Tooth size analysis reveals that Debbie has a tooth size discrepancy of 1 mm. The dental model also reveals that she has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch and some crowding in the upper anterior arch as well.
DEBORAH  PEACOCK				02/05/2007			Page 3

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Class II occlusion.
Crowding in lower anterior arch.
Crowding in upper anterior arch.
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
TMJ pain.
 Headaches.
 Myofacial pain.
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference about 1 mm.
 Lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid 2 mm anterior to the right cuspid. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure.  Use Class III elastics on the left side if tolerated to try to distalize the left mandibular cuspid which is 2 mm anterior to the right cuspid.  Consider slenderizing the first molar and the bicuspids on the mandibular left side to help achieve the AP shift in the left cuspid.
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction with total joint prostheses.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
