MACKENSIE PEAK									10-11-02

MacKensie is 20 years old and referred by Dr. Moody Alexander.

Patient History

She has been diagnosed with hypothyroidism in the past, and MacKenzie has some allergy problems. She broke her wrist in 1992; that is doing well now.

SHE HAS BEEN TOLD THAT SHE IS ALLERGIC TO PENICILLIN.

Current Medications

She takes Armour 1 gr per day and Unithroid 75 mcg.

Patient Concerns

Primary concern that MacKensie has is a gummy smile. She has had an aesthetic gingivoplasty performed, but this has not corrected her problem. 

She has no problems with breathing through her nose, earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, headaches, TMJ pain, nor TMJ noises. 

She has had no previous orthodontic treatment.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, MacKensie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is 6 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular midline is deviated about 1 to 1.5 mm to the right. Chin is pretty much on the facial midline. 

In profile view, she has sort of a C-shaped curve to the upper lip. A little prominence of the nasal dorsum. In frontal view, the nose also is a little bit broad. Upper lip supralabrale is just slightly posterior to the subnasale. Chin appears slightly retruded by probably about 5 to 8 mm. Upper lip is retruded by probably 3 to 4 mm. Chin-neckline appears slightly short, and chin-neck angle is not really well defined. As she postures her mandible forward a little bit, it improves the AP position of the mandible, although the lower third face is still somewhat long. She does have some lip incompetence of probably 5 to 6 mm. She does have a head postured forward neck position. Clinical crown length is approximately 10 mm. Gingiva still exposed is probably about 7 mm. 

The left side might be about a millimeter longer in vertical length as compared to the right side.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars erupted in. Some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. Some slight lower arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being about a millimeter posterior to the left cuspid. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She is essentially just slightly Class II bilaterally by about 2 mm. Has an anterior deep bite of probably about 6 to 7 mm. Covers almost the entire lower crowns with the upper teeth. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva, however, in all quadrants. 

She has no myofascial pain or discomfort. No TMJ symptoms. Joints function smoothly. Incisal opening is about 59 mm. Excursive movement to the left about 11 mm and to the right about 9 mm. 

Oropharynx appears clear. 

MacKensie has relatively moderate-size turbinates and appears to have good nasal airway with it being greater on the right side as compared to the left because of a slight deviation of the nasal septum to the left side. She has a wide columella base, which causes some constricture of her nose. Opening up the nostrils enabled her to breathe a little bit easier. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Radiographic evaluation shows the absence of all four third molars. Sinuses look relatively clear. Nasal airway looks clear. Condyles appears a little bit flattened on the anterior aspects but otherwise look fine. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows some significant flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. Slightly decreased joint space posteriorly. Significant depression at the base of the articular eminence where most likely the posterior band sits. Articular eminence is moderately steep and fairly long in length. 

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows some significant flattening on the head of the condyle. Articular eminence has a moderate slope to it. There is significant depression at the base of the articular eminence and probably where the posterior band is sitting. There is slightly decreased posterior joint space. She does have a rudimentary impacted maxillary left third molar.

Opening views show good translation of the condyles well beyond the articular eminences bilaterally.

Waters view shows sinuses look relatively clear. Some deviation of the nasal septum is probably present. Turbinates appear moderate in size with probably better airway on the right side as compared to the left side.

Cephalometric evaluation shows that she does have her head tipped up slightly. Has vertical maxillary excess. Some difference of vertical height through the inferior borders of the mandible and vertical height difference at the occlusal surface area. Turbinates do not look particularly enlarged. 

Tooth-size analysis reveals that there is a 3-mm discrepancy beween the upper and lower anterior teeth. 

Basic Diagnoses

Vertical maxillary excess.
Slight AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion (2 to 3 mm).
Anterior deep bites of 6 mm.
Mandibular anterior teeth occluding on the palate.
Reverse curve of occlusion, upper arch.
Slightly accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch.
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm.
Mandibular arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch.
Mandibular dental midline shifted off to the right of the mandibular midline.
Vertical inclination of maxillary incisors.
Slight over-inclination of mandibular incisors.
Relatively hypertrophied turbinates.
Wide columella.
External nasal deformity.

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up 1 mm of space around each of the upper lateral incisors.
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 1.5 mm of tooth structure. 
To correct mandibular arch asymmetry, use some Class II elastics on the left side and Class III elastics on the right side to try to shift the right cuspid forward a millimeter and the right cuspid posteriorly the same amount. This should require probably just a couple of months of elastics. Objective would be to get the lower dental midline directly onto the chin midline and to align it with the maxillary midline.

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly approximately 6 mm.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward about 5 or 6 mm.
Partial inferior turbinectomies.
Surgical removal of maxillary left impacted third molar.
External nasal reconstruction including columella reconstruction.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

Restorative dentistry to place bonding or veneers on the maxillary lateral incisors