JANIS PEPPER 									12/13/2006

Janis is 58 years old and is referred by Dr. Alex Limanni, 712 N. Washington, Ste. 200, Dallas, TX, 75246.  She has been diagnosed with the following conditions: Sjögren syndrome, fibromyalgia and sleep apnea.  She had her tonsils removed at the age of 4.  She had a D&C at age 38.  She had an appendectomy at age 40.  Other than those factors, she is in reasonably good health.  Janis is taking 10 medications and that list is included in our notes.  In addition, there are 6 additional supplements that she takes.  

Last week when her severe pain developed, her bite changed and shifted also and for several days her teeth did not fit together very well.  She probably developed some muscle spasms that shifted her bite off and she felt her posterior teeth did not help but the teeth in the right side around the bicuspid area were hitting.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
The amount of damage to her jaw joints and teeth.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Sleep apnea.

Janis' problems began in her 20s when her left jaw locked up.  Etiology is unknown.  She tolerated the situation for quite a few years.  It is just in the past year that her pain has increased significantly.  She has received no specific treatment for her TMJ problems.  She does snore when she does not wear the CPAP but with the CPAP machine she does snore.  She is moderately tired during the day.  She was diagnosed with sleep apnea in July of 2004. 

Janis does have significant sleep apnea and uses a CPAP machine.  The CPAP machine apparently does not increase any of her TMJ problems.  She has had a sleep study but does not have those results with her today.  

She gets earaches on the left side frequently of moderate intensity.  She gets ringing that is severe and continuous.  She gets occasional lightheadedness.  Other joints that bother her include her wrists, hands, fingers and sometimes her feet.  She is aware of clenching during the day but is not sure if she clenches at night or not.  She gets headaches at a level of 8 that occur predominately on the left side in the frontal, temporal, posterior head and on the top of the head and on the right side in the posterior aspect and top of the head.  She rates her TMJ pain recently at a level of 8, average daily pain at 8, jaw function and diet at 9, disability at 7.  

In frontal view, Janis has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -1.  Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline as is the chin and mandibular dental midline is fairly close as well.  In profile view, Janis has a head postured forward neck position.  Maxilla appears to have fairly good AP balance with perhaps maybe just a couple of mm AP deficient but not too significant.  Chin is about 12 mm AP deficient.  Chin-neckline is not well defined.  Submental areas are full.  

JANIS PEPPER				12/13/2006				Page 2

Trachea appears to be positioned anteriorly.  Intraorally, in the lower arch she is missing the left first molar and significant lingual inclination of the second molar.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has some attrition on the incisor edges.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship of about 2 mm on the right side and perhaps 3 mm on the left side.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 1-1/2 mm.  She has a 2 to 3 mm anterior overjet.  Intraorally, in the oropharyngeal area, the tissues look healthy.  The uvula is elongated but extremely thin.  Soft palate appears to be elongated and posteriorly positioned with a decreased space between the soft palate and posteropharyngeal wall area.  Faucial pillars may be slightly constricted but not too significant.  Intranasally, she has some spurring off the base of the nose in both the left and right sides.  Right turbinate is moderately enlarged.  Left turbinate at least anteriorly appears to be a little bit more normal size but cannot see the posterior aspect of it.  Maximal incisal opening is 43 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is 7 mm, left 10 mm.  Opening without discomfort 21 mm.  To palpation, she has some mild to moderate pain over the styloids, SCMs, shoulders and moderate pain over the left TMJ.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  Mandibular left first molar is absent with mesial drifting of the second molar.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Turbinates appear somewhat large but there appears to be adequate airway.  The left condyle appears smaller than the right one and it appears a little bit more arthritic. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows there is some arthritis present with some anterior beaking.  There appears to be decreased superior joint space.

Right TMJ shows a condyle with a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  A little bit of anterior beaking.  Joint space looks reasonably well balanced.  There may be slight decreased posterior joint space.  On opening, there is good translation of both the condyles but being a little bit greater on the right side as compared to the left side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the mandible appears retruded.  Soft palate appears somewhat elongated.  Oropharyngeal airway at the base of the soft palate measures less than 3 mm at the soft palate level and measures about 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  She has a skeletal and an occlusal Class II relationship.  Tooth size analysis shows that there is a Bolton's difference of 1 mm but probably it may be a little bit higher than that because of the lingual buccal thickness of the incisors.  The other teeth were aligned properly and we could get in a good Class I cuspid molar relationship.  Janis also states she has difficulties swallowing.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Sjögren's syndrome.
Fibromyalgia. 
Left TMJ severe arthritis.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
JANIS PEPPER				12/13/2006				Page 3

AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
Class II end-on occlusion.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
 High-occlusal plane angle.
 Soft palate and uvula hyperplasia.
 Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 Severe sleep apnea.
 Missing mandibular left first molar.
 Crowding of upper anterior arch and crowding in lower anterior arch.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing about 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward.  Upright the mandibular left second molar and distalize about 2 mm to create a normal first molar space.
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ total joint prostheses for TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and down graft it posteriorly.  
Bilateral coronoidectomies.  
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry.
Osseointegrated implant to mandibular left first molar area with placement of crown versus 3-unit bridge.
 