 KAY EMBLEN-PERRY								05/23/2005

Kay is 42 years old and is referred by Dr. Patrick Grossmann, 11 Wimpole St. London, WIG9ST UK.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
TMJ pain. 
Jaw and facial pain.
Headaches.
Limited jaw function.
Difficulties eating and chewing. 
Inability to work because of her pain and dysfunctional problems.
Severe daytime tiredness. 
Sleep disorder.
Difficulty breathing through the nose. 

Her TMJ problems began to the best of her knowledge about 22 months ago following a third molar extraction.  She has had some extensive physical therapy performed as well as splint therapy and acupuncture.  In November of 2004, she had bilateral disc repositioning procedures performed.  These apparently have been unsuccessful and she continues to have severe pain, headache and dysfunctional problems.

She gets headaches in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally at about a level of 5.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain around the head and neck area at 5, but it easily escalates to 8.  She rates her jaw function at 9, diet at 7, disability at 8.  Maximal incisal opening is 6 mm.  Her excursive movements are less than ½ mm in each direction.  To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the masseter muscles, moderate pain over the TMJs and milder pain to palpation over the temporalis, medial pterygoids and styloid areas.  She gets earaches, vertigo and hearing loss that comes and goes.  She has no other joint problems.  She does get numbness in her fingers that comes and goes.  Her pain is worse in the afternoons and evenings.  Talking and working significantly increases her pain levels. 

CLINICAL EVALUATION:
Frontal view shows reasonably good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Nasal tip is deviated 2 mm off to the right side.  Upper lip length is 22 mm and tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm.  In profile view, she is AP deficient in the maxilla by 4 to 5 mm and AP deficient in the mandible by 18 to 20 mm.  She has a Class II end-on occlusion and an anterior open bite of 2 mm.  She occludes only on the second molars and all her other teeth are out of occlusion.  She cannot open far enough for me to evaluate the oropharyngeal areas or to evaluate for any other intraoral pathology because of the limitation of only 6 mm of opening. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of mandibular left and right third molars and maxillary right third molar.  Maxillary left third molar is somewhat in position.  The patient is occluding only on the second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

KAY EMBLEN-PERRY			05/23/2005				Page 2

Joint appears somewhat arthritic but difficult to tell on this view.  Left turbinate appears enlarged. 

Waters view shows that she has a large septal spur off the left side of the bony septum.  Turbinates appear quite large and appear to obliterate the nasal airway.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with decreased posterior and vertical joint space.  There is increased anterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  This is likely indicative of anteriorly displaced disc with a closed lock situation. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with decreased posterior and superior joint space.  There is some significant anterior beaking on this side.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is increased anterior joint space.  Images compatible with anteriorly displaced disc.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency.  She has an anterior open bite.  She occludes only on the second molars.  She has a decreased oropharyngeal airway.  She has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reductions with adhesions and a closed lock.
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II occlusion.
Anterior open bite. 
Occludes only on the second molars.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Nasoseptal deviation with large spur.
 Nasal airway obstruction. 
 Severe TMJ pain.
 Severe headaches.
 Severe myofascial pain.
 Severe limited jaw opening of only 6 mm. 
 Severe daytime somnolence.
 Earaches and vertigo.




KAY EMBLEN-PERRY 			05/23/2005				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery treatment option 1 (for optimal treatment outcome.)
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. 
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.  (Harvest from the abdomen or buttock.)
Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
Nasal septoplasty. 
Surgical option 2.  (This would be significant compromise relative to airway and facial balance but would be a good option for eliminating the TMJ pain, headaches and myofascial pain as well as reestablishing jaw function.)
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and small mandibular advancements in a counterclockwise rotation and with total joint prostheses.
Bilateral fat grafts to TMJs.  (Harvest from abdomen or buttock.)
Surgical option 3.  (This would be the poorest prognosis relative to stability jaw function and elimination of pain.  If this procedure fails then we would need to proceed on with option #1 or #2.  This treatment also will not address the airway functional problems nor the significant facial imbalance.)
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization.
Post surgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

Treatment option #1 would give by far the best treatment outcome relative to function, pain and facial balance.  Treatment option #3 has the poorest prognosis and options #2 and 3 will not address the significant airway problems nor the significant facial imbalances that are present.  