PENNY PERKINS									02-13-03

Penny is 39 years old and referred by Dr. Kirk Fridrich, Univ. of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, Iowa.

Patient Concerns

Penny’s primary concerns at this time include the following:

Severe right TMJ pain
Difficulties eating and chewing
Painful to talk, which interferes with her profession
She has had to take a medical leave from teaching school because of her severe incapacitating pain problems
Bite has significantly shifted since the last surgery, and she occludes only on two teeth with all other teeth being out of occlusion

Patient History

Penny’s problems in her joints actually began in 1983, when she was in college and she yawned. While in college, she had five surgeries. On December 27, 1983, she had a left TMJ arthroplasty and Dacron-reinforced Silastic implant placed. On March 20, 1985, the left TMJ Silastic implant was removed. August 13, 1985, a right TMJ arthroplasty was performed with placement of a Proplast Teflon IPI. December 26, 1985, the Proplast Teflon implant was removed and a Silastic implant placed. June 9, 1987, the right TMJ Silastic implant was removed. September 5, 2002, a right TMJ Christensen metal fossa device was placed. Penny’s pain has not improved since placement of the Christensen prosthesis. She says that the pain is somewhat different, but the intensity and severity are quite similar. She underwent splint therapy in October of 2002, and this seemed to help a little bit, but there was controversy between her doctors as to its applicability. 

Penny has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. She does have right-sided noise hypersensitivity, and she has “squeaking” and “squishy” kind of noises on the right side. She describes her pain as severe, unrelenting pain primarily confined to the right TMJ area. Of interest, she did have migraine headaches that were fairly severe last summer. She is treated with Remeron, and the migraines went away. She was then able to wean herself off that medication and has had no significant problems with migraines since that time. She has no cranial nerve V or VII dysfunctions at this time. She gets headaches about once every two weeks currently primarily in the frontal area behind her eyes that she registers at about a level of 7. She registers her TMJ pain on an average day at about 8, overall pain on an average day at 8, jaw function, diet, and disability all at 8. Her TMJ pain becomes significant worse with the more jaw function. Thus, since she is a teacher, she has had to take a medical leave because of the severity of the pain and the increase in pain intensity with talking. 

Current Medications

Penny currently takes the following medications:
Nabumetone (an anti-inflammatory)
Tylenol #3.
Klonopin 0.5 mg q.h.s. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Penny has fairly good facial symmetry. The right side of the face may be a little bit shorter vertically as compared to the left side, with the right mandible being about 3 or 4 mm higher than the left side. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is about a millimeter off to the right. Mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Chin is a little bit off to the right maybe a couple of millimeters. 

In profile, Penny has fairly good facial balance. Perhaps some slight AP deficiency in the mandible but not too significant.

Intraorally, Penny has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has some fairly significant crowding, lower anterior arch. Has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. 

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Incisors are both rotated a little bit mesially, but otherwise the teeth are reasonably aligned. In centric relation, she occludes only on the right side, and she has a complete open bite on the left side with the teeth apart probably 2 to 3 mm. It appears that she hits just on her upper first and second molars and lower first and second molars, and all other teeth are out of occlusion. Just a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side by maybe 1 to 2 mm and the left side is about 3 mm. Transversely, the left maxilla is down about a millimeter or 2 compared to the right. Vertical overbite is about 1 mm and overjet is probably 2 to 3 mm. To palpation, Penny has severe pain over the right TMJ but mild to moderate pain over the right temporalis. No other areas are tender around the head and neck area. Maximal incisal opening is 26 mm, but she could open about 23 without severe pain. Excursive movements to the right 5 mm and to the left 2 mm. On the right side on opening, she has some squeaky noises. On the left side, the joint functions reasonably smoothly.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the maxillary sinuses are clear. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged, but the airway looks reasonable. Missing all four third molars, but the rest of the teeth are present. She has a metal Christensen fossa liner in the right side, and there appears to be significant loss of vertical height of the condyle on that side. The remaining condylar neck appears a little bit broad. 

Left TMJ shows a condyle that is a little bit sclerotic and somewhat flattened on the superior anterior head. Joint space appears a little bit narrow.
Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Nasal airway looks reasonably good. Fossa liner is seen on the right side. One of the screws might be just a little bit extruded. It can be seen that the occlusion is hitting prematurely on the right side and the left side has an open bite. The vertical asymmetry in the mandible is also noted with the left side being 3 to 4 mm shorter than the right side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows severe arthritic changes in the left joint. There is significantly decreased superior and posterior joint space. In fact, there are some areas that it appears that there is bone on bone contact. Articular eminence is fairly flat, and it appears as though it may have been altered as well as the condylar head in previous surgeries. There is a notch in the posterior aspect of the condylar head and a little bone that might be extruding posteriorly against the posterior wall of the fossa. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows the presence of the Christensen fossa. The condylar head itself appears to contact on an anterosuperior aspect of the remaining condylar head and neck component. The posterior aspect of the condyle appears to not be occluding with the fossa. Significantly increased posterior joint space is what one would normally expect to see. The condyle appears to be postured forward in the fossa on this view probably 4 to 5 mm compared to where the normal position should be. It appears that she occludes on her molars only. 

Opening view shows minimal translation in the left joint and very minimal or no translation in the right joint.

Cephalometrically, she has slight AP mandibular deficiency. She has an overjet of about 2 to 3 mm. Occlusal plane may be slightly elevated. Lower incisors are slightly overangulated compared to the chin. Oropharyngeal airway space measures about 6 mm at the base of the soft palate and closer to 8 mm at the base of the tongue. The tongue is held low in the mouth, so the airway is probably pretty good.

Basic Diagnoses

Right TMJ Christensen fossa prosthesis in place but with severe arthritis of the mandibular condyle
Left TMJ severe arthritis
Right mandibular vertical hypoplasia secondary to right TMJ loss of condylar height
Class II end-on occlusion
Open bite extending from the right second bicuspid through and inclusive of the left second molar
Occluding only on the right mandibular and maxillary first and second molars
Tooth-size discrepancy with the lower anterior six teeth being approximately 3 mm larger relative to the upper anterior six teeth to fit together properly
Severe TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Headaches 
Hypersensitivity to noise
Rule out hypersensitivity to metals
History of previous alloplastic implants to both left and right TMJs 

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth, removing approximately 3 mm of tooth structure in order to keep from flaring them any further forward, eliminate the crowding, and correct the tooth-size discrepancy. Consider stripping the lower bicuspids as well removing 0.5 mm of tooth structure from each lower bicuspid. Maximize posterior anchorage and retract, and this should minimize flaring forward of the lower incisors

Surgery
Treatment Option 1
Surgery, Stage 1
Removal of right TMJ Christensen fossa prosthesis
Bilateral TMJ CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol)
Surgery, Stage 2
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen or buttocks)

Treatment Option 2
Removal of right TMJ Christensen fossa prosthesis
Right TMJ condylectomy, debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis
Fat graft to right TMJ (harvested from abdomen or buttock)
Left mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy with rigid fixation to aid in correcting the occlusion

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

I discussed with the Perkins’ the intended surgery and the surgical options she has as well as potential risks and complications. They seem to understand. I did answer all the questions that they had at this time. 