PEGGY PENCE									07/21/2008

Peggy is 58 years old.  She is referred by Dr. Bill Hang.  She has had previous appendectomy, bunionectomy, dilatation and curettage.  More recently, she has had a colonoscopy and endoscopy in 2007.  She takes the following medications:

Claritin D p.r.n. 
Flonase daily.
Pepcid 1 at bedtime.

Primary concerns that Peggy has includes the following:

Clicking in the left jaw joint. 
Nasal congestion with difficulties breathing through the nose. 
Cannot eat comfortably. 
Teeth are shifting. 
Headaches. 
TMJ pain. 
Wakes up tired. 
Difficulties breathing.

She has been previously diagnosed as having the following problems:

GERD.
Reactive airways.
Allergies to pollens, animal dander, etc.

She has no problems with earaches or tinnitus, but does get some vertigo.  The other joints that bother her include her thumbs and her knees.  She rates her headaches at about a level of 7 in the frontal and temporal area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 2, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 6, diet at 3, and disability at 6.  Peggy if stands talking to someone she occasionally will get lightheaded to the point that she feels that she has to grab onto something to keep from falling over.  Peggy is not aware of snoring at all, but she does have some moderate daytime somnolence and occasionally will wake with difficulties catching her breath.  She is not aware of snoring and has moderate daytime somnolence and maybe some mild sleep apnea symptoms.  She may have a mild sleep disorder and has nighttime mouth breathing and also sometimes during the day. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Peggy has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 30 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -1.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline may be just about 1 mm to the left.  Chin may be off to the left side a couple of millimeters.  In profile view, there may be just some slight AP maxillary deficiency.  The chin appears AP deficient by probably 10 to 12 mm.  In profile, the maxilla may be retruded about 3 mm, and chin maybe about 10 mm.  Intraorally, she is missing the lower left first bicuspid and on the right side she is missing first bicuspid and first molar, but has a replacement partial denture.  She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch, but has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she is missing first bicuspids as well.  She is basically a Class I cuspid molar bilaterally. She has about a 1 mm vertical overbite.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look healthy and normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The septum is deviated off to the left side.  There is probably moderate to severe nasal airway obstruction.  The luminal valves are quite constricted intranasally.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids as well as the right first molar.  She has crowns on all three mandibular molars.  The left side of the condylar head and neck appear somewhat shorter in length than the right side.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows that appears to be a significantly decreased vertical joint space, although the upper spacing elsewhere looks reasonably good.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little better of morphology than the other side.  The joint space appears decreased vertically.  On opening, there is restricted translation of both joints.  
Waters view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side.  The turbinate on the right side appears enlarged.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  
On opening, Peggy has an audible click at about 30 mm in the left joint and on closing it almost to the point of complete closure.  The right side seems to function relatively smoothly.  On excursion movements, she likewise has an audible click in the left joint, but the right side functions smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 57 mm, but without discomfort 27 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 9 mm, to the left 8 mm. 
Basic diagnoses for Peggy would be as follows:    

Left TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction. 
AP mandibular deficiency.  
AP maxillary deficiency.  
AP microgenia.
Deviated nasal septum.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Bilateral constricture of the nasal valves. 
Significant nasal airway obstruction. 
External nasal deformity. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.   Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgical Option 1.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a slight counterclockwise direction.  
Maxillary osteotomies to advance it and down graft posteriorly.
Nasal septoplasty.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Reconstruction of internal nasal valves.
External rhinoplasty and narrow nasal tip.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to AP augment the chin. 
3.   Surgical Option 2.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Left mandibular sagittal split osteotomy to maintain the occlusion and create space to accommodate the articular disc. 
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin. 
Nasal septoplasty.
Bilateral turbinectomies.
External rhinoplasty.
Reconstruct nasal valves.
4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

There are 2 treatment plans I discussed with Peggy.  Treatment option 1 obviously would get her a better aesthetic result for her, but I felt obligated to offer option 2 which is less involving eliminating the maxillary surgery.  