KIRBY PERES								12/05/2011

Kirby is 49 years old, birth date 10/15/1962.  Referred by Dr. Ron Groves, 2105 W. Southlake Blvd, Suite 245, Southlake, TX 76092.

Kirby is in good health with no major medical problems except he does have some allergies.  He currently takes Singulair 10 mg q.d. and Zyrtec q.d.  Kirby has no apparent TMJ issues.  Primary concerns Kirby has are as follows:

Crowded teeth.
Small lower jaw.
Snoring. 
Which teeth to be pulled relative to which method he plans to go with orthodontics only or with surgery and orthodontics.  

Kirby gets headaches about once or twice per week mainly in the frontal and temporal area on the left side at about a level of 3.  He has no TMJ pain and no daily myofascial pain.  He rates his jaw function, diet and disability at 0.  He gets no earaches, occasional tinnitus, no vertigo and no hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He does clench at nighttime.  He is predominantly a mouth breather and has moderate snoring.  He usually wakes up 2 or 3 times at night and is predominantly a mouth breather at nighttime and some during the day.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Kirby has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 26 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1.  The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm to the left and the chin is slightly to the left about 3 mm.  Kirby has a lip incompetence of about 6 mm.  He has probably about a 4 mm lower lip to lower teeth relationship.  In profile, the maxilla retruded about 8 mm.  The mandible is retruded about 20 mm.  The chin neckline is short and chin neckline moderately defined.  Intraorally, Kirby has all of his teeth present back through the third molars.  He has severe crowding in the lower anterior arch, and, in fact, the left second bicuspid is completely blocked lingually out of the arch.  On the right side, the first bicuspid is blocked somewhat buccally.  There is some significant crowding in the anterior six teeth.  He does have adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he also has all of his teeth back through the third molars and some moderate crowding as well.  He has an anterior open bite of about 4 mm.  He has got a full Class II relationship on the left side and Class II end-on on the right side.  He has a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being up about 1.5 mm at the cuspid area.  He has some significant lower arch asymmetry with the mandibular left cuspid being probably a good 5 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  In the upper arch, the left cuspid about 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  In Class I occlusion, he likely will have some posterior cross bite relationships.  Kirby has an overjet of 8 to 9 mm.  He has a V-shaped palate and maxillary dental arch.  The lower arch is a little bit more rounded.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Anteriorly, the nasal septum is deviated off towards the left side blocking off part of the left side of the nose.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged and appear a little bit engorged.  The left nostril is narrow.  The right side is more normal in size.  The maxillary incisal opening is 60 mm and excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  He has no tenderness around the head and neck area to palpation.

Radiographic evaluation demonstrates that he has all of his teeth including the third molars erupted into position.  He appears to have maybe some thickening of the sinus membrane in the right sinus, but the left one looks good.  Turbinates appear enlarged.  Could not evaluate the TMJs in this view.

Coronal view shows that there is some deviation of the nasal septum back in the bony area with a spur extending off from the left side.  The cut is done back inside the nose.  The turbinates are significantly enlarged and appear to obliterate most of the airway.  Sinus membrane on the right side has slight increased thickness, but the left side is clear.  

Axial view shows that the turbinates are enlarged and appear to obliterate most of the functional nasal airway.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  There is good vertical joint space and almost to an excessive amount.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  In one area, there appears to be some slight flattening on the top of the condyle particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head as well towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination and there is good joint space.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows that there is fairly good vertical joint space with just maybe a slight decreased lateral joint space.  The condyle has good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows that there is good condylar width and good vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 mm with a slight decreased lateral joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is an AP maxillary hypoplasia.  There is a rocker bottom shape to the maxillary arch with an accentuated curve of Spee.  In the lower arch, the lower incisors are a little bit lingually inclined.  Occlusal plane angle appears somewhat steep.  He has a skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 6 to 7 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 6 to 7 mm.  Turbinates appear to extend perhaps just slightly beyond the hard palate.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia.
Class II cuspid relationship on the left side and Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side. 
Occluding only on the molars with all other teeth out of occlusion. 
Anterior open bite of 4 to 5  mm.
Severe crowding lower arch.
Moderate crowding upper arch.  
Significant mandibular asymmetry with the left cuspid being 5 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  
Hypertrophied turbinates creating nasal airway obstruction.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 6 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Extract maxillary second bicuspids, mandibular left second bicuspid, mandibular 	right first bicuspid, and all four third molars.
2.	Orthodontics.  
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Try to lose posterior anchorage so that the 		inclination in the maxillary incisors is not significantly decreased.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch to try to establish good AP symmetry in 			between the left and right cuspid.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward 			approximately 20 mm.	
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, expand and level the maxilla.
	c.	Bilateral partial turbinates.
	d.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
4.	Restorative dentistry as necessary to replace the maxillary incisor veneers.