MONICA PEREZ									05/18/2007

Monica is 33 years old and is referred by Dr. Richard Ingraham.  She had a C-section in 2003 and also in 2000.  She had her tonsils removed in 1980.  Otherwise, she is in good health with no major medical problems.  She takes no medications.  Monica was diagnosed with having a heart murmur but this has required no treatment.  She currently takes birth control pills and will require a hysterectomy in the future.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Jaw popping.
Headaches.
Clenching.
Pain in the jaw joints.
Drooling during sleep.
Inability to eat certain foods.
She bites her cheeks and her lower lip.

Monica believes that her jaw problems began when she was about 6 to 7 years of age and it could be associated with when she had her tonsils removed but we are not sure.  She apparently complained at that age of something being wrong with her jaw.  She has had clicking her jaws as long as she can remember.  She began noticing the headaches when she was in high school.  Medication-wise she takes birth control pills and she takes ibuprofen 1 to 2 tablets at bedtime for her headaches and pain.  Monica rates her headaches at a level of 5 that occur in the frontal and top of the head area and these occur 3 to 5 days per week.  She rates her average TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain 5, jaw function 5, diet at 4, disability at 5.  She has no problems with earaches but gets tinnitus and vertigo but has no hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching her teeth at nighttime and also during the day.  She essentially has had no treatment for her situation to date.  Monica is aware of sometimes having snoring problems.  She has moderate daytime somnolence.  She wakes up at times unable to catch her breath.  

In frontal view, Monica has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm.  Maxillary midline and chin are pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 3 mm to the left.  Chin may be actually be shifted about 1 or 2 mm to the left.  In profile view, Monica has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  Chin is significantly retruded probably 12 to 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is moderately well defined.  In the lower arch, Monica has all the lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has significant crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has more crowding on the left side than the right side.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a Class II cuspid molar relationship and a full Class II on the left side.  She has about one mm vertical overbite relationship but has an 11 mm overjet relationship.  Monica shifts her mandible forward into a Class I position.  Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear normal.  Turbinates appear fairly large and may cause some nasal airway obstruction.  On opening, she has an audible click in the left joint at about 20 mm of opening and 10 mm of closing.  Actually, closing click is louder than the opening click.  Right joint seems to function reasonably smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm.  Excursive movements are 3 mm in each direction.
MONICA PEREZ				05/18/2007 				Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  Condyles look a little bit short in vertical height.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit posteriorly postured in the fossa.  Articular eminence has relatively low inclination and does not appear to be very long.  Condyle has reasonably good morphology.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Articular eminence is real shallow.  Joint space could be a little bit decreased but a little bit difficult to evaluate.  On opening, there is translation of both condyles.  

Waters view shows maxillary sinuses that may have a little bit of stuff in them.  Septum is reasonably straight though it deviates a little bit to the right and there is a little spur coming off the septum towards the right side.  Turbinates appear moderate in size with the left side appearing to have some obstruction.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a significantly retruded mandible and some maxillary alveolar protrusion.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 9 mm at the soft palate level and 10 mm at the base of the tongue.  Lower incisors appear over-angulated as do the upper incisors.  There is slight tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 1.5 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction. 
Severe AP mandibular deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Class II occlusion.
Significant crowding in lower anterior arch.
An 11 mm overjet relationship.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
TMJ pain.
 Headaches.
 Myofascial pain.

Unfortunately, the MRI was taken with the mandible postured forward and therefore the disc on the MRI was in the closed position.  I am suggesting that the MRI be redone with the patient in a centric relation to get a better idea of placement of the articular disc.  

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Redo closed position on the MRI.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary.
MONICA PEREZ				05/18/2007				Page 3

Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure and expand the arch slightly.  This should hopefully allow us to align the teeth non-extraction.  It could be considered to do some minor equilibrations on the lower first and second bicuspids as well to help minimize the flaring forward of the lower incisors.  
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand and correct any residual AP or vertical discrepancy.
Bilateral reduction inferior turbinectomy. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
