CHUN RONG PENG									10/01/2007

Chun Rong's problems began about 3 years ago when she had her wisdom teeth removed.  She began having problems after that time.  Since that time she has also had some paresthesia and tingling in the distribution of the left submandibular and mental nerve distribution.  Since 2005, she has had three splints made by three different "TMJ experts" without relieve.  She does not wear them anymore because they actually made her feel worse.

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo. She gets headaches two to three times a week that she rates about a level of 3 in the frontal and temporal area.  TMJ pain is a level of 5 predominately on the right side.  Average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 6, diet at 5 and disability at 6. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Headaches.
Pain in the jaws.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Difficulty smiling.
A feeling of the left side of her face and cheeks being pulled.

In frontal view Chun Rong has good facial balance and symmetry.  She has relatively normal upper lip length and probably about 3 to 4 mm of tooth and lip exposed.  Upper lip length is 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is probably about 3 mm.  Midlines are in line with each other.  In profile view she has good balance.  The chin may be a little bit AP deficient but with her Chinese background, it appears to be in reasonable harmony.  More recently Chun Rong has had fat injections into her face because her face was too skinny and this apparently occurred since she had her wisdom teeth taken out.  Chen Rong has a good occlusion with a Class I cuspid molar relationship and she has about a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Uvula and soft palate look relatively normal.  Faucial pillars may be slightly constricted.  Tonsils are relatively normal in size.  To palpation, there is high moderate pain over the masseter muscles, styloid area and TMJs.  Moderate pain over the shoulders and mild discomfort to palpation over the SCMs and left medial pterygoid area.  Incisal opening is 48 mm.  Excursive movements are 8 mm in each direction.  As she would open and close she has some noises in her joints that are sort of soft click kind of sensations.  It is very uncomfortable for her to shift her jaw from side-to-side and also at the maximum opening it is quite uncomfortable for her.  She has tried muscle relaxants in the past as well as fairly high levels of pain medication but this does not seem to give her relief.  She would prefer to go without the medications so that she can function at school. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  It could be a little disruption of the canal on the left side.  Sinuses look reasonably healthy.  The condyles appear a little flattened on the anterior head.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear and the nasal septum is straight with the turbinates being relatively moderately enlarged.  She reports no difficulties breathing through her nose.
Chun Rong Peng				10/01/2007				Page 2

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is extremely steep and the disc is probably in a vertical orientation.  There is decreased posterior joint space. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is flattened anteriorly with some anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is quite steep although not quite as steep as the opposite side.  There is a decreased posterior joint space.  Disc could be in a vertical orientation in both of these joints.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal and occlusal Class I relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway looks very good.  Chin appears deficient anteroposteriorly.  The chin appears to be a good 4 to 5 mm AP deficient. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations with reductions.
Relative mandibular hyperplasia.
Traumatic neuroma to left inferior alveolar nerve.
Paresthesias to lower left lip and chin.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
AP microgenia.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
MRI of left and right TMJs. 
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomy.
Nerve repair with possible nerve grafting of left inferior alveolar nerve.
Anterior mandibular horizontal to augment the chin approximately 4 to 5 mm. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
