IRMA PEREZ										03/31/2006

Irma is referred by Dr. Stephen Markham, 2141 Hammerand Court, Suite B, Las Cruces, New Mexico, 88011.  She has problems currently with her jaws as well as her left shoulder, left shoulder rotator cuff and back pain.  She had previous surgeries that involved a cyst removal x2 form her right wrist and rotator cuff surgery on the left shoulder.  Other than her current jaw problem she is in fairly good health. 

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Ibuprofen 800 mg p.r.n. 
Mobic 7.5 mg p.r.n. 

Irma's problems began about three years ago of unknown etiology.  In 2003 she received a splint from Dr. Robert Supple.  This was an anterior jig and did not help her significantly.  She then saw Dr. Steve Markham and on September 20, 2005, received an NTI and then an occlusal splint with some adjustments.  As of January, Irma's pain levels have decreased significantly.  Of interest also was that Irma did wear orthotics in her shoes.  Dr. Markham had removed those and her TMJ pain did get better.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.
Back pain. 
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Lightheadedness.

Her vertigo is not nearly as significant now as it was before when it was almost constant.  Other joints that bother Irma include her back, left shoulder, left elbow, left wrist and her feet.  It is possible that she may have plantar fasciitis.  She does have allergic reactions to Paxil, Zoloft, Phenergan, Compazine, bananas, fish and kiwi.   She cannot wear cheap jewelry and for her pierced ears she has to wear gold pins.  

She is aware of clenching her teeth at night time and daytime.  She gets headaches currently at about a level of 3 in the posterior head area.  Up until January of 2006 these headaches would frequently escalate to 10.  She has improved significantly during the past 2 months with her new splint.  She gets pain now at about a level of 4 but used to escalate to a level of 10 and this is predominately on the right side.  She rates her average daily pain currently at 3 but it previously was a 10.  She rates her current jaw function at 5, diet at 5, disability at 5.  In frontal view, Irma has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face but asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1/2 mm off to the right side.  Chin is probably about 6 mm off to the right side.  




IRMA PEREZ					03/31/2006				Page 2


In profile view she has a little bit of deficiency in maxillary projection at about point A.  Upper lip down below appears a little bit full but may be due to just a depression of point A of about 2 to 3 mm.  Chin is deficient by about 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is essentially absent.  From the posterior aspect of the chin there is a very short distance to her trachea.  Irma does have a head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, she is missing mandibular right first molar and perhaps a second molar on the left side with may be the second molar positioned on the right side and on the left side the second molar is in mesial inclination.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  In centric relation she occludes on the right second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.   As she manipulates her mandible to try and improve the bite she can get the left first and second molars together but still the rest of the teeth are out of occlusion.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane and the right is 2 mm higher than the left side.  She has a Class II end-on occlusion being about 5 mm Class II on the right side and probably 3 to 4 mm on the left side.  She has an anterior open bite of about 3 to 4 mm.  In centric relation on the left posterior side she has an open bite that ranges from about 1 to 3 mm.  Intraorally, oropharyngeal tissues look good.  The uvula is moderately enlarged.  The soft palate is relatively normal in length.  The faucial pillars are somewhat constricted.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off to the right side slightly.  The right turbinate is somewhat enlarged but she does have a cold currently.  The left turbinate is relatively moderate in size and it appears that there is a good possible airway on the left and slightly decreased on the right.  She only has occasional snoring.  She does have daytime somnolence and requires daily naps.  She is not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  To palpation she has high moderate pain over the right TMJ, moderate pain over the right masseter, medial pterygoid, styloid areas, SCM and posterior neck and milder pain over the temporalis muscles, left TMJ, left SCM, left posterior neck and right shoulder.  On opening, the right joint seems to function reasonably smoothly.  The left with an occasional audible pop at about 40 mm of opening and had a consistent closing glitch or pop at about a level of 10.  On opening she deviates significantly off to the right side probably about 8 mm or so.  Maximal incisal opening is about 52 mm, opening without significant discomfort about 26 mm.  Excursive to the right 9 mm, left 5 mm.  She does have a crossbite on the right first molar but none of the other teeth are in crossbite.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows that she has an impacted mandibular left third molar back through all the rest of her teeth in the lower arch except for the right first molar and the third molar.  A second molar is in mesial angulation.  In the upper arch she is missing both third molars but has the rest of her teeth.  Difficult to evaluate the sinuses in this view.  The right condyle appears extremely arthritic.  The left condyle appears to have some mild arthritis but not too significant.  

Waters view shows that she has a deviated nasal septum.  The left turbinate appears extremely large and likely fills most of the nasal cavity but this must be posterior in the area because I cannot see it anteriorly.  Right turbinate is of moderate size.  There may be a possible airway on that side.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The frontal sinus is quite large.  


IRMA PEREZ					03/31/2006				Page 3


Left TMJ tomogram shows some flattening in the anterior head of the condyle and a little bit sclerosis but not too bad.  Decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Disc may be just a slight forward position possibly but for the most part the joint looks reasonable.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows that there is a double image of the condyle and is functioning anterior in the area where the articular eminence should be although the articular eminence is actually nonexistent.  The condyle is postured forward probably 4 to 5 mm from its normal position about 4 mm relatively to its normal position.  There appears to be a large fissure communicating with the middle ear.  On opening, there is actually good translation of both condyles.  Even the right side translates well anterior to the remnants of the articular eminence.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Irma has an anterior open bite.  A little bit of maxillary dental alveolar protrusion and maybe some slight deficiency at point A area.  There is a high occlusal plane area.  Open bite exits almost throughout the occlusion.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 8 mm and at the base of the tongue, the lower part of the tongue measures about 5 mm.  Transverse cant in the occlusion is not quite as appreciable as it is in the clinical exam.  Irma does have some crenations around margins of her tongue.  Irma has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 30 mm.  Irma did have orthodontics as a teenager but says that the braces were removed prematurely.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Right TMJ severe anatomical deformity with bifid condyles and severe arthritis. 
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Maxillary hyperplasia and asymmetry.
Mandibular deficiency and asymmetry.
Class II occlusion.
Apertognathia. 
Occludes only on the right second molars in centric occlusion and all other teeth are out of occlusion. 
Missing mandibular right first molar. 
High occlusal plane angle. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
AP microgenia. 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Impacted mandibular left third molar. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.




IRMA PEREZ					03/31/2006				Page 4


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch in 3 segments.  Place a vertical step between the cuspids and lateral incisors to align the 4 incisors in an elevated plane compared to the posterior teeth.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Right TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advance with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
Fat graft to right TMJ (harvest from the abdomen.)
Right coronoidectomy.
Left mandibular disc repositioning and ligament repair with a Mitek anchor.
Left mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy to advance the mandible.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the transverse plane and decrease the curve of Spee.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the mandibular inferior border.
Surgical removal of mandibular left bony impacted third molar.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Consider osseointegrated implant and crown or a 3-unit bridge to replace the missing mandibular right first molar.
