VELMA JEANETTE PICKENS							4/1/05

Velma is 70 years old, referred by Clint Barrett, DDS MD.

She has had problems with headaches and high blood pressure in the past.  She had a hysterectomy 20 years ago.  Smokes 1/2 pack of cigarettes per day.  She is trying to quit and currently is on the patches.  Velma's jaw problems began about 1 or 2 years ago of unknown etiology.  She just noticed that her lower jaw was moving backwards.  She has worn a bite plate for about 20 years for headaches and for nocturnal clenching and bruxism and it has worked fairly effectively for her. 

Velma only has problems with the left hip besides her jaw joints.  She has no history of urinary tract or bladder infections.  She has been exposed significantly to birds.  Growing up, she was around chickens, 15 to 20 at a time, ducks and geese.  Her friend lives her and raises parakeets and has about 160 of them.  He has been raising them for about 10 years.  She has not really been around cats.  She has had a dog for about 7 years.  He is an indoor dog.  Growing up, she was around horses, cows, pigs, sheep and goats.  No GI problems.  She does have chronic fatigue.  No thyroid problems that she is aware of.  No significant memory loss problems.  She does have high blood pressure, but other known cardiac problems.   She has had bronchitis numerous times, but she does not get it as frequently now as she did when she was younger.  She attributes that to getting flu shots on a more regular basis. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Headaches.
Lower jaw becoming more retruded.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Speech is being affected.
Jaws get very tired when she eats.
Significant snoring.
Daytime tiredness.

MEDICATIONS: 
Effexor 150 mg q.d.
Micardis (for blood pressure for which she has just begun taking for about the past year.)
Bone supplements.
Ibuprofen for pain. 

Velma states that her high blood pressure may be hereditary in nature.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or hearing loss, but she does sometimes get vertigo.  The only other joints that really bothers her is her left hip where she has some osteoporosis.  She has no known allergies.  She cannot wear cheap earrings very well, however.  She is very much aware of clenching and bruxism at night but does not feel she does that during the day.  She rates her headaches at about  a level of 8 and they occur in the frontotemporal, posterior head and top of the head areas.  She is not aware of any significant pain directly in the TMJ area.  She rates her average daily pain at about a level of 8.  She rates her jaw function and diet at 5, disability 2.  In frontal view, Velma has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  
VELMA PICKENS				4/1/05					Page 2

Upper lip length is about 27 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -1.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline shifted a little bit to the left about 1 mm.  Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much on the facial midline.  So the chin is also slightly just off to the left side.  In profile view, Velma has some slight AP maxillary deficiency maybe 2 to 3 mm.  Mandible is about 20 to 25 mm AP deficient.  Chin-neckline is extremely short.  In fact, the chin points almost back on the trachea.  Intraorally, she appears to have all of her teeth back through the first molar on the left side but with gold crowns on the bicuspids and first molar.  On the right side, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars with crowns on the second bicuspid, first and second molars.  She has all of her teeth back through the first molars bilaterally missing the second and third molars.  She has crowns on the upper left first bicuspid, upper right second bicuspid and first molar.  Velma has almost a full Class II malocclusion.  It is a little bit greater on the left side as compared to the right side.  She has an overjet of about 11 mm.  She has an open-bite of about a mm.  In centric relation, she occludes only on the first molars bilaterally with all the other teeth being out of occlusion.  Intraorally, it is difficult to see the oropharynx, but I did get a glimpse at it.  The uvula appears maybe mildly elongated.  The soft palate appears fairly significantly posteriorly positioned.  Fascial pillars were very difficult to identify but probably relatively normal in transverse width.  I cannot visualize the tonsils.  Nasal airway appears quite open.  There is some slight deviation of the septum, but for the most part it is relatively normal.  Turbinates are normal in size and she appears to have a very good airway.  To palpation, Velma has moderate discomfort over the left temporalis, masseter, TMJ and styloid area.  On the right side, she really did not have any tenderness.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 35 mm.  Excursion movement to each side about 2 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of maxillary left and right second and third molars, mandibular left second and third molar, mandibular right third molar.  She has crowns on most of the posterior teeth and lower arch and crown on the maxillary right second bicuspid first molar, left first bicuspid.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Nasal airway looks relatively clear.  Condyles appear to be functioning underneath the articular eminence and it appears that most of the condyles are gone or resorbed.  Fossa also appear to be a little bit flattened on the articular eminences.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the articular eminences appear relatively flat.  Condyles are essentially almost completely resorbed almost down to the sigmoid notch although there is a little bit of condyle remaining.  Condyles are positioned beneath the articular eminence and essentially completely dislocated forward of the fossa.

Right TMJ tomogram likewise shows a very small amount of condyle still remain functioning on the articular eminence where the articular eminence appears to have almost completely resorbed away.  The condyles are completely anterior to the fossa.  On opening, there is very minimal translatory movements of the condyles.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size, although there does appear to be passable nasal airway. 
VELMA PICKENS				4/1/05					Page 3


Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows significant class II skeletal occlusal relationship, but otherwise a high-occlusal plane angle.  Her oropharyngeal airway is significantly constricted with a dimension of about 2 mm at the soft palate level and perhaps 2 to 2.5 mm at the base of the tongue.  Hand manipulating Velma's dental model show that she can actually be shifted back into a fairly reasonable Class I occlusal relationship with just about 2 mm overjet remaining and this due to probably to some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.

BASIS DIAGNOSES: 
Severe bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis.
Condylar remnants functioning on the articular eminence.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Severe AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II occlusion. 
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of 2 to 3 mm.
Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain.
TMJ pain.
Occludes only on the second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.
Snoring.
Masticatory dysfunction.
Speech articular problems.
History of nocturnal clenching and bruxism.
Apertognathia. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Consider sleep apnea study.
CT scan of  TMJ and jaws.

3.  Surgery.
	     a.  Bilateral TMJ and mandibular reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint   
                prostheses advancing mandible forward 23 mm.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to downgraft posteriorly and slightly advance it forward as well as upright the incisors. 
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest graft from abdomen.)
Application of maxillary mandibular arch bars.

      4.  Postsurgical therapy as necessary to regain jaw function. 

