KHADIJA PFEFFERKORN								01-04-05

Khadija is 29 years old and referred by Dr. George Adams.

Patient History

She has had some previous surgery that included periodontal grafting. She also had laparoscopy for uterine fibroid removal. She is in good health. She takes no medications. She has NO ALLERGIES. Khadija’s problem began about two years ago of unknown etiology. She began orthodontic treatment on 03/11/04. Her problems have gotten progressively worse. 

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She has no problems particularly with headaches, and gets a headache only every two weeks or so and considers it just a routine-type headache from stress, etc. She rates her TMJ pain at 4, facial pain and headaches at 4, jaw function at 7, diet at 0, and disability at 3.

Patient Concerns

Left TMJ clicking and popping
Left TMJ locking
Left TMJ pain
Headaches
Gummy smile
Difficulties getting her lips together when eating
Difficulties chewing

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Khadija has good left-to-right facial balance. 

In profile, she also has good facial balance.

Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 5 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all fairly well-aligned with the facial midline. 

Intraorally, Khadija is missing the mandibular right first molar but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. Teeth are nicely aligned and leveled. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she is missing two central incisors but has pontics in that area. She is also missing the right second bicuspid/first molar. On the left side, she is missing the first molar. She has just a slight Class II end-on occlusion by probably 1 to 2 mm. Has about a 2 mm overbite relationship anteriorly. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula, soft palate, and faucial pillars all look normal.

Intranasally, the turbinate on the right side is somewhat hyperplastic. On the left side, there is a little bit of deviation of the septum over toward the left at the anterior aspect of the septum. Turbinate on that side appears to be a little bit more normal in size. 

To palpation, she has some moderate pain over the left TMJ but no other pain around the head and neck area. On opening, she has an opening click at about 25 mm of opening and closing click at 5 mm. The click is quite prominent. Maximal incisal opening is 43 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 4 mm and to the left 10 mm. The disc does not reduce on her excursive movements to the right. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Lateral cephalogram shows that she has basically a Class I skeletal relationship. She has some bimaxillary protrusion. Oropharyngeal airway appears fairly good. Occlusal plane has relative low angle. She has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip. She has some lip incompetence. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have some mild arthritic changes with some flattening and some peaking on the condyle. Decreased superior/posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a joint that has decreased posterior joint space and maybe some superior joint space where the articular eminence is moderately steep. 

On opening, there is restricted translation of the left TMJ but good translation of the right TMJ. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Nasal septum is reasonably straight. Right turbinate appears enlarged compared to the left turbinate.

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, maxillary left first molar, mandibular left first molar, mandibular right first molar, and maxillary right second bicuspid and first molar. Khadija does have her maxillary incisors present. It appears that they have root canals and just temporary crowns on currently. 

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction but occasional closed lock
Right TMJ articular disc medially and anteriorly dislocated but in a pre-click position
Anterior vertical maxillary excess
Mandibular hyperplasia
Slight Class II end-on occlusion
Missing maxillary left first molar, mandibular right first molar, maxillary right second bicuspid and first molar
TMJ pain
AP microgenia
Lip incompetence
Difficulties eating and chewing because of pain
Tooth-size discrepancy of approximately 2 to 3 mm
Hypertrophied turbinates
Partial nasal airway obstruction

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract to help minimize flaring of the lower incisors and to correct for a mild tooth-size discrepancy


Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly, upright the incisors, and move the posterior aspect of the maxilla superiorly
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible upward into occlusion
Genioplasty
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Osseointegrated implants to the maxillary first molar area, maxillary right second bicuspid/first molar area, and mandibular right first molar area

Dental reconstruction of implants, maxillary central incisors, etc. 