KAREN PETERS									09-24-03

Karen is 58 years old and referred by Dr. Gary Flower, 2501 Lake Ridge Dr., Ste. 100, Norfolk, NE  68701. Her general dentist is Dr. Charles Skoglund, 1502 N. 13th Street, P.O. Box 1203, Norfolk, NE  68702.

Patient History

In the past, she has had problems with lichen planus in the mouth. Previous surgeries have included appendectomy, two cesarean sections, fissure and hemorrhoids, Morton’s neuroma of the left foot, hysterectomy, reconstructive surgery on the left foot, excision of cyst behind right ear and chin, and bone grafting to the upper jaw in the center. 

Karen’s problems in reference to her TMJs began about three years ago of unknown etiology. However, she was involved in an MVA back in 1997 and was knocked unconscious and is aware that she at least hit her head on the rearview mirror. She has worn a splint at nighttime for 10 years to help decrease her nocturnal clenching, but it has only been in the last three years that she has worn a splint specifically for her TMJ problems. She has received about six months of physical therapy with no significant improvement. She also has been placed in various types of jaw exercises which also have not been beneficial for her. Her current splint does help keep her bite better balanced since her bite has shifted significantly during the last three years. She has no problems with earaches, no tinnitus, no vertigo, and no hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her neck, shoulders, wrists, hands, fingers, hips and knees occasionally, left ankle (she has had previous surgery with fusion of some of the bones, and toes. She is aware of nighttime clenching, and this is the reason for wearing the splints, and she also sometimes will clench during the day. Relative to the TMJ problem, she was originally seen by Dr. Tylka, an oral surgeon who was in Nebraska but now apparently has moved to Norman, Oklahoma. Dr. Gary Flower is her most recent oral surgeon and the one that referred her.

She gets headaches about three or four times a week at a level of about 6 that occur in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain on an average day at 6, although it can escalate to 8. She rates her average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 7, diet at 9, and disability at 3. 

Karen’s husband is not aware of Karen’s snoring prior to the development of the joint problems, so it has only been in the last two to three years that the snoring has significantly developed for her.

Current Medications

Vitamins
Amoxicillin 500 mg whenever she goes to the dentist or has surgery. Karen has mitral valve prolapse which is the reason for the antibiotics

Allergies

She has had a reaction to LODINE, MACRODANTIN, AND SULFA.

Patient Concerns

TMJ pain
Headaches 
Teeth don’t fit together
Only two teeth touch when she does bite down
Restless sleep
Snoring
Pain down through the jaws, neck, and shoulders

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Karen has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline. In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose or maybe just some slight AP maxillary deficiency of 2 to 3 mm. Chin appears retruded, and chin-neckline is relatively short. The upper lip without the chin is probably about 10 mm AP deficient. 

Intraorally, she is missing the second and third molars bilaterally in the mandible and in the maxilla. She has a large 5-unit bridge in the front replacing the two missing central incisors and a 3-unit bridge on the right side replacing the second bicuspid. She apparently is losing some bone around the first bicuspid tooth on the right side. When she bites together, she occludes only on the first molars on the left side and perhaps the second bicuspids, but the rest of the teeth completely around, through, and including the molars on the right side are out of occlusion with an open bite. Anteriorly, she has about a 3-mm anterior open bite. She is a little bit Class II end-on cuspid on the left side by maybe a millimeter or 2, and on the right side she appears to be more of a Class I. Oropharynx appears relatively clear, although she appears to have a small cyst perhaps in the right posterior faucial pillar but close to the uvula. 

Intranasally, she has some constricture of the luminal valves bilaterally, but turbinates appear moderate in size, and behind the luminal valves, the airway looks fairly good. She gives no really significant history of having difficulties breathing through her nose. 

To palpation, she has mild to moderate tenderness over the masseters, medial pterygoids, TMJs, styloid area, SCMs, and posterior neck area. Opening without significant pain was about 32 mm, and maximal opening was about 34 mm. Excursive movement to the right was 2 mm and to the left 3 mm. She does have a history of smoking for about 35 years about a pack a day. She stopped smoking in 1998. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that sinuses appear as though they have some very thickened tissue, and there is just a small area of opacity. She is missing the second and third molars in all four quadrants and missing the maxillary central incisors x 2 and the right second bicuspid, but these three teeth are replaced with bridgework. She has a root canal in the maxillary right first bicuspid and mandibular left first molar. Condyles look a little bit arthritic particularly on the left side. Definite increased open bite in the molars on the right side as compared to the left side. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is postured forward in the fossa with an increased posterior joint space. Appears to be very minimal superior joint space. There are anterior beaking and an osteophyte extending off the anterior aspect of the head of the condyle. The cortical bone appears rough on the superior aspect of the condyle. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. The bone on the articular eminence may be slightly irregular as well.

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle that has some significant osteoarthritic changes associated with it. There are some anterior beaking and an osteophyte with slight upward turning of it creating some decreased joint space vertically and anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is a little bit steeper than the opposite side and a little bit longer in length. Condyle appears smaller on this side as compared to the opposite side. 

On opening, there is significantly limited translation and minimal joint space in the open views anteriorly. In the open view, the left condyle appears more sclerotic than in the closed tomographic views.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear a little bit cloudy. There appears to be a cyst in the left maxillary antrum. Turbinates appear enlarged particularly on the left side. Frontal sinuses and ethmoids appear clear.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the maxilla is slightly AP deficient as is the mandible. Mandible is more so because of the higher occlusal plane and anterior open bite. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 4.5 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue.

Nuclear scan shows an increased uptake in the left TMJ, although there is also an increased uptake in the right TMJ, but the left joint is much hotter. Her left ankle lights up quite a bit compared to the right side. Her shoulder joints seem to light up quite a bit as well as also the sternoclavicular joint seems to light up quite a bit. 

Other Systems

Karen has problems in her neck, shoulders, wrists, hands, fingers, hips and knees occasionally, left ankle, and toes. About 10 years ago, she had about four or five urinary tract infections in a row, which at that time they found she was allergic to one of the antibiotics. In her younger years, she had ovarian cysts and fibrocystic breast disease. She had a partial hysterectomy in 1987. She has two children, ages 37 and 34. She had a vaginal yeast infection about two times in the past. She does have some generalized gingivitis and periodontal concerns of moderate severity. She had a couple of styes as a child. She has burning and itching of her eyes. In June of 2000, she was diagnosed as having mebomitis that apparently is a chronic condition that will be there the rest of her life. It primarily involves some infections of glanular tissue in her eyelids. She is not aware of having any sinus problems. She did smoke a pack per day for about 35 years but quit in 1998 and 1999. She has some earaches problems. She has occasional cough, and she has had bronchitis three to four times in the past. She has no GI problems, no problems with fatigue, fever, thyroid, or memory loss problems. She has mitral valve prolapse. She was around chickens from infancy to the age of 13 years, and this included about 200 chickens. When living on the farm, they had outdoor cats. She had one outdoor dog at that time. There were 50 cows also on the farm. She has no other implants in her body except in her left ankle/foot area where she has three screws and a staple.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis being worse on the left side as compared to the right side with major degenerative changes to the articular discs and degeneration of the fossa and articular eminences as well
Mandibular hypoplasia being worse on the left side
Cant in mandibular transverse occlusal plane angle with the left side being about 2 mm higher than the right side
Anterior open bite
Basically a Class I occlusion with a slight Class II tendency on the left side
Anterior open bite of 3 mm and is getting progressively worse
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Earaches 
Missing second and third molars in all four quadrants as well as the maxillary central incisors and right second bicuspid, but these three teeth are replaced with bridgework

Recommended Treatment

CT scan of jaws and jaw joints using the TMJ Concepts protocol

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies, debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)
Application of arch bars to control occlusion during surgery as well as afterward

Removal of arch bars probably 4 to 8 weeks postsurgery

Restorative dentistry as necessary to rebuild the bite
