ALEXANDRA PETHTEL								11-18-04

Alex is 20 years old and was referred by Dr. Moody Alexander. Dr. Hamlin is her dentist. His office is off the tollway in the Highland Park area. 

Patient Concerns

Her lower jaw shifted off toward the right side
Teeth don’t fit together very well
Popping in both jaw joints but worse on the right side
Tightness and achiness in the jaws if she tries to chew anything that is too tough

Patient History

Alex’s problems began about six years ago of unknown etiology. She has ortho from the ages of 9 through 13. She had a maxillary expander. She thinks her bite was pretty good after the orthodontics then her jaw began to change from the age of 15 to 16, and the lower jaw shifted off toward the right side. Alex feels that there has been no additional significant change for the last three to four years.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Alex has good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. She does have asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 3 mm off to the right side, and chin is probably 4 to 5 mm off to the right side. As she shifts her mandible toward the left side, it significantly improved the facial symmetry, although she has a little bit of extra fullness in the left mandibular area. However, if she shifts over to the left side, she does go into a crossbite on the left side and the right-sided crossbite is eliminated. Therefore, if the mandible were lined up with the maxilla, she would probably have fairly good facial symmetry.

In profile, she has very good facial balance. 

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has good attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars, and the teeth appear to be nicely aligned and leveled. Transversely, she has just some slight vertical asymmetry with the left side maybe being up just 1 mm but not too significant. She has essentially a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and a Class III end-on relationship on the left side being Class III by probably 4 mm. Alex has an end-on incisor relationship and a crossbite on the left side that extends essentially from the central incisor back through the right first bicuspid. Soft palate and uvula look normal. Tonsils are moderately large but appear uninflamed. Faucial pillars look relatively normal. Alex has had a previous rhinoplasty and septoplasty performed. 

Intranasally, the septum has some deviation but not too bad. Turbinates are slightly enlarged but not too significant. She doesn’t really complain of any nasal airway obstruction now, but she did have it prior to her nasal surgery. 

To palpation, she has some very mild tenderness over the masseters, TMJs, and styloid areas. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly, although she does dislocate anterior to the articular eminence with a fairly prominent pop kind of noise. Popping is not consistent, however, with an articular disc dislocation. 

Alex has had her wisdom teeth taken out about 4 years ago. Alex brought along some dental models. Hand articulating them shows that they go into a fairly good Class I cuspid-molar relationship. 
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. She has a 3x3 retainer in the lower arch. Sinuses look relatively clear. Condyles look relatively normal. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows an articular eminence that is long and steep. Condyle appears a little bit flat anteriorly. Superior posterior joint space seems to be decreased some. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good shape. Articular eminence is long and moderately steep. Significantly decreased joint space vertically. 

On opening, she translates out anterior to the articular eminence. 

Waters view shows a severely deviated nasal septum with a large septal spur in the bony aspect of the nose way posteriorly. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Difficult to evaluate the maxillary sinuses, but they look reasonably clear and equal. Frontal and ethmoid sinuses appear clear.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a Class III occlusal relationship but a Class I skeletal relationship. Inferior border of the mandible and occlusal plane are lower on one side than the opposite side. Airway looks good.

Basic Diagnoses

Mandibular deviate prognathism
Left mandibular condylar hyperplasia (probably arrested)
Bilateral TMJ medially displaced articular discs
TMJ pain
Myofascial discomfort
Nocturnal clenching

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch 

Assess to rule out continued growth of the left mandibular condyle

Surgery
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back onto the facial midline
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 