LAUREN PHILLIPS								11/09/2011

Lauren is 23 years old (birth date 10/5/88) and was referred by a former patient, Sherry Ifft.  Her primary concerns are:  TMJ popping and clicking, locking jaws, and pain.

Lauren began having TMJ problems at about the age of 14 when she felt clicking in her jaw joints.  She had orthodontics from the age of 12 to 14 and it was after the orthodontics that the clicking began.  However, she did not have any major significant problems until 10/18/2011 when she was involved in a motor vehicle accident and this has escalated her pain problems. 

She gets headaches at about a level of 4 mainly in the posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 4, diet at 1, disability at 1.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, occasional vertigo and no hearing loss.  The only joints that bother her are her knees, but she is a runner.  She has no known allergies and no reaction to jewelry.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime.  The only medication she takes is Advil occasionally for her headaches.  Previous treatment she has had includes orthodontics from the age of 12 to 14.  She has had a night guard to wear at night since 2009.  

In frontal view, Lauren has good facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm and tooth lip relationship is 1.  The maxillary and mandibular midline are pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin.  In profile, Lauren has good facial symmetry and balance.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  The teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.  She has some thin attached gingiva particularly over the right central incisor.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She is pretty close to being a Class I cuspid with just a slight Class II tendency on the left side of about 2 mm.  She has about a 1 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  To palpation, she has mild to moderate tenderness over the masseter muscles and retromandibular area.  On opening, she has a distinct click at about 15 mm of opening and 15 mm of closing on the left side.  The right side functions smoothly.  The maximal incisal opening is 52 mm, excursion movement to the right 7 mm and to the left 9 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular third molars and right maxillary third molar.  The left maxillary third molar is present.  There appears to be a little bit of a septal spur off the base of the septum towards the left side.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  Sinuses appear clear.  Condyles appear arthritic with the left side having some slight anterior beaking whereas the right side has some sclerosis and some ebernation of the condylar head.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum appears reasonably straight at the level of the cut and the right turbinate appears moderately enlarged compared to the left side.  The sinuses appear clear.  

Axial view shows that there may be a septal spur off to the left side touching against the turbinate whereas on the right side the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Sinuses are relatively clear.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is significantly decreased joint space vertically and laterally.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows better joint space on this side.  There is some arthritic changes in the top of the condyle with an erosive area in the mid portion.  The lateral pole appears to extend laterally significantly more than the opposite site.  Vertical height of the condylar head appears shorter on this side compared to the opposite side.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 4 mm.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears narrow anteroposterior.  There appears to be a pseudocyst in the head of the condyle.  There is decreased superior and posterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears more arthritic on this side with sclerosis on the top of the condyle.  There is increased vertical joint space.  There is some definite anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence has a moderate shallowness to it.  The joint space appears better balanced on this side.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is moderate increase in the occlusal plane level.  She has about a 1 mm vertical overbite and a slight overjet is present.  AP dimension at the soft palate level measures about 5 mm and at the base of the tongue about 7.5 mm.  The neck is quite vertical and straight in this particular radiographic.

Basic diagnoses for Lauren would be as follows:

Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with early reduction.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction and with significant degenerative and deformation changes.  
Relative mandibular prognathism.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral ramus sagittal split osteotomies to maximize the occlusal fit.  
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 