AMANDA PHILLIPS								7/11/05

Amanda is 22 years old.  I had recently seen Amanda on July 10, 1998, when she was 15 years old.  We worked out a treatment plan for her.  She eventually had that treatment by Dr. David Brown in Midland and apparently the mandible was repositioned and stabilized with some bone screws.  About 3 weeks postsurgery, a friend of hers threw her down and she hit her head and apparently bent the screws.  Her bite shifted some.  She went back to see Dr. Brown and he placed her in elastics to correct the problem.  She wore orthodontic appliances for approximately 5 years and they were eventually removed in 1999.  

CURRENT CONCERNS 
Popping in the left TMJ area.
Pain in the left TMJ and jaw area.
Facial asymmetry with the chin and mandible shifted off to the left side.  

She does not have problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing her teeth.  She has no significant headache problems.  She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 3, but on an average day her overall pain is only about a 1.  She rates her jaw function at 2, diet at 0, disability at 0.  

CLINICAL EVALUATION
In frontal view, Amanda has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  She has asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 0 on the left and 1/2 mm on the right.  Maxillary midline may be about 1/2 mm to 1 mm towards the left side.  Mandibular dental midline is about 3 to 4 mm.  Chin is probably 7 to 8 mm off towards the left side.  In profile view, Amanda has some significant AP maxillary deficiency of probably about a good 6 mm.  Upper lip supralabrale is probably 3 to 4 mm posterior to subnasale.  Chin may be just slightly AP retruded as well.  Chin-neckline is of relatively normal length and may be just a little bit short.  Chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids and has the rest of her teeth.  She has a little bit of crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Thin attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  Left cuspid is about 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  In the upper arch, she is missing first bicuspids.  The rest of the teeth are present.  She is Class III on the right side by probably 4 mm.  On the left side she is closer to Class I, but has a crossbite on that side.  She has an end-on incisor relationship.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being about 1.5 to 2 mm lower than the left side.  Amanda feels that she hits first on the left side before the right side, but it is not a major significant difference for her.  Intranasally, the septum appears relatively straight.  Turbinates are of moderate size.  She appears to have good airway as best as I can tell.  Nostrils are a little bit narrow, but probably related to AP maxillary deficiency.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the TMJs and styloid areas.  She has some noises in her left joint with occasional clicking on opening at about 15 mm and closing about 5 mm.  Right joint seems to function reasonably smoothly.  On excursive movements she had definite clicking and popping in the left TMJ with excursions towards the right side and then coming back into centric relationship.  She had clicks in both of those movements.  Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm.  She can open 30 mm without discomfort.  Excursive movements are about 5 mm in each direction.
AMANDA PHILLIPS 				7/11/05			Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 

Waters view, nasal septum is deviated off towards the left side in the bony area posteriorly.  Right turbinate appears enlarged with decreased airway on that side although the left airway appears reasonably good.  Sinuses appear clear.  The asymmetry in the mandible can be observed with it being shifted off towards the left side.  

Right TMJ lateral tomogram shows a decreased superior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Condyle actually has a fairly good morphology.  There is evidence of 3 screws in the ramus from the previous surgery.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic and is narrow anteroposteriorly.  There is decreased posterior and superoposterior joint space.  Articular eminence is a little bit steeper on this side than the opposite side.  There is evidence of 3 screws in the ramus from the previous surgery.  

The open tomograms show good translation of both condyles with them coming anterior to the articular eminence.  Three bone screws are seen on each ramus side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows AP deficiency in the maxilla and mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway is only about 4 mm at the soft palate level at about 7 mm at the base of the tongue.  Occlusal plane is relatively normal.

BASIS DIAGNOSES
Right condylar hyperplasia versus osteochondroma versus osteoma.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
Right TMJ posterior displacement of the articular disc. 
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Deviated mandibular prognathism.  The mandible is shifted off towards the left side, 3 mm at the incisors and 7 to 8 mm at the chin.
Class III end-on occlusion on the right side, Class I on the left side.
Full crossbite on the left side and posterior crossbite in the first and second molar area on the right side with incisors edge-to-edge.
I see all 4 first bicuspids and all 4 third molars.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 1.5 to 2 mm lower than the left side. 
AMANDA PHILLIPS			7/11/05				Page 3


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
 Align and level the maxillary arch.  Tip the lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.

Consider further imaging, possible CAT scans to determine if abnormal growth is present on the right condyle.

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Consider right high-moderate condylectomy if abnormal growth is confirmed in the condyle.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and expand.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 



