PAMELA PETROFF									9/20/05

Pamela's problems may have begun back in 1986 when she was involved in an MVA and sustained a whiplash injury.  Two years ago, she fell at a Walgreens and injured her shoulder and apparently broke her arm and was not diagnosed for sometime and then she injured her shoulder.  Although she was involved in an auto accident in 1986, she really did not become aware of having significant head and neck problems until about 2000 when she developed a fairly significant earache.  She was treated for 9 months for her earache by ENT.  In the spring of 2001, she had severe earaches and pain in the right side of her jaw.  Since then the pain has progressed to include the left side of her jaw and now the left-sided pain is significantly worse than the right side.  In 2001, Dr. Ken Rotskoff injected botox into her on several occasions primarily into the muscles.  She went to another oral surgeon and had bilateral TMJ lavages done x2 and her problems continued to get worse.  She had repeated muscle injections done in different areas of her head and neck area without relief.  Dr. Duane Keller made her an orthotic in June of 2004 and she has worn that until more recently.  It has not worked and she currently cannot open wide enough to even consider putting the device in.  She had additional muscle injections by another doctor during that time.  She has developed an abscessed tooth, #10 and has a draining fistula associated with it.  She is to get root canal therapy done on that tooth sometime this week.  She originally had a root canal done on that tooth 37 years ago.  She has daytime somnolence that is very significant and she does not sleep very much but maybe an hour and a half at night.    

She now has a frozen left shoulder and she cannot straighten out her elbow.  She has the following concerns and problems:

Her jaws are frozen.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Severe difficulty in eating and chewing.
Sleep disorder.
Significant weight loss.  

She rates her headaches at a level of 4 but gets headaches to a level of 10 and they occur about 2 or 3 days a week.  She rates her TMJ pain at 10, overall facial pain and headaches at 10, jaw function at 10, diet at 10 and disability at 10.  She has virtually no jaw movement at all.  To palpation she has no tenderness around the temporalis masseters, TMJs or posterior neck area.  She currently takes the following medications:

Imitrex.
Dalmane 30 mg q.h.s.
Serzone 200 mg q.h.s.
Demerol 50 mg for pain.
PAMELA PETROFF				9/20/05				Page 2


Other joints that bother her include her back at L4 and L5 and she has a bone spur at C5.  Her left shoulder is frozen, left elbow does not function well and her fingers on her left hand do not work well.  She is allergic to morphine, codeine, Ultram and Augmentin and she is lactose intolerant.   She does have Crohn's disease.  She has gone from 92 pounds down to 85 pounds.  

She had parakeets for about 25 years and a number of different ones as some would die and be replaced.  She had a cockatiel for 5 years.  She has had no birds for about the last 10 years.  She had cats and they did eat birds.  She has not had cats for the past 12 years.  She has had some dogs but none were interested in the birds.  No exposure to hoofed animals.  She does not give much of a history of urinary tract infections but has had 2 this past year.  She has had bronchitis x1.  She has had pneumonia x6 and was told that they were a viral pneumonia.  The last one required hospitalization.  Her Crohn's disease was diagnosed in 1994 and she says it is currently in remission.  She has had herpes that affected her esophagus and was treated for this and has had no recurrence.

In her photographs, she has a retruded maxilla and mandible but she reports no evidence of snoring or sleep apnea and has no interest at this time except to eliminate her severe pain and regain jaw function.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES 
Bilateral TMJ reactive arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction and with severe adhesions.  
Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Severe masticatory dysfunction with only able to take a liquid diet.
Sleep disorder secondary to pain.
Crohn's disease.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Place orthodontic appliances on teeth.
CT scan TMJ Concepts protocol.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from abdomen or buttock.)
Application of maxillary mandibular arch wires (only if orthodontic appliances cannot be done.)
      4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.