B107
B107 is 62 years old. She is referred by Dr. XXXX. B107's TMJ problems began at age 33 when she had a bicycle accident where she sustained facial fractures. She was treated. She subsequently developed some TMJ problems. At age 35, she had a left arthroplasty and disc plication; at 36 left disentomb with temporal fascial muscle flap; at 42 left TMJ reconstruction with a rib graft; at 43 right TMJ diskectomy and temporal fascial flap; at 44 right rib graft. The surgeries were performed by Dr. XXXX and Dr. XXXX. She has had no further TMJ surgery. She does have severe sleep apnea that was diagnosed 6 years ago. She has tried a CPAP and a BiPAP, but either the seals do not work because of her facial structure or she cannot tolerate them.

B107 gets daily headaches at a level of 6 that occur predominantly in the right frontal area and in the back of the head on the right side. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 6, jaw function and diet at 7, disability at 10. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her wrists, hips, and knees. She was diagnosed with lupus and Sjogren's syndrome. She has a chronic bowel inflammatory process present as well. B107 has some significant facial nerve damage from the operations that she has had. Both frontal branches are out and the right zygomatic branch is weak. In fact, she has to wear eye patches at night to keep her eyes from drying out. She has some dysfunction of the marginal mandibular nerve as well. She is numb on the right side in the lower lip, chin, and cheek area. She has prepared a list of medications that is attached. She does take Lortab for pain.

CLINICAL EVALUATION. In frontal view, B107 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 0. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.. The mandibular dental midline is shifted about 3 mm to the left. The chin midline is about 2-3 mm to the left. The nasal tip is about 3 mm to the right. In profile, upper lip is about 6 mm AP deficient and the chin is probably 10-12 mm AP deficient. Chin neckline reasonably is well defined. Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular left molars and right first and second molars with a bridge there in the third molar place. In the upper arch, she is missing her molars on the left side and right side. She is also missing 4 incisors and left cuspid. B107 has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and Class II on the left side. She has a 2 mm overbite relationship. The mandibular left cuspid is about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. Oropharyngeal airway looks healthy. Uvula and soft palate may be a little bit elongated. The fascial pillars are mild to moderately constricted. Intranasally, the turbinates look relatively normal in size. The columella is wide and the nostrils are relatively narrow. To palpation, she has high moderate to low severe pain through most of the head and neck area and just moderate pain in the temporalis area. Maximal incisal opening is 22 mm and opening without severe pain 15 mm. Excursion movement to the right is about 1 mm and to the left less than 1 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of costochondral grafts in both joints. There are extremely large screws x2 in the left jaw area securing the grafts in place. On the right side, there are 3 smaller screws. It appears she has had previous hyaloid suspension performed in the chin area, and there is a large bony defect there currently. She is missing the mandibular left molars, mandibular right first and second molars which have been replaced with a 5-unit bridge that extends back to the third molar. In the upper arch, she is missing all 6 molars as well as the 4 incisors and left cuspid. She has a 10-unit bridge in the upper arch. Her bridge is apparently loose.

Coronal view shows that she has a deviated nasal septum, but turbinates appear moderate in size and the sinuses appear clear.
The axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates are moderate in size and the septum has some slight deviation towards the left side, but there appears to be a good airway through the nose bilaterally.

Left TMJ sagittal view just shows that there must be some cartilage on the rib graft that extends upward. There are 2 large screws stabilizing the graft in place. The articular eminence is fairly flat.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows the presence of a rib graft that has some cartilage on top yet. The articular eminence is fairly steep on this size. There are 3 screws holding the graft in place.

Left TMJ coronal view shows that the lateral rim is quite flat. There is some bony structure that is actually almost out lateral to the lateral rim of the fossa for the majority of the graft. Part of the graft is contained underneath the lateral rim of the fossa. The 2 screws are seen in the mandible.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a lateral rim of the fossa that curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm. The rib graft is seen with osteophyte kind of extension upwards at the lateral aspect of the condyle. Three screws are seen in the mandible and they extend quite a ways through the mandible.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has retruded maxilla and mandible and the posterior maxilla is quite vertically deficient. The vertical height of the mandibular ramus is also quite deficient. Oropharyngeal airway actually measures about 5 mm at the tip of the soft palate and about 5-6 mm at the base of the tongue. B107 has a transverse cant in the maxillary occlusal plane with the left side being 3 mm higher than the right side.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Bilateral failed TMJ rib grafts with fibrous ankylosis.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Missing all the maxillary molars, mandibular left molars, and mandibular right first and second molars replaced a 5-unit bridge. Also missing maxillary 4 incisors and left cuspid replaced with a 10-unit bridge.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm (normal 11 mm).
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. Headaches.
Sleep apnea.
Lupus and Sjogren's syndrome.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
2. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
3. Restorative dentistry that may include dental implants and dental reconstruction.

B107 had previous breast implants with silicon gel in it. This initiated her lupus and Sjogren's syndrome problems. She had the silicone implants removed and had saline implants placed. However, the right saline implant is ruptured and she has not been able to get it taken out because of her significant airway problems and the fact that the surgeons and anesthesiologists are afraid to put her to sleep.

MRI
B107 AGE: 62/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows that she has had previous surgery and by history she had a rib graft placed in the left TMJ at age 42. The left tomogram shows the presence of a graft and it appears that there is almost a separate body of tissue that is somewhat calcified within the joint space. The anatomy is quite deformed.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is narrow in width. The disc may be in position, but difficult to tell on these views. The lateral rim of the fossa appears fairly flat in some areas, but in other areas there is a part that curves down about 2 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that there is some kind of foreign and calcified material or artifact within the ramus area that is actually somewhat anterior to the fossa. Somewhat lateral, there appears to be some material in the fossa area. On opening, there is virtually no translation present.

The right TMJ shows significant degenerative changes in this joint. There is some fluid in the joint space. It appears she has had some previous surgery in this side as there is some metal artifact meaning she could possibly have a rib graft done on the right side as well. There is no translation present.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ severe destruction of the joints with probable bilateral rib grafts placed.

