LAURA PERSON									07-02-03

Laura is 47 years old and referred by Dr. Jesse Schroeder, 6407 Colleyville Blvd., Ste. B, Colleyville, TX  76034.

Patient History

Laura had surgery for Crohn’s. In September of 1968, she had further surgery for her Crohn’s disease with removal of the ascending colon. In 1975, she had her gallbladder removed, in 1979 a C-section, in 1989, she had periodontal surgery, and in 2000 had some periodontal surgery touch-up. The medical conditions that Laura has include the following:

Crohn’s disease
Diabetes
Glaucoma

She does get occasional right-sided earaches. She does get some vertigo but has had that checked out with a neurologist. Laura does feel that she has some hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her neck and lower back. Her fingers and hands get a little bit stiff about two times a month. Her hips bother her some and her knees give her some problems. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly except she would have an occasional glitch in the right TMJ. On excursive movements, the joints seem to function smoothly. To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Laura has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is shifted about 1 mm off to the right. Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left.

In profile view, she has good facial balance anteroposteriorly as well as vertically. Has about a 9-degree angle of the nasolabial angle. 

Intraorally, Laura is missing the mandibular left second and third molar and right third molar. Mild crowding lower anterior arch. Reasonable attached gingiva in the front except a little bit thin around the central incisors. In the upper arch, she is missing probably a second bicuspid on the right side and a third molar. On the left side, both bicuspids are missing, and she has a 4-unit bridge to replace the two missing bicuspids. On the left side, she has a Class III end-on occlusion being about 3 to 4 mm Class III. On the left side, she is fairly close to being Class I. She has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm. Tendency toward crossbite in the left second bicuspid, first molar area. Oropharynx looks clear. Posterior faucial pillars are transversely narrow and may be positioned somewhat posteriorly. Uvula is moderately hyperplastic. She does have some mild sleep apnea problems and has had a sleep study taken. Sleep study was done in November or December of 2002. 

Intranasally, turbinates appear moderate in size with the left one being maybe a little bit larger than the right side and maybe blocks the airway a little bit because of the slight septal deviation off toward the left. Doesn’t appear that there is any significant nasal airway obstruction.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses are clear. Nasal airway appears patent. A little deviation of the nasal septum. Missing all four third molars and in addition maxillary right second bicuspid, left first and second bicuspid, third molar, mandibular left second molar, and both lower third molars. Condyles appear flattened on top bilaterally and a little sclerosis possibly.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that it is extremely flat and shows the fossa and articular eminence. Some anterior beaking present. Increased posterior joint space. Appears as though there is vertically decreased joint space as well.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is fairly large in size and has some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is much steeper on this side and approaches more normal slope. Increased superoposterior joint space.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are all clear. Septum is deviated all the way off to one side particularly the bony septum.

Cephalometrically, oropharyngeal airway is about 9 mm at the soft palpate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue. Lower incisors appear slightly over-angulated. Soft palate appears a little bit short in length and definitely not hyperplastic. 

Dental model analysis shows a Bolton’s difference of about 1 mm. She has a slight reversed curve of occlusion in the lower arch and accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Laura has a dual bite relationship, and in her centric relation, she has an open bite of about 4 mm. She has just a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the left side and a slight Class III by about 1 to 2 mm on the right side. Midlines are off by about a good 3 mm. Mandibular dental midline is shifted off to the left a couple of millimeters. Maxillary midline is shifted off to the right about 1 mm. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are reasonably well aligned with each other.

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior maxillary transverse deficiency
Chronic posturing of the mandibular in a forward position
In centric relation, slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side (2 mm) and a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the left side
Significant anterior open bite of 4 mm
Missing all four third molars and mandibular left second molar, maxillary left first and second bicuspids, but they are replaced with pontics
Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
Reverse curve of occlusion, lower arch
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Overangulation of both the maxillary and mandibular incisors
Tooth-size discrepancy of 1 to 2 mm
Mandibular dental midline shifted off to the left about 2 mm


Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip upper lateral incisors mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align the arch segmentally to include the left cuspid through second molar, left lateral incisor through right lateral incisor, and right cuspid through second molar. Place a vertical step in the arch wire versus cutting the arch wire between the lateral and cuspids. This will enable us to get a better vertical bite relationship to eliminate the anterior open bite
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and align. Try to shift mandibular dental midline to the right 1 to 2 mm to help correct for some slight transverse asymmetry within the lower arch

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand, advance slightly, and establish a normal overbite, overjet relationship with the lower anterior teeth

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Laura does chronically posture her mandible forward about 2 to 3 mm. In centric relation, she is slightly Class II on the left side and slightly Class III on the right side. It would be important to help correct her mandibular midline discrepancy, and the use of perhaps some Class III elastics on the right side and light Class II elastics on the left side might help shift the teeth around toward the right side to help correct for that slight midline deviation of 2 mm.