MELISSA PERSON									01-22-04

Melissa is 20 years old and a sophomore at TCU.

Patient History

Melissa is in good health with no major medical problems. She takes no medications. Melissa has no allergies that she is aware of, no food allergies, and no problems wearing jewelry.

She states that she doesn’t really have any breathing problems through her nose that she is aware of, but she does tend to breathe through her mouth when she sleeps. She has no problems with earaches but gets occasional tinnitus, no vertigo, and no hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is aware of nocturnal clenching and bruxism, and sometimes during the day she will find herself clenching. She takes no medications except for Advil for her headaches. 

Her TMJ problems began as far back as she can remember but probably in her early teen ears of unknown etiology. She did undergo some preliminary orthodontics and then had interceptive treatment predominantly using a Herbst appliance for one year that was cemented in place. This was followed by full orthodontics for two years. She has had some splint therapy as well. 

She gets headaches fairly often but not particularly every week, and they occur predominantly in the temporal area at about a level of 3. She used to get severe headaches at a level of 10 prior to puberty. After achieving puberty, those severe headaches pretty much disappeared, and she was left with just this ore regular type of headaches. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 7, diet at 4, and disability at 4. 

Patient Concerns

Popping in the jaw joints
Headaches 
Jaw joint pain
Difficulties eating and chewing

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Melissa has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is almost 4 mm. Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline is all pretty much on the facial midline. She does tend to have somewhat decreased vermilion exposed in the upper lip. 

In profile view, she may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe 2 to 3 mm. Chin appears to be retruded approximately 12 to 15 mm. Chin-neckline is short, although chin-neck angle is fairly well defined. Some fullness in the submental area. 

Intraorally, Melissa has all of her lower teeth back through her second molars. Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled. She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship by about 3 mm, and she has an overjet of probably about 3 mm. She has about a 3-mm anterior deep bite relationship. Oropharynx appears relatively healthy and clear. 

She does have a little bit of a wide columella base and somewhat constricted nostrils. Intranasally, turbinates are a little bit enlarged particularly on the right side but not so much on the left side. Nasal airway is a little bit greater on the left side as compared to the right side. 

To palpation, Melissa has no tenderness around the head and neck area. 

On opening, she has a definite click in the left TMJ at less than 10 mm of opening and a closing click at probably less than 5 mm. There also appears to be a closing click on the right side, although an opening click is not as noticeable.

Maximal incisal opening for Melissa is 39 mm but only about 19 mm with reasonable comfort. Excursive movements are 7 mm in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that Melissa has all of her teeth except for her third molars. Sinuses look fairly clear. Turbinates are a little bit difficult to evaluate. Condyles appear a little bit flattened anteriorly, and it appears that the lateral poles are inferiorly located relative to the medial poles. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class II relationship. Probably a mild high occlusal plane angle and some slight anterior vertical maxillary excess. Skeletal Class II relationship is present. Oropharyngeal airway appears good. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear, and the face appears to have fairly good symmetry. Bony septum appears relatively symmetrical. Right turbinate appears a little bit enlarged compared to the left one, and the nasal airway has better passage on the left side as compared to the right side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is relatively small in anteroposterior dimension. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with a significantly increased anterior joint space indicative of probably anterior displacement of the articular disc. The condylar position on the tomograms is different than the MRI possibly due to anterior posturing during the MRIs compared to these centrically positioned condyles. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is narrow anteroposteriorly. Some flattening on the superior head. Significantly decreased posterior joint space and significantly increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Likewise this joint is indicative of probably anteriorly displaced articular disc. 

On opening, there is reasonably good translation of both condyles. Joint space in the open view appears reasonable probably indicative of reduction of the articular discs in the open position. Extreme narrowness anteroposteriorly of the condyles is noted in the open position with the right condyle having more AP narrowness than the left side. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction
Anterior vertical maxillary excess
AP mandibular deficiency
High occlusal plane angle
Class II end-on occlusion
Accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch
Slight reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch
Slight anterior deep bite of about 3 mm
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up about 0.5 to 1 mm of space around each upper lateral incisor to help compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy
Align and level mandibular arch trying to decrease the accentuated curve of Spee. Strip lower anterior teeth removing at least a millimeter of tooth structure (She has had previous stripping there, so want to be careful not to remove more than about 1 more millimeter). Include the second molar in the presurgical orthodontics and try to elevate the mesial ridge and lower the distal marginal ridge by bringing the molar roots anteriorly in the mandible

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect superiorly and slightly forward as well as correct any vertical transverse discrepancies that may be present
Augmentation genioplasty

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
