EDNA PODELL									05/02/2007 

Edna is 38 years old.  Edna was referred by Dr. Craig Skaggs in Beverly Hill, CA, an oral maxillofacial surgeon.  Edna had taken her kids out there for some pilot shooting for films and developed her significant pain while she was there.  She saw Dr. Skaggs in reference to it and he subsequently referred her here.  For the most part Edna is in good health except she does have some allergy problems.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Zyrtec.
Sudafed. 
Lexapro 10 mg daily.
Ibuprofen 600 t.i.d.
Spironolactone for acne.
Progesterone.
Hydrocodone p.r.n. for her migraines.
Fentanyl for migraines.
Amitriptyline p.r.n.

Edna is not aware of when her jaw joint problems actually began.  She has been aware in the past of having issues with the jaw joints and headaches and pain problems.  Etiology is unknown.  She has had no treatment to date except for medications.  Her problems have gotten significantly worse, however, in the past three to four weeks with significantly increased pain and headaches and closed lock problems.  For awhile she was unable to eat but that has improved some.  

Edna rates her current TMJ pain at a level of 6 average daily pain of 6, jaw function at 6, diet and disability at 7.  She rates her headaches that she gets about two to three times per a week at a level of 7 and these occur in the temple areas.  She does get migraines about two to three times a month that occur only on the left side behind the left eye and into the temple area.  These typically run a level of 9.  They occur right before and right after her periods and also they can occur around the 15th day of the month.  She has no problems with earaches but does get an occasional tinnitus and vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of nighttime clenching.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Difficulty eating and chewing.

In frontal view, Edna has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about –3 to 4 mm.  Maxillary midline and chin appear pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline may be just about 1 mm off towards the left.  In profile view, Edna has some AP maxillary deficiency probably 4 to 6 mm.  Mandible appears to be retruded probably around 15 mm.  Chin-neck angle is not well-defined.  Chin is actually fairly close to her trachea being only maybe about an inch or so in front of the trachea itself.  

EDNA PODELL				05/02/2007				Page 2

Intraorally, Edna has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has some very minor crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She appears to have good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has slightly a Class II cuspid relationship by about 3 mm on the right side and 2 mm on the left side.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm.  In the oropharyngeal area, the tissues look healthy.  The uvula is moderately enlarged.  The soft palate appears moderately elongated.  Faucial pillars appear moderately constricted.  Tonsils are present and appear normal to mild in size.  She does have some deviation in the nasal septum.  Turbinates appear moderate in size but there does appear to be a passable airway.  She does report some snoring and daytime somnolence but no sleep apnea problems.  To palpation she has some moderate tenderness over the temporalis muscles, TMJs and some mild retention over the styloid areas and right shoulder.  Maximal incisal opening is about 37 mm but only about 23 without significant discomfort.  Excursive movement to the right is 9 mm, left is 6 mm.  On opening, she has significant crepitation in the right joint.  The left joint seems to function somewhat smooth.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars but all the other teeth are present.  She has a root canal in the mandibular left cuspid and first bicuspid.  Sinuses appear clear.   Both condyles appear arthritic.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle has some arthritic changes.  In one view there appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence has a relatively normal inclination to it.  There appears to be some subcondylar breakdown of the trabeculation with what appears to be a pseudocyst present in the condylar head.  There appears to be some sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  Significant signs of osteoarthritic changes.

Right TMJ tomogram shows osteoarthritic and degenerative changes of the condyle.  There may be some decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence may be a little bit flatter on this side compared to the other side.  There appears to be some breakdown of subcondylar bone and a little sclerosis on the superior aspect of the condyle.  On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints.  Significantly decreased joint space in the open view on the right side with what appears to be bone-on-bone contact.  

Waters view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side in the bony area.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged posteriorly with some constricture of the functional airway.  Obstruction appears to be much greater than what can be seen with the scope in the anterior aspect of the nose.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that both the maxilla and mandible are retruded.  The oropharyngeal airway dimension is only about 3.5 mm at the soft palate level and about perhaps 5.5 mm at the most at the base of the tongue.  She has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  She has a skeletal Class II relationship. 


EDNA PODELL				05/02/2007				Page 3

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with articular disc dislocations non-reducing and non-salvageable.  Perforation is present in the right joint.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Sleep apnea symptoms.
TMJ pain.
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch. 
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and down graft the maxilla decreasing the occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
