CHRISTOPHER PILAND 								01/02/2008

Chris is 18 years old and referred by Wanda Manchew, 4711 Dove Hollow Way, Arlington, TX 76016. 

Christopher's primary concerns are with sleep apnea.  He has had this particular problem for as long as he can remember.  He has no joint problems.  No headaches.  No myofascial pain.  No TMJ noises or problems.  He has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  He had some problems with his knees.  He has had previous surgery including a tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy but this did not solve his problems.  He had orthodontics from 1998 through approximately 2003 including the use of a Herbst appliance for a while.  He has severe snoring.  Moderate to a little severe daytime somnolence and he has moderate to severe sleep apnea at night.  His parents say that he has significant apnea episodes.  Interestingly, Chris' mother also has sleep apnea and is on a CPAP machine.  

In frontal view, Chris has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 
18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 7 mm.  In profile view, Chris has some AP maxillary deficiency probably 4 to 5 mm.  Chin is retruded about 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is absent.  Lower third face appears slightly elongated.  Intraorally, Chris has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  He has fairly good attached gingiva lacking a little bit around the central incisors and thin around the cuspids.  In the upper arch, Chris has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has some spacing along the upper lateral incisors.  Upper left lateral incisor is small in size compared to the right one and the rest of the teeth.  There is slight tipping of the incisors with the roots being shifted a little bit towards the left side and crowns towards the right side.  He has basically a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being about 2 mm Class II.  Anterior deep bite of about 3 to 4 mm.  The nasal tip is about 3 mm off toward the right side.  Maxillary dental midline is about 1 to 1.5 mm off to the right side.  Straightening the nose up shifts the midline and the upper lip a little bit towards the left and closer onto the mandibular midline.  Maxillary right cuspid is about 1 mm or 2 posterior to the left one.  Right maxillary cuspid is about 1 or 2 mm higher than the left side.  Oropharyngeal area looks good.  Uvula is moderately elongated.  Soft palate and faucial pillars all appear relatively normal.  Tonsils are gone.  Intranasally, the columella is quite wide and nostrils are somewhat constricted.  The right turbinate is relatively normal in size.  The left one is moderately enlarged.  At the base of the septum there is a spur that goes off to the left side and almost touches against the left turbinate.  The airway on the right side appears significantly better than the left side.  Maximal incisal opening 53 mm.  Excursive movements to the right 9 mm, left 10 mm.  He has no tenderness around the head and neck area to palpation.  Joints seem to function smoothly.  Chris has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
We are having difficulties with our Panorex today and only about two-thirds of it showed up after two to three attempts.  All the teeth are present back through the second molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Right TMJ looks normal.  Left ramus and condyle are not seen.


CHRISTOPHER PILAND			01/02/2008				Page 2

On waters view the sinuses look reasonably clear.  Left nasal airway appears almost totally blocked.  Some passable airway on the right side.   

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good morphology and good joint space.  Articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Left TMJ tomogram appears to have relatively normal morphology and joint space with moderate inclination of the articular eminence.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the presence of anterior vertical maxillary excess, AP maxillary deficiency, AP mandibular deficiency, high occlusal plane angle, Class II end-on occlusion, hypertrophied nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue, and severely decreased oropharyngeal airway. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
AP maxillary deficiency.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Hypertrophied adenoid tissue in nasopharynx. 
High occlusal plane angle. 
Slight Class II end-on occlusion.
Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.
 Hypertrophied right nasal turbinate.
 Nasoseptal spur on the left side of the septum.
 Partial nasal airway obstruction. 
 Severe sleep apnea. 
 Wide columella and narrow nostrils. 
 Nasal deformity with the dorsum shifted off to the right side 3 mm and a foreshortened 
       nasal dorsum.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Sleep study. 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Maintain spacing around the upper left maxillary lateral incisor maintaining 1 mm of space on each side of the tooth.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.




CHRISTOPHER PILAND			01/02/2008				Page 3

Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior maxilla superiorly, posterior maxilla inferiorly and advance approximately 4 to 5 mm. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible approximately 12 mm at pogonion. 
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy. 
Left turbinectomy. 
Nasoseptoplasty.
Reconstruction of the columella. 
External rhinoplasty to place the nose back on facial midline and to lengthen the nasal dorsum. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors. 