DEE PIERCE									10/26/2011

Dee is 41 years old, birth date 07/24/1970.  Her TMJ problems began during her teenage years of unknown etiology.  She had orthodontics from the age of 19 to 21 including four first bicuspid extractions and all four wisdom teeth were removed.  She had surgery in September 1997 including maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla upwards and augmentation genioplasty.  Afterwards the upper jaw had been moved superiorly too much and the chin was too strong.  She went back into orthodontics from the age of 27 to 29.  In October 1998, she had orthognathic surgery again where the upper jaw was moved back downwards and the chin prominence was reduced.  Her primary concerns at this time include the following:  

The bite and jaws when they come together do not feel right.  
She feels as though there is an over bite relationship. 
It is uncomfortable for her to brush her teeth. 
When she drinks, she has trouble at times with water dribbling down her chin.  
She feels tightness around the upper jaw and feels that the upper jaw is protrusive. 
Front teeth feel susceptible to injury.
Jaws do not touch at rest.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Dee has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  The maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin are fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The nasal tip is slightly off to the right side about 2 mm and the chin may be just slightly off to the right side about 2 mm.  Upper lip length is 22 mm and upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm.  In profile view, the upper lip can be retruded about 4 mm and chin about 10 mm.  Chin neckline is a little bit shorter, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, she is missing mandibular more like second bicuspids and in the upper arch probably is missing first bicuspids.  The lower incisors appear to be tipped lingually with an increased curve of Spee.  There is some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she does have a slight buccal tipping of the teeth particularly the second molars.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being probably about at least 4, perhaps 5 mm Class II on the left side and about 3 to 4 mm on the right side.  She has an anterior deep bite of 4 to 5 mm.  There is no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  She has some crepitus in the left TMJ, but the right side seems to be reasonably smooth.  She reports no headaches and no TMJ pain or myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function at 0, diet at 5, disability at 2.  She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  The maximal incisal opening is 39 mm and excursion movement to the right 7 mm and to the left 6 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, the maxillary first bicuspids, and mandibular second bicuspids.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  She has 2 bone plates in each side of the maxilla with 5 screws on the left side in the combined plates and 6 screws on the right side in the combined plates.  She has significant arthritis in her joints.  There is anterior beaking being a little bit more pronounced on the right side as compared to the left side.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  

Coronal radiograph shows that the turbinates are actually quite large and appear to block a good portion of the functional nasal airway.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Axial view shows that the turbinates are huge in mediolateral width and actually push the lateral nasal wall into the maxillary sinuses.  The maxillary sinuses are smaller in size because of the displacement by the turbinates, but the sinuses are clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking tendency.  There is decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint.  There is sort of a hockey stick shape formation to the condylar head and neck.  The articular eminence is fairly steep.  There is slight decreased joint space.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows that there is some significant arthritic changes with anterior beaking present.  There is significantly decreased vertical joint space.  The articular eminence is more shallow on the right side as compared to the left side.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a lateral extension of the condyle that extends out beyond the lateral rim of the fossa.  The condyle was somewhat peaked in midportion.  There is significantly decreased vertical joint space and it appears that in areas it could be almost bone-on-bone contact.  

Right TMJ coronal tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have lost some vertical volume.  There is significantly decreased vertical joint space.  There is a pseudocyst in the head of the condyle towards the medial side.  The fossa is much more shallow on the right side as compared to the left side where on the left side there is a downward curvature of 4 to 5 mm, whereas on the right side there is only a 1 to 2 mm downward curvature.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is some anterior vertical maxillary excess.  The maxilla is AP hypoplastic.  The mandibular is also AP hypoplastic.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5.5 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  She does demonstrate some lip incompetence of probably about 6 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Dee would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction and with probable significant deformation by asymptomatic. 
Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Moderately high occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5.5 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).  
Missing mandibular bilateral second bicuspids and maxillary first bicuspids.
Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 4.5 mm.
Vertical inclination of maxillary and mandibular anterior teeth.
Anterior deep bite of 5 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Orthodontics to open up bicuspid spaces in each arch and expand the maxillary and mandibular dental alveolus.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy and open space around the upper laterals to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
Placement of 4 dental implants.
Restorative dentistry to replace the bicuspids as well as build up the maxillary lateral incisor with bonding, veneers or crowns.
Continue to monitor the TMJs.
TMJ and orthognathic surgery only if indicated following the orthodontic treatment.  
	