HANNAH PLUMLEE								07/24/2008

Hannah is 15 years old.  Referred by Dr. Moody Alexander, 5500 Preston Road, Suite 360, Dallas, TX 75205.  Hannah has previously been diagnosed with Crohn's disease.  She has had her wisdom teeth removed.  She had previous orthodontics from the age of 8 to 10 with what appeared to be a good result.  She had her wisdom teeth removed within the past 6 months.  Medications she takes include fish oil and probiotics.  She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain.  Jaws work normal and she eats a regular diet with no disability.  No other joints bother her.  No earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Hannah has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  She has some asymmetry in the lower jaw.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline may be just slightly off the left 1 mm as is the mandibular dental midline.  The chin is almost 5 mm off to the left side.  In profile view, she has a little dorsal hump.  The maxilla appears a little bit deficient particularly at soft tissue point A.  She has a C-shape curve with the upper lip.  She has a lip incompetence of probably about 6 to 7 mm.  Chin appears retruded about 8 to 10 mm.  Chin neckline is a little bit short and chin neck angle is somewhat soft in shape.  Intraorally, Hannah has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  She has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has accentuated curve of Wilson in the upper arch.  She has increased fullness in the right side of the face compared to the left side.  Transversely, the maxilla appears somewhat elongated on the right side by 1 mm.  It appears the left side may be down about 1 mm.  Anteroposterior the lower arch seems fairly symmetric.  In the upper arch, the left cuspid may be 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  She has a Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by probably 4 mm.  In the left side, she is probably 2 mm Class II.  Her submental view seems to have more fullness in the right cheek as compared to the left side in an AP direction.  Inferior border of the mandible on the right side appears lower than the left side by perhaps a couple of millimeters.  Right angle of the mandible appears to be maybe 3 mm more prominent than the left side.  It appears that there is a posterior yaw.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy and normal.  She does have a bifid uvula.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The septum looks reasonably straight.  She probably has some moderate nasal airway obstruction.  She has a wide columella, narrow nostrils, and some constriction of the luminal valves.  She is not aware of any snoring problems, daytime somnolence, of sleep apnea symptoms.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer.  Sinuses look clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  The condyles show no gross deformity.  
Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  She has huge frontal sinuses.  Nasal septum appears somewhat wide.  The turbinates are fairly good size and there does not appear to be much of a nasal airway.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has reasonably good morphology.  Joint space  looks relatively normal.  Articular eminence is relatively normal in inclination.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has reasonably good morphology.  Joint space appears fairly well balanced.  Articular eminence is relatively normal in inclination.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal and occlusal Class II tendency.  She has an anterior open bite.  She appears to have a moderate high occlusal plane angle.  Upper incisors appears over angulated.  Oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:    

Anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia. 
Mandibular prognathism (hidden because of the excessive vertical maxillary growth).
Facial asymmetry with the right side of the face being more prominent than the left side. 
Slight Class II occlusion on the left side by 2 mm and on end-on Class II relationship by 4 mm on the right side.
Anterior open bite of 2 mm. 
Overangulation of the maxillary incisors.
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.
Accentuated curve of Wilson in the upper arch. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Significant constricture of luminal valves. 
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Predominant mouth breather. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Extract maxillary first bicuspids.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Close the extraction space and decrease the inclination of the maxillary incisors. Tip lateral roots mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing to help decrease the slight overangulation.  
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly, advance it, and correct any transverse discrepancies.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible into proper occlusion and correct the asymmetry. 
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Consider reconstruction of the luminal valves. 
4.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
