DEBBIE PITMAN									11/01/2006

Debbie is 57 years old and referred by Dr. William Johnson, 2500 McGee Dr. Norman, OK 73072 and Dr. Janet Barresi, 11016 Quail Creek Rd., Oklahoma City, OK 73120.  In the past five years she has had problems with head and neck pain, irritable bowel syndrome and ear infections.  Previous surgeries she has had includes a tonsillectomy in 1955, hysterectomy in 1980, breast implants in 1984, ACL knee reconstruction in 1992 and replacement of breast implants in 1998.  She has some high blood pressure issues.  She had an adverse reaction to Demerol, penicillin and erythromycin. 

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Benazepril 5 mg daily.
Zanaflex 2 mg b.i.d. and 4 mg at bedtime.
Zelnorm 3 mg b.i.d.
Darvocet 100/650 at bedtime.
Ultracet 37.5/325 p.r.n. pain.
Nasacort 2 sprays 1 to 2 times per day.
Astelin 2 sprays b.i.d.
Progesterone 400 mg daily.

Debbie's problems began when she was about 20 years old in 1969.  She had a tooth extraction and this seems to have initiated problems. More recently she was in a motor vehicle accident in 06/2005 that significantly exacerbated her problems.  She has had the following treatments:
Rolfing for 12 years.
Acupuncture.
Cold laser.
Facet joint injections.
Splint therapy treatment and TMJ treatment for the past 35 years.
TMJ equilibrations including placement of crowns.
Trigger point injections.
Osteopathic manipulations. 
Homeopathic/naturopathic remedies.
 Healing touch.
 Reiki reflexology massage.

She rates her headaches currently at a level of 5 in the temple and posterior head areas bilaterally.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 5, diet at 3, disability at 7.  She is aware of clenching her teeth day and night.  She has significant problems with frequent earaches bilaterally with the right side worse then the left side.  She gets continuous ringing in her ears that have been present for about 14 to 15 years.  She has lightheadedness and dizziness that occasionally occurs.  She occasionally suffers from depression but it apparently is not an ongoing problem and she is receiving no treatment for it. 

She also reports the presence of fibromyalgia symptoms, chronic fatigue, irritable bowel syndrome and moderate high blood pressure.  

DEBBIE PITMAN				11/01/2006				Page 2


Other joints that bother her include her back, thumbs, left hip, shoulders and she states occasionally her whole body will ache and she will get generalized joint soreness.  Previous Panorex sent dated January 15, 2003, shows that she has crowns in all the posterior teeth from second bicuspid through the molars and through the quadrants and in the right posterior quadrant.  The first bicuspid also has a crown.  Relative to Debbie's headaches, they are very continuously and sometimes worse than other times.  TMJ pain is there continuously as well.  Her right side is worse than the left side. 

In frontal view, Debbie has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm.  Maxillary midline and mandibular dental midline and chin are all fairly well aligned with each other.  The nasal tip may be just slightly off to the right side 1 to 2 mm and her right eye may be elevated by about 2 mm.  In profile view, she has fairly good interfacial balance.  Maxilla and mandible, however, could be moderately retruded by maybe 4 to 5 mm.  Intraorally, Debbie has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has crowns on the second bicuspids and all the molars.  Some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  It appears to be adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, Debbie has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has crowns on the left second bicuspid molars and on the right side from the first bicuspid through the molars.  There is basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship and maybe just a slight II tendency on the left side.  There is about a 3 mm anterior deep bite.  Intraorally, the oropharynx appears relatively normal.  Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear normal.  She does have some amalgam tattooing in the right cheek area in two spots.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side.  Right turbinate is moderately hyperplastic and the left one is also but not quite as significant.  It appears that there may be adequate airway.  Debbie does awake at night usually secondary to pain or to hot flashes.  She is unaware of any sleep apnea problems.  To palpation, Debbie has moderate pain over the TMJs, styloid areas, masseters, SCMs, posterior neck, shoulder areas and mild to moderate tenderness over the temporalis muscles and medial pterygoids.  Maximal incisal opening is 46 mm but about 25 mm where she can be comfortable before she clicks in the right joint.  After she clicks, she can open to about 35 mm with reasonable comfort.  Excursive movement to the right 8 mm, left 9 mm.  On opening, the left joint seems to be function relatively smoothly but in the right joint she has a click at about 25 mm of opening and probably closing at 10 to 15 mm.  In excursive movements in particularly, there is some crepitus in the right joint and Debbie feels that she can feel some of that even when she just opens her jaw.  She experiences the crepitus on opening in the pre-click position but after she clicks that goes away.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  She has crowns as previously noted on all the send bicuspids and molars as well as the right first bicuspid.  She has a root canal on the right mandibular first molar and maxillary right first molar.  Sinuses appear reasonably clear.  Septum appears that there could be a spur posteriorly in the bony septum.  Sinuses are probably reasonably clear.  The left condyle appears to be in a little bit better shape than the right side and shows some arthritic changes.

DEBBIE PITMAN				11/01/2006				Page 3


Waters view shows that there is significant deviation in the bony nasal septum and posterior aspect of the nose being displaced to the mid part of the floor of the nose.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  There could be a spur off the septum into the left side of the nose as well towards the mid to the superior aspect of the septum.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  Decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep but not very long.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle has more of a hockey stick shape and a little bit more sclerosis on the superior and anterior aspect of the condylar head.  A little bit of flattening on the posterior head of the condyle.  Articular eminence appears a little bit steeper on this side perhaps than the other side.  There are decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.   Styloid process although noted on both sides appears a little bit more prominent on the right side.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Debbie is basically a skeletal Class I occlusal position.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm at the base of the tongue and about 6 mm at the soft palate level.  Turbinates appear somewhat prominent and extends posterior to the palate.  The tongue is carried somewhat low with good space between the dorsum of the tongue and the hard palate.  Debbie's tinnitus began roughly around 1992 following some extensive equilibrations done on her teeth. Dr. Johnson, her dentist, then reconstructed her mouth with the crowns.  It was in about 1994 that she developed a tinnitus that has been continuous since that time.  Debbie may have had some fibromyalgia symptoms prior to then but she became more aware of them around that time.  Her original breast implants placed in 1984 were silicone and her current ones that were placed in 1998 are saline.

Debbie has been in splint therapy for the past 35 years.  She still sleeps in a splint at night.  Debbie feels that she has to have a splint in order for her mouth to feel somewhat rested.  The occlusal splints that she wears during the day seem to help her or at least reduce some of the symptoms as compared to going without a splint during the day. She currently has a daytime splint that fits on the upper teeth.  Debbie feels that she probably felt better with the lower splint that she had that one of the surgeons in Oklahoma City made for her but that splint broke and there was a repair attempted on it that did not work well.  However, she does feel that one did work better than the current upper splint that she has.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with reduction.
Mandibular hypoplasia.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Tinnitus.
Crowding of lower anterior arch.
DEBBIE PITMAN				11/01/2006				Page 4


Crowding of the upper anterior arch.
Class II end-on occlusion being a little bit worse on the left side than the right side.
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 2 mm. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy. 
CT scans of TMJs and jaws if treatment option 2 is selected.
Surgical option 1.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies. 
Surgical treatment option 2.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry as necessary to finalize the bite.





