BRAD POE										08/06/2008

Brad is 18 years old.  Referred by Dr. Maryam Mojdehi-Barnes, Allen, TX 75013.  Brad was born with a bilateral cleft lip and palate.  He had repair in September 1990 and then additional repair in December 1990.  He had a cleft palate repair in 1991.  He had a lip/nose revision in 1995 and a bone graft to the palate and probably alveolar cleft area in November 1999.  He has had seven sets of ear tubes.  He had nose and lip scar revisions in July 2003.  He had a mastoidectomy in November 2004 and he had nasal polyps removed in November 2007.  He had tympanoplasty and cholesteatoma in December 2007 and inner ear repair also in July 2008.  

Primary concerns that Brad has includes the following:

Flatness in the face particularly around the base of the nose. 
Possibility of requiring upper and lower jaw advancement.
Fistula present in the palate.

The only medication that he currently uses is Nasonex two times per day.  Brad does have some difficulties breathing through his nose which apparently had been related to nasal polyps.  Brad thinks he breathes through his nose when he sleeps, but occasionally through his mouth, but is not sure.  He does have some mild snoring.  He has no sleep apnea symptoms.  He has no TMJ related issues.  Brad has had orthodontic treatment with Dr. Ed Genecov.  He had orthodontic appliances on for approximately 8 years.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Brad has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  He has a beautiful repair on his lip.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  There is a soft tissue defect in the tubercle area of the upper lip.  If the tubercle were there, upper tooth lip relationship would probably be about zero.  The right eye may be elevated just 1 to 2 mm.   The maxillary midline is off to the left side about 3 mm.  Chin likewise is off to the left side probably about 3 mm.   In profile view, the maxilla is probably AP deficient by 6 to 8 mm and the chin AP deficient by probably about 10 mm.  Chin neckline is a little bit short and chin neck angle is a little soft in angulation.  He has good nasal projection.  Intraorally, Brad is missing lower first bicuspids and lower teeth appear to be in a little bit of lingual inclination.  He has decalcification on some of his lower teeth.  In the upper arch, Brad has a transposed cuspid and first bicuspid on the left side.  He has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars, although the second molar is tipped buccally quite a ways.  On the right side, he is missing upper right lateral incisor and has the rest of his teeth.  The upper cuspid is in the lateral incisor position.  The first central incisors are narrow at the incisal edge.  It appears particularly in the right side that the tooth was fractured or recontoured, but is very narrow at the incisal edge compared to the normal formation of that tooth.  Brad has an anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.  He has a small upper left lateral incisor that probably creates a significant tooth size discrepancy.  He has a basic Class I cuspid relationship on the right side, but a Class III molar relationship.  On the left side, he has got a full Class III cuspid relationship if the first bicuspid is used as the cuspid.  All incisors appear to be in vertical position.  He has an end-on incisor relationship and zero overbite.  Transversely, the arches are fairly level with perhaps the right cuspid being up 1 mm on the right side compared to the left side.  TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly.  He has no tenderness to palpation around the head around the head and neck area.  Incisal opening is 43 mm.  Excursion movements are about 4 to 5 mm in each direction.  The oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  He does appear to have an oronasal fistula up in the roof of his mouth.  He has a repaired cleft hard and soft palate.  The palate appears somewhat short in length.  Fascial pillars are relatively normal, although because of the short soft palate they actually turn a little bit anterior in the AP position of the palate.  Intranasally, the turbinates are hard to see, but appear maybe just mildly enlarged, but difficult to tell for sure.  The septum appears reasonably straight at least anteriorly.  He has significant constricture of the nostrils particularly on the right side and has severe constricture of the luminal valves particularly on the right side.  On holding his valves open, he could breathe a little bit easier through the right side, but he has quite a severe constricture there.  Brad probably has significant nasal airway obstruction where at night he probably is predominantly a mouth breather and also during the day he breathes significantly through his mouth.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary right lateral incisor, mandibular first bicuspids, and all four third molars.  The sinuses look reasonably clear.  The condyles look relatively normal.  Right condylar head and neck appear somewhat elongated compared to the left side.  Roots on the maxillary central incisors as well as on the bicuspids appear somewhat foreshortened.  
Right TMJ tomogram appears relatively normal.  
Left TMJ tomogram also appears relatively normal.  On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyles.  
Waters view shows that there is a significant deviation of the nasal septum.  The septum appears wide or there could be a double curve in it back in the bony area.  Left turbinate appears to be quite large and appears to block most of the airway.  On the right side, the turbinate is moderate in size, but the septum is deviated off towards the right side posteriorly and this may be causing some of the airway obstruction.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that it appears Brad has some AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency.  Oropharyngeal airway dimension at the base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 5 mm and as best I could tell from the soft palate area also measures about 5 mm.  Maxillary and mandibular incisors appear to be slightly over-retracted.  Brad has a transverse yaw with the right side of the mandibular angle being about 5 mm more prominent in the lateral direction than the left side.  

Basic diagnoses for Brad would be as follows:    

Repaired bilateral cleft lip and palate.
AP maxillary hypoplasia.  
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Anterior bilateral posterior crossbite and greater in the posterior right than left side.
Transverse facial asymmetry with a posterior yaw to the right of approximately 5 mm.
Missing maxillary right lateral incisor and mandibular first bicuspids.
Transposition of the maxillary left cuspid and first bicuspid. 
Class I cuspid on the left side, Class III cuspid on the right side.
Mild velopharyngeal incompetency. 
Mild hypernasal speech.
Probable hypertrophied turbinates. 
Severe constricture of right luminal valve.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Primarily a mouth breather.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  On the left side, be sure that the lateral incisor root is tipped mesially and first cuspid root tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery.
Advance the maxilla approximately 7 to 8 mm.
Advance the mandible approximately 5 mm at the incisal tips.
Partial turbinectomy on the left side.  
Reconstruct right side cleft nose deformity (severely constricted nasal valve).
