RHONDA PIERCE 									11/20/2007

Rhonda is 46 years and is referred by Dr. Patterson.  Rhonda has had previous right shoulder repair.  She is taking Zithromax currently because of sinus infection.  She has had an adverse reaction to ampicillin.  

HISTORY OF PRESENT PROBLEMS:  Rhonda apparently had a malocclusion that she is aware of and she wanted it corrected.  She went to an orthodontist, Dr. Lisa Stokes, in Sherman.  Some teeth were extracted, a total of 8 teeth and then the lower anterior teeth were retruded to try to correct the bite problem.  Rhonda is unhappy with the changes that has been made in her face with her chin becoming much more prominent than it was before and sunken in areas around her lip and cheek areas.  She got her braces off in about 2004.  

In frontal view, Rhonda has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 
20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 0.  Maxillary dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline as is the chin.  The mandibular dental midline is off to the right side about 1 to 2 mm.  In profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency.  The maxilla may be back about 3 to 4 mm.  Chin actually looks in fairly good AP position but lower lip appears retruded probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids and has the rest of her teeth.  Mandibular left second bicuspid has had an exceptionally large crown probably due to a diastema that would not remain closed.  Otherwise, it appears reasonably well aligned.  She has good attached gingiva with evidence of previous grafting performed particularly in the lower anterior arch.  The left cuspid may be about 1 mm forward than the right cuspid.  In the upper arch, she is missing first bicuspids and she has residual spacing between the cuspids and second bicuspids.  She is fairly close to being a Class I cuspid relationship and Class I molar.  Lower incisors appear to be in somewhat of a lingual inclination.  Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged and seem to be constricting the airway somewhat. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  The condyles appear relatively normal.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little flattening on the top but not too significant.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space appears fairly well balanced.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  Joint space appears fairly well balanced.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On excursion, the condyles translate completely anterior to the articular eminence.  

Waters view shows that the turbinates are enlarged and there appears to be constricted nasal airway.  The bony septum at least appears fairly straight.  The sinuses may be a little bit cloudy today but she does have some sinusitis problems.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that it appears that she has some AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular alveolar deficiency.  Oropharyngeal airway is a little bit constricted at the soft palate area where it measures 5 mm.  
RHONDA PIERCE				11/20/2007				Page 2

At the base of the tongue it measures about 7 mm.  She has as a relatively low occlusal plane angle.  Sinuses are actually in reasonably good angulation, just everything appears to be retracted.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular dental alveolar deficiency.
AP macrogenia. 
Previously extracted maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids and all four third molars. 
Spacing between the upper cuspids, second bicuspid and lower cuspids and second bicuspids ( left space is filled in with a crown extension.)
Mandibular dental midline shifted 1.5 mm to the right.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Try to close the spacing between the upper cuspids and second bicuspids.
Align and level lower arch.  Decrease the size of the crown on the left second bicuspid creating about 1 mm of space and then try to close the spacing.
Surgery.
Total mandibular subapical osteotomy with decortication and preservation of the inferior alveolar nerve.
Maxillary osteotomy to advance the maxilla.
Partial inferior turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to build up the distally the cuspids and mesially the second bicuspids if necessary to eliminate the spacing.