LAWRENCE (BURT) PIERCE						05/05/2011

Birth date 07/26/1963.  Age 47 years.  He is referred by Dr. Urszula Firlik, 6225 West River Drive NE, Belmont, MI 49306-9025.

Burt’s TMJ problems began in the late teens to early twenties in around 1983.  The etiology is unknown.  He had orthodontics at the age of 16 with extraction of four first bicuspids.  He developed significant symptoms in his early twenties and by age 25 he began his odyssey of splint therapy.  He has had five splints.  His TMJs did get somewhat better.  The most effective splint has been the current one that displaces his tongue inferiorly and forward.  In September 2008, he got very sick where he developed problems with his immune system and his protection from his immune system dropped way down.  He was hospitalized and ended up with shingles on his face and was sick for months.  He has been aware of sleep apnea for a number of years.  He has had a previous sleep study which showed he has severe sleep apnea.  He has had a total of five splints constructed.  He was placed on a CPAP machine in 2010 and has used it for the past year.  He continued to have significant problems so on 04/15/2011, he had bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies and a septoplasty.  He currently takes no medications.  He wakes up with headaches in the morning at about a level of 8 in the frontal and probably the anterior temple area.  He rates his TMJ pain at a level of 8, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 6, diet at 4, disability at 7.  The incisal opening is 52 mm and excursion movements are 9 mm in each direction.  On opening and closing of his jaws, he has glitches in both TMJ joints.  To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the left TMJ.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo.  Other joints that bother him include his neck and his ankles.  He is allergic to pollens and cats.  He does have a history of shingles.  He is also aware that he clenches at nighttime.  He has a Class I occlusion with about a 4 mm anterior vertical over bite relationship.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  Upper lip length is 28 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is zero.  Midlines are well aligned.  In profile, the maxilla appears to be retruded 8 to 10 mm and the chin appears to be retruded 25 mm.  He is missing all four first bicuspids, but has erupted third molars.  He appears to occlude only on the second and third molars bilaterally with all other teeth out of occlusion.  He has just a slight Class II cuspid-molar relationship.  He has an anterior open bite of about 3 mm.  He has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.  

Primary concerns that Burt has at this time include the following:

Severe sleep apnea and the side effects of it. 
Bites only on his very back teeth and all other teeth do not meet.
Foggy thinking.
Difficulties eating and chewing. 
TMJ pain and headaches.  
He does have a high occlusal plane facial morphology.  
Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy, but uvula is moderately enlarged but the other structures look relatively normal.  Intranasally, the right turbinate appears a little bit large, yet the left one at least anteriorly appears a little bit normal in size.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the left TMJ.  On jaw function, he has some glitches in his joints.  The incisal opening is 52 mm and excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four first bicuspids.  All four third molars are in place.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  He has elongated styloid processes bilaterally.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a defect in the condylar head as a depression possibly related to the orientation of his articular disc within that joint.  He has a decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a significant depression in the middle of it.  There is some anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  The lateral joint space is decreased.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is somewhat posteriorly postured in the fossa.  The articular eminence is a little bit more shallow on this side.  The joint space looks reasonably good, although decreased at the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight.  The turbinates are moderate in size on the right side, but the left side appears more normal.  The sinuses appear relatively clear with just a little bit of increased thickness of the sinus membrane on the floor of the sinus on the right side.  

Axial view shows the sinuses are clear and the right turbinate has a moderate enlargement, but the left one appears more normal in size.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a retruded maxilla and mandible, although fairly close to a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm at the soft palate level and about 9 mm at the base of the tongue.  The head may be tipped up slightly which may increase the size of the airway.  He does have an anterior open bite of about 3 to 4 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Burt would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Apertognathia.  
Pain.
Sleep apnea.
High occlusal plane angle.
Occluding only on the maxillary and mandibular second and third molars. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch in two occlusal plane levels.  Align the 			cuspids through third molars at one occlusal plane level and place a 			vertical step in the arch wire to align the four incisors at an elevated plane.  		Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room 			for interdental osteotomies.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 			removing 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower incisors 			any further forward.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints. 
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies.
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies. 
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  