B108
B108 is 46 years old. Referred by Dr. XXXX. She had previous distraction osteogenesis of the mandible to expand the width of the mandible by Dr. XXXX. The surgery was done in San Paulo in his sister's office. She has also had her tonsils and adenoids removed. Primary concerns that B108 has includes the following:

The upper jaw is inclined. She has a long face morphology. The lips do not meet.
Upper lip length is excessive.
Breathing difficulties. Sleep apnea.
Eyes seem "sad" or "silly". Nose moves when she talks.

The only medication she takes is Nasonex. She takes no other medication. B108 has no problems with headaches nor TMJ pain. She rates her average daily pain at a level of 1, rates her jaw function and diet at 3, disability at 0. She takes Nasonex and Terramycin. Since she began wearing braces, she will find that she sometimes clenches at night and also sometimes during the day. B108 has some difficulties breathing through her nose and tends to breathe through her mouth at night when she sleeps always and during the day she will find herself breathing through her mouth. She has some mild snoring, mild daytime somnolence, and she feels she does have sleep apnea that began about 5 years ago. She has had about three significant episodes. She tends to sleep on her sides. B108 smokes two packs per cigarettes per day or about 40 cigarettes per day and she has done this for about 27 years. She has increased her current level and did not use to smoke as much as she does today.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
: In frontal view, B108 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm. B108 feels that her lower lip is more laxed now than it was prior to the surgery. With her lips relaxed, she has almost about 10 mm of her teeth above her lower lip. The maxillary midline is about 1 mm off. In profile view, the infraorbital areas are about 5 mm AP deficient. She has an obtuse nasolabial angle and her bases are positioned low compared to the nasal tip. The actual length of the dorsum of the nose actually looks fairly good. Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably a couple of millimeters. The lower third face is elongated. She has probably 10 mm of lip incompetence. The mandible appears to be retruded by about 15 to 18 mm. Chin neckline is shorter. As B108 postures her mandible forward where the mandible comes in front of the maxilla by probably 6 mm, it significantly improves her facial profile. Intraorally, she is missing probably the first bicuspids, but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. The teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and leveled. There is adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she is missing probably the first bicuspids as well, but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. She apparently ended up losing a maxillary left first molar, mandibular right first molar, and has had orthodontics to close those spaces pulling the second and third molars forward in those two areas. The left eye is about at least 2 mm lower than the right eye. There is a significant transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the maxillary left cuspid being 3 mm higher than the right cuspid and the mandibular left cuspid being about 1 mm higher than the right cuspid. B108 has almost a full Class II cuspid relationship on the right side and a Class II end-on occlusion on the right side. She has small upper lateral incisors. In the lower arch, the right mandibular cuspid may be 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid. In the upper arch, the left cuspid may be 1-2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. In frontal view, B108 has more prominence in the left angle area than the right side with a posterior yaw present being probably about 3 to 4 mm. She feels as though she hits prematurely on the right first molars before any other teeth touch. She has a TAD attached in the maxilla adjacent to the right bicuspid on the palatal side and also she has labial TAD between the lower cuspid and first bicuspid. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal in architecture. To palpation, she has some tenderness over her shoulders. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly. She has an anterior over bite of 2 mm. Incisal opening is 47 mm. Excursion movements are about 11 mm in each direction. She has a deviated septum a little bit off to the right side and some spurring off to the left side at the base of the septum. The right turbinate appears enlarged and there appears to be decreased airway on that side, whereas the left side of the septum at least anteriorly appears to be a little bit normal in size. B108 has mild snoring problems and mild daytime somnolence, but apparently no sleep apnea except for the three major incidents that have occurred in the past five years. She sleeps fairly well at night. She is a chronic nighttime mouth breather and also does some during the day as well.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of apparently the maxillary left first molar and right first molar. Apparently, the second and third molars on the lower right side have been pulled forward into the first and second molar position. Thus, the reason for the TAD on that side. In the upper arch, apparently the first molar is missing and the second and third molars have been pulled forward, again using the two TADS on that side of the maxilla to help accomplish that. She has root canals on the maxillary left third molar and right first molar. It is difficult to evaluate the sinuses. Condyles appear relatively normal. Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Some slight deviation in the nasal septum in the bony area. Left turbinate appears quite enlarged back by the bony septum, and the right one appears moderate in size. There is some asymmetry noted in the maxilla. Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears fairly normal in architecture. Joint space looks reasonably good. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly morphology. Joint space appears well balanced. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is good translation of both joints. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B108 appears to have AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency. She has a moderately high occlusal plane angle. Upper lip length looks elongated. There appears to be some lower lip ptosis. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate area measures about 6 mm and at the base of the tongue it appears more constricted with a distance of about 5 mm and then lower down towards the hyaloid bone measures about 2 to 3 mm. She has close to Class II end-on occlusal appearance and a Class II skeletal relationship, although both maxilla and mandible are retruded. Length of the soft palate appears somewhat elongated. She has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4 mm secondary to the small upper lateral incisors.

Dental model analysis also shows that there is a transverse deficiency in the maxillary arch. The teeth on the left side, particularly in the left cuspid, lateral bicuspid and molar area, are higher on the left side as compared to the right side. The source of a problem in the maxillary arch and lower arch the vertical difference would only be about 1 mm or so. The upper arch, however, is about 3 mm.

Basic diagnoses for B108 would be as follows:
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia. Transverse maxillary hypoplasia. Class II occlusion. High occlusal plane angle. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3.5 mm at the base of the tongue (normal 11 mm).
Missing all four first bicuspids as well as the maxillary left first molar, mandibular right first molar.
Lower arch asymmetry with the right mandibular cuspid being almost 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.
Mandibular dental midline shifted 1 to 2 mm to the right of the chin midline.
Upper arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4 mm secondary to small upper lateral incisors.
Transverse maxillary asymmetry with the left cuspid being 3 mm higher than the right cuspid.
Slight lower arch vertical asymmetry with the left cuspid being 1 mm higher than the right cuspid.
Hypertrophied nasal turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction. Sleep apnea symptoms. Long upper lip being approximately 4 mm longer than normal for a female.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Open up 1 mm of space between the lateral incisors and cuspids on each side and also 1 mm of space between the lateral incisors and central incisors on each side. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Re-open 4 to 5 mm of space between the right bicuspid and molars to re-establish lower arch symmetry (advance the right cuspid forward 2 mm and re-align the dental midline onto the chin midline). This space will then be removed surgically. Try to shift the mandibular dental midline 2 mm to the left to center it back on to the chin midline. Consider slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1 to 1.5 mm of tooth structures to help keep from flaring the teeth any further forward. Another option would be to consider advancing the mandibular right cuspid 2 mm and shifting the dental midline to the left 2 mm using TADs and orthodontic mechanics.

Surgery Stage 1.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and down graft it posteriorly. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward, down graft it posteriorly, and expand it. Right mandibular body ostectomy to remove space between the bicuspid and molars if the space is re-opened.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Consider removing TADS at the time of surgery. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Surgery Stage 2.
Bilateral infraorbital augmentation by either alloplastic implants versus osteotomies to advance and elevate the infraorbital rim.

B108 MRI AGE:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. Vertical joint space appears decreased. There appears to be discal tissue anterior to the condyle.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There is decreased superior joint space. Discal tissue appears to be anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterosuperior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced. There is decrease superior and posterior joint space. There is fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. Open views show that there is virtually no translation in the joint.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows the articular disc is anteriorly displaced. There is some decreased superior joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. She has some significant fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. Open views show that there is virtually no translation in the joint.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated without reduction, but the discs are in reasonably good morphology.

