KATHLEEN “KATE” PLAXCO						10/10/2011

Kate is 16 years old, birth date is 10/26/1994.  Kate had approximately 5 years of orthodontics and the orthodontist was unable to get the bite together.  In December 2010, she had maxillary and mandibular osteotomies and a genioplasty likely using Medpor.  She got out of her braces on July 30, 2011.  Her bite apparently is good and she is pleased with most of the outcome.  The primary concerns she has are as follows:

Chin is too strong.
There is a protrusion of the implant on the left side that is palpable.
There are scar bands inside the lower lip vestibule.
There is no space on the right side between the mandibular ramus and maxillary tuberosity.

Kate had braces from 2006 until 2011.  

Kate has no problems with headaches or TMJ pain or myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function at 1, diet at 2, disability at 1.  She has some decreased sensation to the lower lip and chin area.  She takes no medications.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing at nighttime or during the day.  She has no problems with snoring, daytime somnolence, nor sleep apnea.  She is predominantly a mouth breather at night.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Kate has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip  relationship is about 2.5 to 3 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, she has fairly good facial symmetry.  Chin appears to be in reasonably good balance.  Chin neckline is relatively normal in length and chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  She does have a slight prominence in the labial mental fold.  Oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal and healthy.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  The maximal incisal opening is 46 mm, excursion movement to the right 8 mm and to the left 7.5 mm.  Joints seem to function reasonably smooth, although there is an occasional very slight glitch in the left joint on wide opening.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but the rest of the teeth are present. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch.  There is evidence of four bone plates in the maxilla and a total of 16 screws.  In the mandible, she has 5 screws in the left ramus and 4 screws in the right ramus.  She has 2 screws in the chin where the chin implant has been placed.  Her condyles show significant problems with condylar resorption, and the condyles appear small in a vertical and anteroposterior dimension.  

Coronal view shows the cut was done way posteriorly in the molar area so most of the sinuses are missed, but it does appear that there is some thickened lining in the wall of the sinuses.  The left turbinate has been completely excised, but the right middle turbinate is still present and fairly large.  The middle turbinate on the right side appears to obstruct against the septum.  

Axial view shows that in the left sinus that the mucosal lining is extremely thickened.  In the right side, likewise it appears that there is increased thickness of the sinus membrane.  The septum has some slight curvature in it.  The right inferior turbinate appears to block a good portion of the nasal airway.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that there is evidence of significant loss of vertical condylar volume.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  There is flattening on the head of the condyle and some anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence is fairly shallow.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite small in size with loss of vertical and anteroposterior volume.  There is decreased vertical joint space in some areas.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows that the condyle is narrow mediolaterally and has lost significant vertical volume.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost volume mediolaterally as well as superiorly.  There is some medial beaking of the condyle.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some adenoid tissue still present in the nasopharynx.  She has a moderate increased occlusal plane angle.  The chin appears to have reasonably good AP dimension.  There is some lower lip ptosis with the lower lip being about 3 mm lower than ideal relative to the position of the lower incisors.  She has a relatively prominent labial mental fold. 

Basic diagnoses for Kate would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR) versus connective tissue autoimmune disease.
Maxillary and mandibular yaw shifted towards the right side about 3 or 4 mm.
Anterior vertical overbite of 1 mm.
Presence of Medpor chin implant slightly large for the patient’s facial morphology.
Slight Class II occlusion by 1 to 2 mm in the cuspid area.  
Wide chin and prominent chin in AP dimension (parents’ concern).

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1. MRI of TMJs.
2.	Placement of maxillary and mandibular orthodontic appliances.
3.	Surgery (this will be dependent on MRI findings).
	a.	Consider bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair 			with Mitek anchors (if AICR and discs are salvageable) as well as bilateral 		sagittal split osteotomies to create space in the joint area to accommodate 			the discs.
	b.	Consider bilateral TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses if TMJ pathology 			related to connective tissue autoimmune disease.  