MATTHEW PITTS									09-13-04

DOB:  08/21/86. He is 18 years old. 

Patient Concerns

Jaws are retruded
Teeth don’t fit together properly

Patient History

Matt has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss, no myofascial pain problems, no headaches, no TMJ pain, and no TMJ noises. Matt has been under orthodontic treatment for some time. He has had four first bicuspids extracted, and the spaces have been closed. He takes no medications. He has a little bit of problem with his right shoulder but otherwise has no other joint problems. 

Clinical Examination

Joints seem to function very smoothly. Incisal opening is 50 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 8 mm and to the left 7 mm. Upper lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 to 2.5 mm. Mandibular dental midline may be shifted about a mm to the left of the maxillary midline, although the chin midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship and has an overjet of about 4 to 5 mm. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is a little bit hyperplastic but not too significant. Faucial pillars are a little bit narrow transversely but again not really significant. Intranasally, appears to have adequate airway. Reports no problems with snoring, daytime somnolence, or sleep apnea. 

In profile view, his maxilla appears to be retrudced about 4 mm. Mandible is retruded about 10 to 12 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars and the absence of four first bicuspids. Sinuses are clear, and condyles look relatively normal. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be well inserted into the fossa with good joint space and relatively good morphology. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be well inserted into the fossa with good joint space and relatively good morphology. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows some AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency. Slightly increased occlusal plane angle. Overjet of about 4 to 5 mm is present. The impacted third molars can also be noted. Oropharyngeal airway looks very good. 

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Class II end-on occlusion
Four to 5-mm overjet
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4
Missing four first bicuspids
Moderately high occlusal plane angle

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch
Continue to align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward about 4 mm and downgraft it 2 to 3 mm posteriorly to level the occlusal plane
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction 
Removal of four impacted third molars

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
