CALEB POEMOCEAH									04-10-03

Caleb is 15 years old and referred by Dr. George Adams.

Patient History

He has had some previous surgery for adenoids, an adenoidectomy. Caleb is in good healthy except for occasional asthma problems.

Patient Concerns

Primary factor that brings Caleb to see us is that his teeth and jaws are not properly aligned and don’t fit together.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Caleb has good facial symmetry and balance. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.  Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline, although chin may be just a little bit to the right a couple of millimeters. 

In profile view, Caleb has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Chin appears somewhat retruded. Chin-neckline is a little bit shortened, although chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, Caleb has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars erupted in. Mandibular left second molar is tipped significantly lingually. So is the right side, but the left side is greater. Some mild crowding, lower anterior teeth and malrotations of the lower cuspids. Appears to have adequate attached gingival, although it is extremely thin in some areas. Roots are prominent in the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars present. He has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship, a little bit worse on the left side as compared to the right side. He has about a 0 overbite and about 3 to 4 mm overjet. Oropharynx appears clear. He has his tonsils present, and they are moderately hyperplastic but not too bad and do not appear to be inflamed at this time. Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged but no really significantly. Columella is a little bit wide, but opening the nostril didn’t really improve his ability to breathe very much. 

Caleb has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, headaches, TMJ pain, etc. He is now aware of any nocturnal clenching or bruxism. 

To palpation, he had no tenderness around the head and neck area. On opening, however, he had a click at about 40 mm and a closing residual click that was extremely soft at about 20 mm. Maximum incisal opening is 54 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 6 mm and to the left 7 mm. 

He has a unilateral left posterior crossbite.

Current Medications

The only medication he takes is he takes some asthma medications occasionally.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars, and they are all unerupted. Sinuses look fairly clear. Left turbinate looks larger compared to the right side. Condyles look like they have reasonable morphology. There appear to be a significantly accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses look very clear. Turbinate on the left side appears quite large and appears to be obliterating most of the airway. Right side appears to be some airway present. There may be a mucous retention cyst in the left maxillary sinus high on the medial wall of the sinus. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is relatively shallow and somewhat elongated. Increased anterior joint space. Condyle appears a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly. 

Left TMJ tomogram also appears to demonstrate the condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space. Disc may be vertically oriented in this situation. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle appears somewhat narrow anteroposteriorly.

On opening, there is good translation of both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows he has a skeletal and occlusal Class II occlusion. Nasal turbinate appears to extend back along and beyond the hard palate. Oropharyngeal airway is reasonably good with measurement at the soft palate at about 8 mm and at the base of the tongue 12 mm. Appears to be occluding on the first and second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion. He has some nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue present, and it appears that it almost touches against the posterior turbinates, which may contribute somewhat to a nasal airway obstruction. There is a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 1.5 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations
Maxillary transverse hypoplasia
AP mandibular hypoplasia
Class II end-on occlusion
Anterior open-bite tendency
Crowding, lower anterior arch
Occluding only on the first and second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue mass
Nasopharyngeal airway obstruction
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJs

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch
Align and level mandibular arch. Could strip lower anterior teeth removing about 1 mm of tooth structure if necessary to keep from flaring them too much further forward

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla and downgraft the posterior aspect slightly
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandibular in a counterclockwise direction
Partial turbinectomies
Surgical removal of impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
