MELISSA BANKS POND		Telephone Conversation 			10-22-03

ROSEMARY BANKS:  I discussed with her the results of the testing we have received back so far. This included sedimentation rate that was well within normal limits. The ANA titer came back at a level of 8 which is high outside the normal reference range, and the pattern was speckled. This pattern is found in many disease states including SLE and mixed connective tissue disease. I suggested that Melissa see a rheumatologist. She asked me who I would suggest. I gave her the names of Dr. Richard Merriman and Dr. Dianne Petrone.

MELISSA BANKS POND							10-27-03

She comes in today with her husband and her parents. She says she feels somewhat better since the stressors of work have been eliminated. I went over her lab results with her including her sed rate, which is within normal limits, but her ANA was elevated to a level of 8 with a speckled pattern. I told them that there are false positives in this but that she needs to get to a good rheumatologist. We had previously given her three names of rheumatologists here at Baylor, or she could go to anyone that she chose to for a rheumatology evaluation. We gave her a copy of the labs we had back. We are still pending the Chlamydia and Mycoplasma lab tests. Melissa will follow up on that with the lab and have them send the results when they get them. Also discussed that it would be important for her to get to an endocrinologist. They said they went to one in Tyler that was not very effective. I think an endocrinologist could be very helpful particularly after we get the female lab reports back. She has been taken off of her birth control pills so that her female hormone levels will come back to whatever they are at and can be assessed. She continues to have no pain in the TMJs nor any headache problems. She has myofascial pain at a moderate level affecting the masseters, medial pterygoid, styloid areas, shoulders, and she has moderate pain to palpation over the TMJs and mild pain to palpation over the SCMS. She is on the following medications:
Klonopin 0.5 mg q.h.s. 
Vioxx 25 mg 1 tablet q.d.
Levoquin 500 mg 1 tablet q.d. (2 tablets remaining)
Synthroid 0.025 mg q.d. 
Unisom (over-the-counter sleep medication) 1 tablet q.h.s. 
Advil occasionally

She has no trouble with earaches and gets tinnitus but not very often. She gets vertigo only occasionally and has no hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her shoulder blades and her right arm tendons, knee tendons, and ankle tendons. These are relatively new developments for her in the last few weeks. These were not present at her last appointment except for the shoulder blade pain problems. She says her whole body is achy. She feels worse in the p.m. She says her speech is changed because she doesn’t want to move her jaw very much, and, therefore, she speaks with her jaws somewhat closed. Incisal opening is 37 mm but only 30 mm without significant pain. Excursive movement to the right is 6 mm and to the left 4.5 mm. She rates her TMJ pain at 0, average daily facial pain at 5, jaw function at 5, diet at 6, and disability at 7. She may be developing symptoms of fibromyalgia. I told them to be sure to mention that as a possibility to the rheumatologist. We also gave them a copy of the recent labs on the sed rate and ANA. We also gave her a copy of the tomogram of the left TMJ that shows the new erosion pattern there. I answered all the questions that she, her husband, and her parents had today. I told them I felt the rheumatologist and endocrinologist may be our best bets to identify her problems. 


MELISSA BANKS POND		Telephone Conversation 			10-28-03

ROSEMARY BANKS (Mother):  Discussed with her the fact that the antibody titers for Chlamydia and Mycoplasma came back negative. This could be affected by the antibiotics that Melissa has been on. Melissa will stop her antibiotics tomorrow, and we will then see if her condition improves or worsens. If it stays basically the same, then it is probably more of a connective tissue autoimmune disease problem. She has an appointment with Dr. Alex Limanni on 11/11/03. I requested he send me a copy of any labs and reports that he does. If her symptoms increase, we may want to get the bacterial antibody titers done again prior to initiating any further antibiotics. 
