ADRIENNE PONDER									    03-16-05

Adrienne is 19 years old. Her birthday is 04/02/85. She was referred by Danny Dugan, DDS, 613 Harwood Road W., Hurst, TX  76054.

Patient History

She is a sophomore at OU in acting. She has had previous surgery for gastric banding. She smokes about a half pack of cigarettes per day and has done that for about four years. She had a bout of shingles when she was about 10 or 11 years of age but no recurrences since then. She takes Lipitor 40 mg, BCPs, and Zetia. She does have familiar hypercholesterolemia. 

Adrienne has no problems with earaches but gets occasional tinnitus. She gets vertigo about three times per day. She has no hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include possibly her neck where she does get some cracking noises if she manipulates it in certain ways. She gets ganglion cysts in her wrists but has no other joint problems. No allergies except for some seasonal. She cannot wear cheap posts in her ears. She is aware of clenching with nighttime being greater than daytime. Doesn’t really have problems with headaches and rarely gets them only about one every couple of months. She rates her TMJ pain at the worst at about a level of 8 and today it is a level of 5. Average daily pain is about a level of 4. She rates jaw function and diet at 4 and disability at 2. Adrienne relates that her problems with her joints began in her early teens. Adrienne’s mother states that she could clench and grind her teeth at the age of 3. Adrienne has undergone orthodontic treatment beginning at the age of where she had expanders done and then was in full orthodontic appliances by the age of 12. Her orthodontics was started by Dr. Terry Moore and finished by Dr. Jesse Schroeder at about 14 years old. She has had no further orthodontic treatment. 

Previous treatment for her current situation involved splint therapy, but this only increased her pain. The splint was made by Dr. Rebecca Lauck. She also has seen Dr. Jack Gordon, who is an orthopedic surgeon, then she went to see Dr. Danny Dugan, who referred her here.

ADRIENNE PONDER								3/16/05

(Continuation)

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
TMJ pain.
Pain down through the jaws, neck and into the back.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Difficulties with any activities involved in her studies that aggravates or requires significant jaw function.  
Moderate daytime tiredness.
Snoring.

In the frontal view, Adrienne has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline.  In the profile view, she has very good facial balance.  Chin-neckline is close to normal dimension.  Chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Adrienne has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  Teeth appear to be aligned and level.  She has a  lingual retainer on the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars.  It is basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has about 1-1/2 to 2 mm of overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway looks healthy.  Uvula is of normal size.  The soft palate may be slightly elongated.  Posterior fascial pillars appear to be posteriorly positioned and moderately constricted.  Tonsils are present and they are of moderate size.  Intranasally, the right turbinate looks relatively normal in size.  The left side maybe just slightly enlarged at this time, but she appears to have good functional airway.  She had a lower mandibular left third molar removed and none of the others developed.  To palpation, Adrienne has moderate tenderness over the masseters, shoulders and mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles, TMJs, styloid areas and posterior neck area.  Maximal incisal opening is 57 mm, but she can open 32 mm without significant discomfort.  Beyond that it is when she begins to click and pop in her jaw joints with loud audible noises.  Excursion movement is 8 mm in each direction.  On opening, she had audible grinding kind of pops at about 30 mm of opening on the left side and 35 mm on the right side and then on closing, reciprocal pops at 25 and 35 mm respectively.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows that she missing four third molars.  She has a lingual retainer.  X-ray quality is not the greatest.  Difficult to evaluate the joints, although particularly the right side looks flattened on the superior aspect.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  Decreased posterior joint space and superior joint space appears that some of bone of the condyle may be a little bit rough, but difficult to tell.
ADRIENNE PONDER			3/16/05				Page 2

Right TMJ tomogram shows worsening arthritic condition on this side.  There is some significant anterior beaking and flattening at the anterior head of the condyle.  Decreased posterior and superior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles beyond the articular eminence.  Anterior beaking is very evident in the left joint.  Right joint demonstrates arthritic changes. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. There is deviation in the nasal septum.  The left turbinate is significantly larger than the right turbinate although there does appear that there is a passable airway. The sinuses are clear.  

Cephalometric radiograph reveals a high-occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue about 4 to 5 mm.  There appears to be decreased vertical height of the maxilla.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis (right side worse than left) and articular disc dislocation.  She has a significant deformation of the disc, but probably still salvageable. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Class I occlusion.
High-occlusal plane angle of 20 degrees (normal 8 degrees.)
Decreased oral pharyngeal airway of 4 to 5 mm (normal 11 mm.)
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain of the head, jaws, neck, shoulders and upper back.
Snoring.
Daytime somnolence.
Sleep disorder.
Sleep apnea symptoms.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair of Mitek anchors. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and downgraft the posterior aspect.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
