KRISTEN POPE									01/24/2011

Kristen is 37 years old and referred by Dr. Stephen Smart from El Dorado, AR.  Kristen received an accidental gunshot wound to the face and jaws on September 13, 2008.  It resulted in loss of the jaw bone on the right side and her right eye with orbital disfigurement and loss of teeth.  She does get a little popping in the right TMJ area.  She has no pain associated with that joint.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  She rates her jaw function at about 4, but has no restrictions in chewing and her jaw problems do not interfere with her abilities to carry on normal life activities.  She has no airway problems and no sleep apnea issues.

Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline, but the mandibular dental midline is slightly to the right about 1 mm to 2, but the chin is probably about 3 to 4 mm off to the left.  In the right orbit area, the globe is missing as well as the infraorbital rim and a good portion of the orbital floor.  The zygomatic arch is in what appears to be reasonable position, but the malar eminence for the most part has been removed.  At the right angle, the mandible is a little bit more full probably by 3 to 4 mm.  She does have a little glitch in the right joint on opening and particularly on closing.  The clicking is more on closing and not present on opening but occurs at about 15 mm.  The left joint functions relatively smoothly.  Intraorally, Kristen is missing from the mandibular left incisor all the way back through the right third molar in the mandible and in the maxilla she is missing from the second bicuspid through the third molar on the right side.  She is also missing her third molars on the left side.  She does have a partial denture for the mandible replacing from the left central incisor around to the first molar.  It does not fit very well and it is mainly for aesthetic reasons.  The infraorbital rim area on the right side is deficient by about 15 mm.  Transverse deficiency in the infraorbital rim is about 25 mm.  The AP deficiency in the eyelids is about 12-15 mm.  The right commissure is inferiorly positioned about 3 mm.  The maxillary arch is fairly level.  I believe the mandible is probably canted downwards on the right side that causes the chin to be shifted a little bit to the left 3 to 4 mm and for the mandibular dental midline to be shifted a little bit towards the right side.  Part of this may be the construction of the partial denture as well.  She actually does have her mandibular left central incisor so she is missing just from the right lateral incisor in the mandible through the right third molar.  


Kristen had a load sharing bone plate that was initially placed and bone fragments put back in position on the right mandible.  She got an infection around Thanksgiving 2009.  She did have HBO treatment.  She only had about 5 or 6 dives because she had problems with her blood pressure going low and she had trouble with loss of consciousness.  They removed the infected bone plate and bone fragments and placed the reconstructed plate in February 2010 so the plate has now been in for about 1 year.  She had a Gortex implant placed to the right orbit area in September 8, 2010, but by September 28 it got infected and had to be removed.   As she closes her left eye, she gets a little twitching of the right cheek and upper lip area.  She does have some changes in her speech quality and tongue placement because of the injury.  She does not really report any numbness to her tongue, but she did have to have a release procedure done to free up her tongue on the right side and, as she protrudes her tongue, it does deviate towards the right side.  Intraorally, Kristen does have a significant scar band in her right cheek area that limits her opening to just 38 mm.  The maximum incisal opening is 38 mm, excursion movement to the right 12 mm, to the left 10 mm.  In going through her excursion movements, she did have a jolt of pain and a pop in the right TMJ area, but the disc may be slightly out of position.  

Diagnoses for Kristen would be as follows:

Post gunshot wound to right mandible and maxilla and orbit.
Large continuity defect in mandible that is about 40 mm in length and vertical deficiency of probably 25 mm. 
Alveolar bone deficiency in the right posterior maxilla. 
Loss of infraorbital rim and malar area. 
Loss of right globe.
Possible displaced articular disc in the right TMJ.
Missing mandibular right central incisor through third molar and maxillary right second bicuspid through third molar. 


Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Surgery.
	a.	Reposition bone plate in right mandibular ramus area, but maintain the plate on 			the left side.  
	b.	Iliac crest bone graft to reconstruct the left mandibular continuity defect.
	c.	Cranial bone grafts to reconstruct right orbit.
	d.	Possible cranial bone grafts to reconstruct posterior maxillary alveolar bone.
	e.	Application and removal of arch bars. 
2.	Dental reconstruction with placement of osteointegrated implants and dental restorations.