PATTY POPE										07/03/2006

Patty is 54 years old, referred by Dr. Tim Shannon and Dr. William R. Johnson.  Patty’s problems began about 1986 when she was about 35 years of age.  Apparently, as Patty was working as an ICU nurse, she injured her right shoulder.  She had a rib resection done on the right side for thoracic outlet syndrome.  It was then that she began noticing problems with her jaws and with her teeth.  She had full-mouth dental reconstruction done at that time.  Following completion of the dental reconstruction, Patty was then placed into a bite splint.  Patty has essentially been in bite splints since about 1988.  Following full-mouth reconstruction, she was placed on splints which she has now worn for about 20 years.  She has had approximately five different splints during that time.  In addition she has had osteopathic treatment and also wears orthotics and arch supports.  When Patty’s TMJ problems become aggravated it creates sciatica.  In September of 2005 Patty began some orthodontic treatment.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Zestril 5 mg daily.
Allopurinol 100 mg daily.
K+ 8 mcg per day.
Slow magnesium.
HCTZ 12.5 mg daily.
Ativan 0.5 mg b.i.d.
Elavil 50 mg q.h.s.
Soma 350 mg q.h.s.
Activella (hormone replacement.)

Patty is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime as well as during the day.  She rates her headache at about a level of 5 and they occur in the right frontal, temporal and posterior head area and on the left side and the frontal and posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 6, diet at 8, disability at 2.  The 5th and 7th cranial nerves are intact.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Teeth and jaws hurt most of the time. 
Teeth have always been soft and easily broken.
Does not like her smile.
Teeth do not fit together. 
Difficulties eating and chewing.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.

ADDITIONAL MEDICAL CONDITIONS:
Mild hypertension that is controlled.
Kidney stones.  
Ulcerative colitis diagnosed in October of 2004 but is under control and cleared at this time.

PATTY POPE					07/03/2006				Page 2


SURGERIES:  First rib resection in 1986 for thoracic outlet syndrome.

In frontal view, Patty has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 
19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about –2 to –3 mm.  Left eye may be about a 1 mm or 2 higher than the right eye.  Maxillary dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right.  Nasal tip is about 2 mm off to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline is probably about 3 mm off to the left side.  The center of the mandibular right lateral incisor is on the midline of the chin.  The chin is actually in fairly good left to right facial balance.  In profile view, the maxilla is retruded anteroposteriorly probably about 4 or 5 mm at the A-point.  She has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip.  Cheeks and nasal dorsum all appear to be in reasonable balance.  The chin appears AP deficient.  Chin-neck line is extremely short.  As Patty holds her lower jaw forward and the upper lip is filled out it significantly improves her facial profile though she still has a little bit of fullness in the submental area and a little bit of soft tissue depression just posterior to the chin.  Intraorally, she appears to be missing the second and third molars and she has the rest of her teeth.  She has lots of crowns including crowns on all the bicuspids and molars.  She has some significant lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being probably a good 3 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  The lower teeth appear to be in lingual inclination.  The first and second bicuspids appear to have a reverse curve of Wilson.  In the upper arch Patty is missing the right cuspid, left first bicuspid and right second molar and both third molars.  She has crowns on all the maxillary posterior teeth.  Crown height is short and the crowns in all four quadrants are fairly flat.  She has an anterior deep bite relationship probably 5 to 6 mm.  She has an overjet of probably about 4 mm.  She has a full Class II cuspid relationship bilaterally.  In the upper arch, she has fairly good transverse asymmetry if the left cuspid and right first bicuspid are used as references.  The patient has about a 3 mm space at least between the upper right lateral incisor and first bicuspid.  She has slight accentuated curve of Spee in the arch being a little bit greater on the left arch as compared to the right side.  She has about a 5 to 6 mm posterior open bite with it being a little bite greater on the left side as compared to the right side.  She has a large palatal tori.  The uvula, soft palatal and faucial pillars all appear pretty much normal.  Intranasally, there is a little bit of deviation to the septum but not too significant.  Right turbinate is a little bit larger than the left turbinate but she appears to have good passable airways.  The right turbinate is mildly enlarged.  The left one is normal.  The septum is relatively normal.  No airway obstruction.  She has some mild snoring and some moderate daytime somnolence but no sleep apnea symptoms.  She is also missing maxillary right lateral incisor and there is a pontic kind of tooth placed in there temporarily.  She appears to have some clicking and popping in her jaw joints.  She is more aware of it on the left side than the right side.  I feel I can palpate it a little bit more so on the right side as compared to the left side.  To palpation she has some mild tenderness over the masseters, SCMs and shoulder areas.  Maximal opening is about 15 mm and excursive movements are about 11 mm in each direction.





PATTY POPE					07/03/2006				Page 3


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows mandibular arch of the second and third molars on the left side as well as on the right side.  On the right side it may actually be the first molar that is missing with the second molar in the first molar position and third molar missing.  In the upper arch the left first bicuspid, right lateral cuspid and second third molar is missing.  She has a root canal on the two central incisors and mandibular right first molar.  Condyles appear to have reasonable morphology.  Molar teeth in the lower arch have been intruded down almost to the inferior border of the mandible.  Apparently they were that low to begin with.  The lower posterior teeth have migrated significantly down through the bone towards the inferior borders compared to an x-ray that Patty brought from 1988.  Likewise, the maxillary teeth have been intruded significantly above the palatal plane level.  In 1988, the teeth were just even with the palatal plane but now are probably 3 to 4 mm or greater above the palatal plane.  She is missing the maxillary left lateral incisor and has a 3-unit bridge on that side. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Waters view shows the sinuses are relatively clear.  The roots of the molars can be seen to extrude up into the maxillary sinus.  The bony nasal septum has some moderate deviation to it but not too significant.  The left turbinate appears to be enlarged compared to the right side.  Ethmoid and frontal sinuses all appear clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the superior aspect.  Articular eminence is excessively steep.  Joint space appears to be reduced vertically as well as posteriorly.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has little bit more of a hockey stick shape to it.  Posterior joint space and superior joint space appear a little bit better balanced.  Articular eminence does not appear to be quite as steep on this side.  On opening there is good translation of both condyles.  Slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 to 2 mm higher than the left side but that is comparing the left cuspid to the right first bicuspid.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with reduction. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
Posterior vertical mandibular alveolar hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia. 
Class II occlusion.
Anterior deep bite of 6 mm. 
Bilateral posterior open bites of 5 mm on the right side and 6 mm on the left side.
Mandibular dental midline shifted 3 mm to the left of the facial midline.
Missing maxillary left lateral incisor, first bicuspid, third molar (pontic in the lateral incisor position.)
PATTY POPE					07/03/2006				Page 4


Missing maxillary right lateral incisor cuspid as well as the second and third molars.
Missing mandibular left and right second and third molars.
Mandibular arch asymmetry with the left cuspid 3 mm posterior to the right cuspid. 
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 to 2 mm higher than the left side. 
Negative tooth-to-lip relationship – 2 mm.
Palatal tori present.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENTS:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Maintain spacing between the right central incisor and first bicuspid.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Open up space in the left cuspid, first bicuspid area shifting the mandibular dental midline 3 mm to the right to improve lower arch symmetry and close the spacing on the left side between the cuspid and first bicuspid.  Depending on the size of the space in the left cuspid, first bicuspid space, if it is equal to the size of a tooth then an implant and crown could be placed.  However, if the space ends up being only about 3 to 4 mm then I can surgically remove it.  
Try to extrude the maxillary and mandibular posterior teeth to decrease the posterior open bite by at least 3 to 4 mm.  It is not necessary to close it all the way as we can use some of that open bite to advantage trying to achieve the best functional and esthetic result.  
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it posterior as well as expand as necessary. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward in a clockwise direction closing up the posterior open bite. 
Posterior orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to finalize and complete the occlusal esthetic and functional aspects.
