DEBRA POUND									06/06/2007

Debra is 43 years old and referred by Dr. William Kirk, 600 S. College St., Suite 1100, Charlotte, NC, 28202.  Debra's TMJ problems began a number of years ago.  When she first became symptomatic it was in 1992.  She was treated by her dentist for a year with splints and other treatment without success.  Dr. Kirk then treated her in 1993, performing surgery in the left TMJ including an arthroplasty and repositioning of the articular disc.  She did fairly well after that.  In 1998, she had her second child and apparently it was quite stressful and perhaps the clenching or whatever may have damaged the joint.   Redo surgery was performed in 1998.  The redo surgery on the left TMJ in 1998 went fairly well for her and it was not until 2005 when she began developing severe problems again.  She was taken back to surgery and at that time it was identified that she had severe arthritis and the disc was severely degenerated.  Apparently debridement and discectomy was performed.  Since that time she has been on numerous medications, splints, has had an arthrocentesis.  She has been seen by a neurologist, endocrinologist, bone and joint specialist and is currently being managed by a pain clinic.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: 
Duragesic patch 50 mcg.
Flexeril 3 tablets q.h.s.
Morphine 50 mg tablets 1 tablet q.h.s.
Midrin 3 tablets per day.
Toprol XL 25 mg daily.
Amour thyroid 120 mg per day.

She was on Neurontin but that did not significantly help her so she has discontinued taking it. 

Debra rates her headaches which have been constant since 2005 at a level of 10 or they at least escalate to that almost on a daily basis.  TMJ pain is about a level of 9.  The pain radiates down through her mandible into her jaw and teeth and can go into the back of the head, neck and shoulders.  Her average daily pain is about a level of 9.  She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 7, disability at 8.  She gets left-sided earaches and gets vertigo with severe pain.  Other joints that bother her include her fingers, knees and neck.  She has recently been diagnosed with fibromyalgia.  Debra does have some significant snoring problems and some moderate daytime somnolence.  She is not aware of sleep apnea.  She does not sleep well at night and wakes up often related to the pain factors. 

In frontal view, Debra actually has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm.  Maxillary midline may be just about 1 mm to the left side.  Mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Chin may be just slightly to the left side about 1 to 2 mm.  Intraorally, Debra has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  In the upper arch she also has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side by probably about 3 mm and on the left side she is basically a Class I.  Transversely she has a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1 to 2 mm higher than the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Uvula and soft palate appear relatively normal length.  However, the tonsils are fairly large and in a relaxed position fill up a good portion of the oropharyngeal airway.  
DEBRA POUND				06/06/2007				Page 2

It probably decreased the airway at least by 50% or greater.  Intranasally, the turbinates look normal in size and the septum appears relatively straight.  There does not appear to be any obvious nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the left masseter, medial pterygoid, TMJ and styloid area.  No tenderness on the right side.  Maximal incisal opening is 29 mm.  Opening without severe pain 20 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 8 mm, left 9 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of 4 third molars but all the rest of the teeth are present.  Growth on the mandible on the left side is shorter than the right side even in the body area probably indicative of intrusion of the lower teeth on the left side.  The condylar head and neck on the left side is much shorter than the right side.  There are severe arthritic changes in the left TMJ.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear and the septum and turbinates appear relatively normal.  Left side of the mandible is significantly shorter than the right side of the mandible by probably close to 8 mm at the angle area.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have reasonably good morphology.  A little bit of flattening on the posterior head and there is a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it.  Articular eminence appears relatively normal and joint space appears relatively normal.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a joint that is severely arthritic affecting both the mandibular component particularly but also the fossa.  The articular eminence is anteriorly positioned likely due to previous surgery.  It appears there is some decreased joint space and a good part of the joint space actually looks pretty good.  On opening, there is fairly good translation and suprisingly good translation in the left TMJ.  The right TMJ does not translate as well on the films but clinically it has very good mobility. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship.  The left side of the mandible is about 8 to 9 mm vertically shorter than the right side at the angle area and up in the bicuspid area the difference is about 6 to 7 mm.  Oropharyngeal airway is about 9 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue is about 14 mm.  Tonsils are seen to be present and appear fairly large.  They may be actually be helping to posture the tongue forward.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Left TMJ severe arthritis affecting the condyle and fossa.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being 2 mm shorter vertically than the right side. 
Facial asymmetry vertically with the left side being about 8 to 9 mm shorter at the angle area compared to the right side.
High occlusal plane angle.
Class II end-on occlusion on the right side, Class I on the right side.
DEBRA POUND				06/06/2007				Page 3

Severe left-sided TMJ pain. 
Severe headaches.
 Myofascial pain on the right side.
 Overangulation of lower incisors. 
 Earaches. 
 Hypertrophied tonsils.
 Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 Sleep apnea. 

TREATMENT OPTION #1.
Sleep study.
Dental restorations. 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure. 
CT scans of TMJs and jaws.
Surgery. 
Left TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Right mandibular ramus osteotomy to advance the mandible.
Maxillary osteotomies to downgraft the posterior maxilla, level transversely and advance it slightly. 
Left coronoidectomy.
Left TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen.)
Coronoidectomy.
Augmentation genioplasty. 
Bilateral tonsillectomy.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
Definitive restorative dentistry. 

TREATMENT OPTION #2.
Sleep study.
CT scans of TMJs and jaws.
Surgery.
Left TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Fat graft to left TMJ (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral tonsillectomy.

