HELEN POLLIAM									5/23/05

Helen is 50 years old, referred by Brenda Chockley, DDS, 8908 S. Yale Ave., Tulsa, OK, 74137.

Helen has problems with urinary incontinence.  She has had a bladder sling performed.  She has had ulnar nerve surgery on the right elbow.  She has had an abdominoplasty and a hysterectomy.  She otherwise is in fairly good health.  

MEDICATIONS
Fosamax 70 mg 1 per week.
Wellbutrin XL 150 mg 1 per day.
Strattera 40 mg 1 per day.
Nexium. 

She has had an adverse reaction to codeine. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Significant difficulties with eating and chewing.
Loud clicking and popping in her jaw joints to a point that her husband complains about it, and the noise particularly when she eats has become a nuisance to others.
Pain being greater in the left jaw than the right.
Yawning is extremely painful and creates earaches.
Significant limitations in her diet as to what foods she can actually chew.
Eating and chewing creates pain.
She says that she is cranky when in pain and it makes it difficult to carry out her daily chores. 
Earaches.
Ringing in her ears.

Helen's dental problems began in her teenage years of unknown etiology.  Her pain has significantly increased during the past year.  She has tried splints and mouthguards, but these seemed to make her pain worse.  She has also been on Flexeril muscle relaxer 10 mg tablets at bedtime, but it does improve her situation some.  She gets earaches, ringing in her ears, but no vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her at this time except she fractured a bone in her hand about 8 weeks ago and this is still bothersome for.  

ALLERGIES:  Codeine, animal dander, seasonal allergies, milk, corn beef and wheat.  Inexpensive earrings tend to bother her ears. 

She has been diagnosed with osteoporosis.  She gets headaches at least twice a week that occur in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area bilaterally at an average level of 6.  Her average daily TMJ pain is 5 with the left side worse than the right.  Average daily pain is at 5, but can easily escalate to a 9.  She rates her jaw function at 7, diet at 3, disability at 3.  

HELEN POLLIAM				5/23/05				Page 2


To palpation, she has some moderate pain over the left TMJ and mild tenderness over the styloid areas.  She has been on splint therapy as well as muscle relaxers.  The splint seems to make things worse, although the muscle relaxers have helped her some.  

Frontal view shows that she has some good facial balance.  Upper lip length is 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0.5 mm.  In profile view, she has fairly good facial balance.  She has all of her teeth back to the second molars and both arches.  She has a Class II end-on occlusion and an anterior deep bite of 4 to 5 mm.  She has mild crowding in the lower anterior arch and slight spacing in the upper anterior arch.  She has tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.  She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch.  Intranasally, turbinates are relatively normal in size and the septum appears fairly straight.  Intraorally, the uvula is moderately elongated as is the soft palate and the faucial pillars are mildly constricted.  

All the other areas are free of pain or discomfort to palpation.  On opening, she has clicking in the right joint about 25 mm and closing click probably about 15.  Left joint seems to function relatively smoothly but she has a closed lock on that side.  Maximal incisal opening is about 47 mm and she can get to about 38 without significant pain or discomfort.  Excursion movement to the right is about 7 mm and the left about 10 mm but both of these movements were painful for her.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Right TMJ tomogram shows that there appears to be decreased joint space vertically and posteriorly.  The condyle is not very clear on the images. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is significantly posteriorly displaced and significantly increased anterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is limited translation bilaterally.

Waters view show that the sinuses are relatively clear.  The right turbinate appears a little bit enlarged compared to the left side.  

Panorex radiograph shows root canals on both maxillary first molars and left second molars as well as mandibular left first molar.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Condyles look flattened anteriorly and a little bit short vertically.  Helen has what appears to be a Class II malocclusion with an anterior deep bite relationship.  There is a relatively low occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal air way is about 4 mm at the soft palate level and about 7 to 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  Helen has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.  She does have some spacing on the upper anterior teeth.  Upper left lateral is a little bit smaller in size and perhaps even the right lateral.  Helen does have osteoporosis.
HELEN POLLIAM				5/23/05				Page 3


CONCERNS AND PROBLEMS:
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Teeth do not fit together.  As her front teeth come together, she does not feel her back teeth touch.
Eating and chewing causes pain and discomfort. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc location with significant deformation and degeneration. 
Left disc is nonreducing but right disc has a questionable reduction. (Does not reduce on MRI but clinically does make a click on opening.)
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior deep bite of 4 to 5 mm.
Mild crowding of lower anterior arch.
Slight spacing of upper anterior arch. 
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Tooth size discrepancy of 2.5 mm. 
Accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Maintain some spacing around the upper lateral incisors of 1 mm on each side to compensate for the tooth size discrepancy.  Maintain spacing throughout treatment. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider slenderizing lower anterior teeth removing no more than 1 mm of tooth structure to help keep from flaring them any further forward.

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from abdomen.)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

