LACY POPEJOY									     02-09-05

Lacy is 26 years old. 

Patient History

She has hyperinsulinemia/insulin resistance, and she also has two bulging lumbar discs. She has had an adverse reaction to Percocet, Vicodin, and Demerol, and these all cause nausea and vomiting for her. Lacy’s TMJ problems began when she was about 12 or 13 when her joints began to click and pop. She had orthodontics done from the age of 14 to 16 by Dr. Bill Mahon. Since about the age of 20, Lacy would have episodes of developing headaches that could last for a week and then they would go away. In 10/2004, she began developing severe headaches that lasted for extended time periods. She was getting ready to go out of town, so she saw Dr. Scott Bolding, who referred her to Dr. Derrick John Brown, who made as splint for Lacy in 11/2004. This did improve her symptoms some. She originally had orthodontics from the ages of 14 to 16 by Dr. Mahon. Her original problems though did begin when she was about 12 or 13 of unknown etiology. Lacy gets occasional earaches and has fairly constant tinnitus but doesn’t seem to bother her a whole bunch. She has no vertigo or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her back where she has a couple of discs out of place, her shoulders, elbows, wrists, fingers, knees, ankles, and right foot. She has an allergy to PERCOCET, VICODIN, DEMEROL and she also has problems with contact dermatitis, but the same stimulus doesn’t always cause the dermatitis, and then something else would turn up and cause her a problem. She has no known problems in reference to allergy to jewelry. She is aware that she used to clench her teeth in the past but is not sure of she does that now. She has fairly constant headaches that she rates about a level of 4 that begin in the back of her head usually starting at about 8 or 9 o’clock in the morning and that rate about a level of 4 in the frontal, temporal, posterior head, and the top of the head. She actually wakes up pretty much headache free, but when the headaches begin, then they escalate and become worse in the evenings where they can escalate to a level of 10. TMJ pain at the worst is at a level of 8. Average daily pain and headache level is at 4, jaw function and diet at 5, and disability at 7. 

Other Systems

She does have problems with the bones in her neck, back, shoulders, elbows, wrists, hands, fingers, knees, ankles, and feet. She is not aware of having any urinary tract problems but does have to get up at night to urinate one to two times. Has been diagnoses as having polycystic ovarian disease. Did have some problems with eye infections when she was younger but not much now. As a baby, she had problems with conjunctivitis. She currently gets burning, itching, and dryness of her eyes. She has been wearing contacts since the age of 14. She has a chronic sinus problem. Doesn’t smoke. Gets earaches and tinnitus. Has a sore throat x 2 monthly. She usually has a cough in the mornings. As a teenager and up to about three years, she would get bronchitis yearly. She has irritable bowel problems, and she does get pain and cramping unrelated to her periods. She does have gallbladder problems. She does have problems occasionally with diarrhea and constipation. She is not aware of any STDs. She will have periods of time when she will be tired. No major exposure to birds except her grandfather did have a few chickens on the farm that she would spend some time on, but she said she didn’t have any real contact with them. She has had cats most of her life, and one of them growing up did eat birds. She had a dog from about the ages of 4 to 17, and he may have eaten some birds that the cat drug into the yard. She has been around hoofed animals including horses x 3 up to about the age of 12 and then cows where her grandfather had about 200 from the ages of 0 to 21. 

Current Medications

Skelaxin 800 mg 3 per day
Darvocet p.r.n. 
Bextra but has not taken that in the last month
Advil p.r.n. 
Excedrin Migraine p.r.n. 

Clinical Examination

Lacy has good facial symmetry and balance. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm.
Maxillary mandibular and chin midline are all aligned with each other.  In profile, Lacy has fairly good facial balance.  Chin-neckline is not well defined.  Lacy has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She does have all of her teeth back to the second molars present.  Oropharynx appears fairly clear.  Soft palate and uvula are pretty much unremarkable, although the uvula appears to be just slightly elongated.  Fascial pillars are just mildly constricted, but nothing significant.

Primary Concerns:
Headaches.
Muscle pain.
Joint pain.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Difficulty breathing through the nose.
Primarily a mouth breather.
Occasional earaches.
Fairly constant ringing in the ears. 

Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Appears to have a septal spur off to the left side of the nose.  Airway appears somewhat decreased.  She says that she has been told that she has mild snoring.  At times she will get some wheezing.  However, she is not tired during the day.  She is not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  

Radiographic Evaluation: 
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  It is difficult to evaluate the nasal airway.  Condyles appear a little bit arthritic, right side worse than left side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa of the increased anterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Condyle may have a little bit of flattening on the anterior head. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be slightly posteriorly positioned in the fossa and flattening on the end of the condyle.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

On opening, there is greater translation on the right side than the left side.  

Waters view shows a significant nasal septal deviation off to the left side and also off to the right side.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Right turbinate appears enlarged compared to the left side.  

Cephalometrically, she has just a slight skeletal Class III relationship, but appears to have a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway dimension is about 6 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue.  She does have about a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship.  

On opening, Lacy seems to function smoothly, but she seems to have some limitation of opening.  When she does try to open, she does feel pressure particularly in the left.  Her popping has decreased significantly since she started wearing the splint.  Incisal opening is about 41 mm.  Prior to wearing the splint, her joints would pop everytime she opened and she would also have to slide her jaw to the side in order to get it open.  Excursion movement to the left about 7 mm and the right about 6 mm.  She opened about 34 mm without significant discomfort.  

MRI:  Axial views show both condyles have good mediolateral width.  Difficult to identify discal tissue on these views.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows the condyle has some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.  Anterior beaking appears to be developing.  Cortical bone appears it may not be completely intact.  Articular eminences are moderately steep with a fairly gentle slope to it.  Disc appears to be anteriorly positioned though with probably early reduction.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle and disc comes down the posterior slope and does not come completely underneath the articular eminence.  Disc appears to be in position on the open views.  Joint changes in the condylar head are still apparent.

Left TMJ shows the condyle has flattening of the anterior head and a little bit of superior beaking in the condyle particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  Articular eminence seems a little bit steeper on this side compared to the other side.  Disc is anteriorly displaced and somewhat degenerated.  On opening, there is restricted translation and the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.  It appears that there may be a little bit of soft tissue encompassing the articular disc, but it is difficult to tell. 

IMPRESSION:  
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction. 
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction.
Both discs appear to be salvageable.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction (pre-click reduction.)
Headache.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. 
Earaches.
Tinnitus. 
Polyarthrides.
Irritable bowel syndrome with possible joint involvement. 


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Rheumatologist consultation to rule out connective tissue autoimmune disease.

Presurgical orthodontics.
Place braces on the upper arch and align.
Place braces on mandibular arch and align.

Surgery (dependent in part of rheumatologist's findings)
using one of the following modes of treatment.
Option 1: 
Bilateral TMJ and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion.

Option: 2:  
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ concept total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 


I talked with Lacy and her parents later in the day after my consultation with Lacy and I discussed the treatment options with her.  I suggested she see a rheumatologist to rule out some kind of systemic problem.  I personally feel that Lacy would do better with a total joint prostheses, but we do have the option of trying the disc repositioning procedure and sagittal splits to see if this would correct her problem.  If it did not work, it would be good to proceed onto the total joint prostheses.  However, she would do best with a total joint prostheses if it comes to that and if that were done as a first procedure.  She is going to be going to Europe in at the end of March.  May consider surgery after that.  Family will discuss Lacy's situation.  



