ROBERT POHRER								08/29/2011

Rob is 36 years old, birth date 08/01/1975.  Referred by Dr. Peter Crump, 24 South Gore Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63119.

Rob became aware of having joint problems when he was about 15 or 16 when he was a freshman in high school.  Actually someone pointed out to him that his jaws clicked and popped.  The etiology is unknown, although he has played football in high school and rugby in college.  He did have some orthodontics done when he was about 16.  

Rob has had no specific treatment for his jaw problems.  He only recently found out that there is treatment available for his condition from Dr. Peter Crump.

Rob rates his headaches at a level of 9 that occur in the frontal, temporal, posterior head and top of his head bilaterally.  He rates his TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 8, diet at 4, and disability at 8.  He has some numbness in his cheeks that comes and goes.  He gets occasional earaches, tinnitus and moderate occurrence of vertigo.  He feels he has some hearing loss, although that has not been documented.  The only other joint that really bothers him is his left knee.  He has been diagnosed with an irregular heartbeat, but his heart specialist apparently says it is not of any significant concern.  He apparently clenches his teeth at night as he does wake up with headache problems.  He does have some mild snoring, severe daytime somnolence, no sleep apnea (he has had 2 sleep studies done, one when he was in college and one in the fall of 2010, both of which did not identify sleep apnea).  He may be a mouth breather at nighttime.  He currently takes the following medications:

Mirtazapine 7.5 mg for sleep.
Temazepam 30 mg for sleep.
Lipofen.

Primary concerns Rob has include the following:

Clicking and popping of the jaw joints.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Difficulty sleeping.
Difficulties eating and chewing.

In frontal view, Rob has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1.  Maxillary midline is probably on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline.  The chin is shifted about 4 mm off to the right side.  The upper lip is angled a little bit off towards the right side as well.  The midline of the upper lip is a little bit off to the right side about 2 mm.  In profile, the chin appears to be retruded a little bit, probably 4 to 5 mm, and the maxilla may be retruded about 4 mm.  The chin neckline actually has a fairly good dimension.  The chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, Rob has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present.  There is some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.  He has good attached gingiva.  He has got some lingual tori present.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has small upper lateral incisors.  He does have some crenations on the side of his tongue particularly on the right side.  He has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  He does have 1 mm of space between the cuspid and the lateral incisor on the left side and about 1.5 to 2 mm of space on the right side.  He does have a transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being about 2 mm higher than the left side.  He has more fullness in his right mandibular angle area and ramus area than he does on the right side of probably 2 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Uvula is elongated and significantly may contribute to his snoring issues.  The soft palate may be mildly increased in length.  The fascial pillars may be mildly constricted.  Intranasally, the septum appears up high that it is shifted a little bit off to the right side, but at the base of the palate the septum bends significantly off to the left side and appears to touch against the moderately enlarged turbinate.  On the right side, the turbinate is quite large as well.  Collumella is moderately wide and the nostrils are narrow, right side a little bit more so than the left side.  To palpation, Rob has high moderate to severe pain over the masseters, TMJs, styloid areas, and moderate area over the temporalis, SCMs, posterior neck, shoulders, and left medial pterygoid area.  On opening, he has audible clicks in both joints that occur at about 25 mm of opening and closing at 15 to 20 mm of closing.  The maximal incisal opening is 52 mm, but opening without discomfort 19 mm.  The excursion movements were only 5 mm in each direction and it was hard to achieve that probably because the discs were non-reducing in that type of movement.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  Septum is deviated off towards the left side.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is reasonably straight back in the bony area.  Inferior turbinates are quite large and appear to obliterate a lot of the nasal airway.

Axial view shows that the septum deviates a little bit off towards the left side and off to the right side.  Turbinates are quite large and the airway appears to be quite compromised intranasally.  The sinuses appear clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology, although it appears a little bit small and narrow anteroposteriorly more towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  Anteroposterior width of the fossa appears somewhat narrow.  Articular eminence is fairly steep, although not very long.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a little bit of anterior beaking and both condyles show a little bit of a hockey stick shape morphology.  The joint space actually looks fairly more balanced on this side than the opposite side.  The articular eminence is fairly steep, although somewhat shallow.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of a divot towards the lateral aspect of the condyle.  There may be some small pseudocysts within the condyle.  There is decreased vertical joint space and lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa appears to curve inferiorly about 3 or 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship.  There appears to be a relatively low occlusal plane angle.  AP dimension of the oropharyngeal airway space measures about 5 mm at the soft palate level and 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  The asymmetry is not as noticeable in this view.

Dental model analysis shows that there is a little bit of spacing between the lower cuspids and first bicuspids.  In the upper arch, there is spacing between the upper lateral incisors and cuspids.  On the left side, there is a Class I cuspid relationship and on the right side it may be just about 1 mm Class III tendency.  

Basic diagnoses for Rob would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with reduction.
Maxillary AP hyperplasia.
Mandibular AP hyperplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Deviated nasal septum.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Maintain the 1 mm spacing between the 			upper laterals and cuspids.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and 			cuspid roots tipped distally in case interdental osteotomies are necessary.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch by closing the slight spacing between the 			cuspids and first bicuspids.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a slight counterclockwise 			direction.
	c.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward.
	d.	Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
	e.	Nasal septoplasty.  
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
