B109
B109 is 37 years old. B109's TMJ problems began when she was about 15 of unknown etiology. She had orthodontics from about the age of 12 to 13 for about a year and then from about 16 to 18. She had 4 first bicuspids extracted and she has had her third molars removed. She has been on and off splints for 15 years and has had a total of 5 splints. One was made with neuromuscular programming. She had physical therapy as a teenager and then this was reinitiated last year. She rates her headaches at a level of 6 throughout her head that are continuous. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 6, diet at 3, and disability at 4. She gets occasional earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her hands, fingers, toes, feet, knees, wrists, and neck particularly C5-C6. She has been diagnosed with fibromyalgia and she has adrenal insufficiency. She believes that she has a low level autoimmune disease process that has yet to be identified.

She takes the following medications:
Synthroid 25 mcg per day.
T3 37.5 mcg per day.
Flonase 2 pumps.
Lunesta 2 mg q.h.s.
Hydrocortisone 5 mg q.d. for her adrenal insufficiency.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B109 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 3 mm. The maxillary midline is about 1 mm to the left. Mandibular dental midline would be about 1 mm to the right. Chin is shifted to the right about 2-3 mm. B109 has a lip incompetence of about 8 mm. In profile view, B109 has some prominence of the nasal dorsum. She has AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 or 5 mm. Chin appears to be retruded about 18 mm. Chin neckline is short and there is no definite chin neck angle. Intraorally, B109 is missing the lower first bicuspid. The rest of the teeth except the third molars are present. She appears to have adequate attached gingiva and just some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she is also missing the first bicuspids, but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship, and she has an end-on incisor relationship. She occludes only on her incisors and all the rest of her teeth are out of occlusion. The only teeth that currently touch are her four central incisors and left mandibular lateral incisor. She has a little bit of an anterior cross bite associated with the right lateral incisor and cuspid. The oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal except there is some constricture of the fascial pillars. The soft palate may be a little bit elongated with the posterior fascial pillar attaching quite posterior in the soft palate. Intranasally, the septum is deviated a bit off towards the right side. She has had previous septoplasty apparently and turbinectomies with the left turbinate being quite small with a good airway on that side. In the right side, the turbinate appears to be about moderate in size. I do not believe she has any real significant nasal airway obstruction. In profile, she does have a slight head postured forward neck position. She does have bilateral posterior open bites. To palpation, she has high moderate to moderate pain over most of the head and neck area. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly. The maximal incisal opening is 45 mm, opening without significant pain 26 mm. The excursion movements are about 6 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. Bony septum looks reasonably straight and the sinuses appear relatively clear. Joints look a little bit arthritic.

Coronal view shows that the septum is a little bit off to the right side. She has had previous turbinectomies. Sinuses appear relatively clear.
Axial view shows that the septum is a little bit deviated towards the right side, but the sinuses are clear. Turbinates are not seen in this particular cut.

Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology with a little bit of slight anterior beaking. Joint space looks reasonably well, although slightly decreased posteriorly.

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show that she has some decreased joint space. There are some mild arthritic changes present.
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a low lateral pole compared to the medial pole. She decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3-4 mm. The joint space looks better towards the medial side.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a low lateral pole compared to the medial pole. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm. The joint space appears decreased, although fairly uniform throughout the joint.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows she has a retruded maxilla and mandible and posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. Oropharyngeal airway appears narrow with an AP dimension of about 3.5 mm at the base of the tongue and 3 mm at the soft palate level. She has a high occlusal plane angle and an end-on incisor relationship, although she has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
1. Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
2. Multiple joint involving suggesting a systemic etiology for the joint pathology.
3. Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
4. Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
5. High occlusal plane angle.
6. Bilateral posterior open bites.
7. End-on incisor relationship.
8. Class III end-on occlusion.
9. Missing all 4 first bicuspids and all 4 third molars.
10. Headaches.
11. TMJ pain.
12. Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). c.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly. d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B109 MRI AGE: 37/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. The joint space appears somewhat narrow, but there does appear to be some discal tissue in place, although somewhat medially displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width to it. There appears to be some decreased vertical joint space and it appears the disc may be laterally displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology, but does have some anterior beaking present. The articular eminence is moderately steep. Anteroposteriorly the disc appears to be in reasonably good position. Out laterally, the disc is not as evident and could correlate to medial displacement. The disc is seen medial to the head of the condyle. No significant inflammatory process is seen, although there may be a little bit of fluid in the inferior joint space. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the articular disc and the disc is in a reduced position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. There appears to be decreased vertical and posterior joint space. There appears to be discal tissue anterior to the condyle. There does not appear to be any significant inflammatory process present. On opening, the disc appears to reduce and there is fairly good translation of the condyle and the articular disc.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc medially displaced but with reduction on opening. Right TMJ mild arthritis with anterior and laterally displaced articular discs with reduction.

