B110
B110 is 16 years old. Referred by Dr. XXXX and others. The orthodontist that B110 and her mother decided to use is Dr. XXXX. The rheumatologist that B110 is seeing is Dr. XXXX.

B110 is not exactly sure when her jaw problems began but probably when she was sometime around the age of 10 or 11 when there was some awareness that her lower jaw was retruded. Etiology is unknown. She had orthodontics from age 12 to 14 using elastics to try to correct her bite. She had a gum graft done at age 14 in the lower anterior arch. She had her wisdom teeth removed 3 months ago. She gets headaches about every 1 to 2 weeks at a level of 6 in the temporal and posterior head area. She rates her occasional TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 4, jaw function, diet and disability at 0. She takes no medications. She has no earaches, but occasionally tinnitus and moderate occurrence of vertigo, but no hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her hips, fingers, neck, back, wrists and ankles. She is aware of clenching sometimes during the day. She does not snore but has moderate daytime somnolence. She is not aware of sleep apnea and is a predominant mouth breather at nighttime and also some during the day. She did have some blood tests that showed an elevated ANA titer, but rheumatoid factor and sedimentation rate are all well within normal limits.

PriB110 concerns that B110 has include the following:
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Retruded lower jaw that has been getting progressively worse.
Pain around the jaw areas.

In frontal view, B110 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 5 mm of the left central and 6 mm of the right central. Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline and may be just slightly to the left. The nasal tip is a little to the left about 2 mm. The mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. The chin may be just slightly to the left side about 1 mm or so. In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 5 to 6 mm and chin is retruded about 30 mm. She has a lip incompetence of about 10 mm. She has a short chin neckline. She has a head postured forward neck position. Intraorally, B110 has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch. She has all of her teeth in the upper arch. There is some mild crowding in the upper arch. She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower teeth and has a gum graft around the 2 central incisors. B110 has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship by about 2 to 3 mm. She has about a 2 mm anterior open bite. Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy. Intranasally, she has some mild enlargement of the right turbinate, but the left side looks relatively normal. There may be a slight deviation of the septum off towards the right side but not too significant. At least in the daytime, there does not appear to be any significant nasal airway obstruction. To palpation, she has some moderate pain around the masseters and shoulder, but milder tenderness over the posterior neck, retromandibular areas. There is no tenderness directly over the TMJ area. The maximal incisal opening is 46 mm, opening without pain 35 mm. The excursion movements are 6 mm in each direction.

Basic diagnosis for B110 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA). Severe AP mandibular hypoplasia. Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia. High occlusal plane angle of 30 degrees (normal angulation 8 degrees). Class II end-on occlusion. Anterior open bite of 2 mm. Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 4 mm (normal 11 mm). AP microgenia. Myofascial pain. TMJ pain. Headaches. Slight reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch. Multiple other joint involvement including hips, fingers, wrists, neck, back, and ankles. Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Rheumatology work-up for JRA.
2. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Place brackets on the second molars, but do not engage the second molars in the arch wire. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Place brackets on the second molars, but do not engage the second molars with the arch wire.
3. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
4. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise rotation and stabilize with bone plates and synthetic bone grafting. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Augmentation genioplasty with Medpor.
5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B110 MRI Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe resorption. There appears to be disc present with a reactive pannus surrounding it. The condyle is very narrow mediolaterally. What is left of the condylar head and neck is very sclerotic. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 or 4 mm. There appears that may be an osteophytic bone formation curling inwards in the fossa area.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is very mediolaterally and very sclerotic of the remaining condylar head and neck. The disc appears to be in position with a reactive pannus surrounding it. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly 2 or 3 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows what appears to be a broad condylar head anteroposteriorly but very narrow mediolaterally. There is discal in position, but a reactive pannus surrounding it. The condyle is postured somewhat forward in the fossa. The articular eminence is very flat. There appears to be a reactive pannus surrounding the articular disc, particularly between the condyle and the disc. On opening and closing, there is translation of the condyle forward, although the disc moves with the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is broad anteroposteriorly but narrow mediolaterally. There is discal tissue present, but a little bit more degenerative changes on this side with the mid part of the disc absent. There is reactive pannus surrounding the discal tissues. The articular eminence is extremely flat. The condyle is postured forward in the fossa. On opening and closing, there is translation of the condyle forward, although the disc moves with the condyle.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ severe condylar resorption with articular disc in position surrounded with a pannus. MRI imaging compatible with JRA. MRI shows she has severe condylar resorption almost down to the sigmoid notch as well as significant resorption of the articular eminences bilaterally. The condyles are functioning forward in the fossa beneath the articular eminence areas. The sinuses appear clear. She has moderate size turbinates. She has a decreased oropharyngeal airway of probably about 3 to 4 mm. She has a severely retruded chin and a high occlusal plane angle. She is missing all four third molars with them being removed probably within the last few months. She has an anterior open bite and a slight Class II end-on occlusal relationship. The TMJ imaging bilaterally shows severe condylar resorption as well as resorption of the articular eminences. The condyles are postured forward in the fossa. There is joint space present. B110 I-CAT
I-CAT shows she has severe condylar resorption almost down to the sigmoid notch as well as significant resorption of the articular eminences bilaterally. The condyles are functioning forward in the fossa beneath the articular eminence areas. The sinuses appear clear. She has moderate size turbinates. She has a decreased oropharyngeal airway of probably about 3 to 4 mm. She has a severely retruded chin and a high occlusal plane angle. She is missing all four third molars with them being removed probably within the last few months. She has an anterior open bite and a slight Class II end-on occlusal relationship. The TMJ imaging bilaterally shows severe condylar resorption as well as resorption of the articular eminences. The condyles are postured forward in the fossa. There is joint space present. She has very prominent gonial notching bilaterally.

