KAREN PYLE									10-09-02

Karen is 40 years old and referred by Dr. Danny Dugan.

Patient History

Karen was diagnosed with fibromyalgia about three years ago. Joints were not involved at that time. The only previous injury she can remember was in about 1981 when she was in an auto accident, and a telephone pole came through the window and hit her jaw, and she had some stitches. She wasn’t aware of any TMJ problems after that, however. 

Her current problems began in approximately January of 2002. Her problem has gotten much worse in the last three or four months. She was referred to see Dr. Danny Dugan. He referred her to Dr. Louis Miller, and Dr. Miller made her an upper splint. Her problems got worse. She then saw Dr. Kelly Mack, and the splint he made did not help significantly either. She then went to see Dr. Charles Holt, who did further work on the splint and also did an anaphoresis on her, but her problems have continued to get worse. She has had physical therapy including hot and cold packs, but this has not been successful either. She also has had massages on her jaws, and this has not been effective. 

She has earaches, no tinnitus, but does get some vertigo. She has nocturnal clenching. She feels best in the mornings, and then things tend to get worse during the day. Her jaw pain, however, never goes away. The main problems are the severe jaw pain and severe ear pain that she has. She states that her jaws are popping with movement. She rates her headaches that occur at least three to four times a week in the frontal and temporal areas at about a level of 8. They get so severe that it can create significant nausea for her. She rates her TMJ pain at 8, overall pain at 8, jaw function at 5, diet at 7, and disability at 8.

Clinical Evaluation

TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly, although there was some fine crepitation in the right TMJ. If she tries to sleep lying on her left side, it feels like both joints are being pulled out of the socket. She can only sleep over towards the right side. She has about a 5-mm Class II occlusion on the right side and about 2 mm on the left side. She has about a 4 to 5-mm deep bite relationship anteriorly. Maximal incisal opening was 45 mm, but it was only for a brief instant. She could open to about 15 mm without too severe of a pain. However, she prefers not to open her mouth at all to maximize her comfort. Excursive movement to the right was about 7 mm and to the left about 5 mm. Left movement may be restricted a little bit by pain and discomfort.

Current Medications

Effexor 75 mg.
Naproxen 500 mg.
Estratest.
Vioxx 25 mg.
Elavil 10 mg.

SHE HAS HAD AN ADVERSE REACTION TO CODEINE.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows she is missing the maxillary right central incisor, first and second bicuspid, left first bicuspid, first molar, and third molar. She has crowns and bridges replacing the missing teeth. In the lower arch, she is missing mandibular right third molar and left first molar. She has crowns on essentially every maxillary tooth except for the left lateral incisor. In the lower arch, she has crowns on the four incisors and on the right first molar. She has root canals on all three maxillary right third molars, left central incisor, left second bicuspid, and mandibular right lateral incisor and both central incisors. Sinuses look reasonably clear. Nasal airway is difficult to assess. Condyles look large and relatively normal.

Right TMJ tomogram shows condyle is in fairly good shape. A little bit of sclerosis on the head. Articular eminences are moderately steep and have moderate slope to them. Decreased superior and posterior joint space is present. Morphology of fossa and condyle independently looks fairly good. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa. A little bit of anterior beaking present. However, joint space is a little bit better balanced superiorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. A little bit of flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.

Opening shows good translation of both condyles.

Waters view shows that the nasal airway appears to be a little bit obstructed with no good nasal passage seen. Sinuses look relatively normal with just the left side looking a little bit hazier than the right side. Waters view shows she may have just a slight skeletal Class II relationship but not too significant. Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat decreased with a distance from soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall being about 5 mm, and from base of the tongue to posterior pharyngeal wall about 5 mm also.

Intranasally, turbinates look relatively fine. A little bit of deviation of the nasal septum but not too significant. Nostrils are a little bit constricted. Using the scope and expanding the nostrils, able to breathe a little bit better. Her columella is a little bit wide at the base.

Other Systems

She has no other joint problems. Has only had one urinary tract infection. Occasionally has to get up at night to urinate. She had a hysterectomy in 1981 due to chronic salpingitis. She has one child and no miscarriages. She does have some female hormone imbalance due to the hysterectomy. She only had one or two previous vaginal yeast infections. She gets some burning, itching and dryness of her eyes during allergy season but does not wear contacts. Does have earache problems. She does get nauseated with severe headaches. She does have fatigue problems but relates that to her medications. She recently had her thyroid evaluated and got the results back yesterday that everything was totally normal. She does have mitral valve prolapse, and she has the fibromyalgia. She had a parakeet for less than a year about 15 years ago. The parrot died of unknown cause. She had a cat for about three years and is not aware of it catching birds at all. She has had lots of dogs but is not aware of them catching birds either. She has had breast implants for about 5 years. The breast implants she has in are saline. She says she has no problems with them at all relative to sensitivity, erythematous changes, etc.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc medial dislocation.
Mandibular hypoplasia.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Earaches.
Fibromyalgia.

Recommended Treatment 

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies.

Restorative dentistry to re-establish a good functional occlusion