KENNETH PRIESTER									11-24-04

Kenneth is 13 years old and referred by Sophia Rawlins, 9422 Beckleycrest Ave., Dallas, TX  75232. He was referred by Dr. Gayle Glenn, Camp Wisdom.

Patient History

Kenneth is in good health with no major medical problems. Kenneth does breathe through his mouth when he sleeps. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Kenneth has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Some slight asymmetry in the lower jaw area. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 0.5 mm. Actually, there is some asymmetry in the middle and upper third face as well. Nasal tip may be 1 mm off to the left side. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Nasal tip is a millimeter off to the right. Mandibular dental midline is 2 mm to the right of the maxillary and facial midline. Chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline appear to be fairly well aligned with each other. Vertical height of the mandible on the right side is probably about 4 to 5 mm longer than the left side. Has a little bit more fullness in the body of the mandible on the right side as compared to the left side. As he shifts his mandible toward the left side and aligns his dental midlines, his facial symmetry seems to improve, although the chin now is a little bit off toward the left side. Appears to be a cant in the transverse occlusal plane. There is a slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the left maxillary incisor being about 1 mm to 2 mm higher than the right side and the same with the mandible. 

In profile view, Kenneth has good facial balance. Chin-neckline has good length to it, and the chin-neck angle is well-defined.

Intraorally, Kenneth has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Gums look a little bit inflamed, but he appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, Kenneth has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Has a Class III cuspid relationship by about 3 mm on the left side and just slightly Class III by about a millimeter on the right side. Has a crossbite on the maxillary right lateral incisor. Has about 1.5 mm of vertical overbite. Has an increased curve of Wilson on the right side to a greater extent than on the left side. Lower arch looks more symmetrical. Appears to be a slight yaw at the posterior aspect of the maxilla and mandible with them being shifted to the left side some. Uvula, soft palate, and faucial pillars all look fairly normal. Tonsils are moderately enlarged. Although he has had a history of recurrent tonsillitis, he currently does not have any really significant problem with it. 

Left turbinate looks relatively normal in size and appears to be good airway on the left side. On the right side, there is a little hyperplasia of the turbinate, but appears that there is still adequate airway although more constricted than the left side. 

Joints function smoothly. Incisal opening maximally is 55 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 9 mm and to the left 7 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four developing unerupted third molars. The rest of the teeth are present and look good. Sinuses look relatively healthy. TMJs look relatively normal. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. Frontal sinuses are better formed on the left side as compared to the right side. Septum looks fairly straight. Right turbinate looks a little bit enlarged compared to the left one. Asymmetry in the alignment of the dentition is observed with the mandibular dental midline being approximately 2 mm off to the left side of the maxillary midline. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Joint space looks fairly well-balanced although perhaps slightly decreased posteriorly but not too significant. Articular eminence is moderately steep and of relatively short length. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. A little bit of flattening of the posterior head. Joint space is fairly well-balanced. Articular eminence is moderately steep and relatively short in length.

On opening, there is good translation of both joints.

Cephalometrically, Kenneth is basically a skeletal Class III type of relationship. Upper incisors appear slightly overangulated, and lower incisors may be a little bit vertically inclined. Difference in vertical height of the occlusion as well as the inferior border of the mandible.

Basic Diagnoses

Maxillary asymmetry with a vertical deficiency on the left side
Mandibular asymmetry and vertical deficiency on the left side
Class III end-on occlusion on the left side and fairly close to a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side
Mandibular dental midline shifted 2 mm to the right
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side
Anterior crossbite involving the maxillary lateral incisor
Increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch with the right side being significantly greater than the left side
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars

Recommended Treatment

Continue to monitor facial growth and development for the next two years

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Maxillary osteotomies to downgraft it slightly in the front, level it transversely, and correct any transverse problems that may be present
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to correct the mandibular asymmetry
Surgical removal of impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 