ROBIN PRESCHER									7/18/05

Robin is 40 years old, referred by Dr. Al Bishop.  She had her gallbladder removed in 1998.  She had orthognathic surgery in 2001 which consisted of:

Maxillary osteotomies.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies.
Augmentation of bony genioplasty.  

She did get an infection postsurgically on the right side and this was treated with antibiotics and irrigations and it did resolve.  She did have asthma as a child, but now she only has a problem when she gets around cats and dogs which she is allergic to.  After the surgery, she developed what she calls "baby bumps" all over her face.  She went to see a dermatologist and he put her on antibiotics for a year and now she uses some face medications that help keep it in check.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Teeth do not fit together.
Back teeth do not align properly between the upper and lower teeth.
Lower jaw shifts off towards the right side.
She has to pop her jaw in order to make it feel better.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Depression on the left side of her face and hanging tissue around the left side of her face.
Pulling of the soft tissues beneath the left eye.  

Robin's problems began probably in her late teens of unknown etiology.  She was aware that her jaws would click and pop back then, but she had no other symptomatology.  In 1998, she was at a washeteria and someone attacked her and hit her on the head and after that time she developed increased popping and grinding kind of noises in her jaw joints.  She then went and saw Dr. John Stella in approximately 2000.  He performed the above-stated surgical procedures on her in 2001.  Currently, she has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She does have some allergies to cats, dogs and sulfa.  No known jewelry problems, although she may have problems with cheap pierced earrings.  She is aware of nighttime clenching.  The medication she takes is Advil for headaches.  She gets headaches about 2 times per week at about a level of 4 in the frontal and temple areas.  She at times gets a shooting pain predominately through the left TMJ at about a level of 4.  Average daily level of pain and discomfort is level 4.  She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 2, disability at 2.  

In frontal view, she has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Nasal tip may be deviated off towards the left side a couple of mm.  Maxillary midline may be about a mm off towards the right side.  Mandibular dental midline looks fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Chin is fairly close to being on the midline.  In concentric relation, Robin's midlines are aligned fairly well.  She has comfortable bites.  One is towards the left side with the lower midline about a mm to the left of the maxillary midline and then off to the right the mandibular dental midline is maybe 2 mm to the right of the maxillary midline.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  
ROBIN PRESCHER				7/18/05				Page 2


Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheek and nose.  The lower lip appears a little bit retruded.  Chin also appears somewhat retruded, although the labial-mental fold is significantly prominent.  Chin-neckline is full and not well defined.  She is very close to being a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has about a 2 mm overbite.  To palpation, she has some very mild tenderness over the masseter left styloid area.  On opening and closing, she has a clicking left joint that was obvious on closing probably around 20 mm but it is more of glitch than an actual click or pop.  I could not detect it on opening.  On the right side, there was just an occasional pop that occurred at about 15 mm of opening and I could not determine if that was opening or closing predominately.  Robin also states that she got mononucleosis.  On excursive movements, she has a lot of noises in her joints and as on opening she has some crepitus noises bilaterally with the left being worse than the right side.  Incisal opening is 42 mm.  Excursive movement is 7 mm in each direction.  She has a little bit of residual numbness in the lower lip and chin area, but is closer to having feeling than being numb.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the presence of 4 bone plates in the maxilla with what appears to be 4 screws in each plate. There are 2 screws in the ramus on the mandible bilaterally.  There are wires in the chin area.  Left joint difficult to evaluate, but appears a little bit sclerotic.

Waters view shows the septum appears reasonably straight.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Sinuses appear clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a joint that has some flattening on the anterior head.  The joint space does not look too bad except it is decreased posteriorly.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears more arthritic.  There is some anterior beaking present.  Decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.  On opening, there is significant decreased translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she still has what appears to be high occlusal plane angle.  Chin is fairly prominent.  Chin-neckline is short, however.  Oropharyngeal airway shows an airway dimension of probably less than 3 mm at the soft palate level and about 7 mm at the base of the tongue.  It appears there is a little bit more of an indention in the chin area on the left side as compared to the right side and it is possible that the base of the chin and posterior aspect may have gotten shifted a little bit towards the right side.  
ROBIN PRESCHER 				7/18/05				Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES
Previous orthognathic surgery to include multiple maxillary osteotomies, bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies and osseous augmentation genioplasty.
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Maxillary asymmetry with the posterior aspect being shifted 3 to 4 mm to the right.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Mandibular asymmetry with the posterior aspect being shifted 3 to 4 mm to the right.
High occlusal plane angle.
Deviated nasal septum.
Nasal airway obstruction.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Slight transverse asymmetry with the left side being about 1 mm lower than the right side.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Testing at the Environmental Center for hypersensitivities to materials in the prostheses (i.e. titanium, aluminum, vanadium, chromium, cobalt, molybdenum, nickel and polyethylene.)
Consider implant into left forearm of titanium alloy and chromium and cobalt alloy samples (this would be indicated if the patient has hypersensitivities with the injections. 

CT scan of TMJs (TMJ Concepts protocol) for fabrication of the 3D model of the joints and jaws.

Surgery option 1:
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to rotate it back towards the left side posteriorly, level transversely and down graft posteriorly.
AP reduction osseous genioplasty. 
Nasoseptoplasty.
Fat grafts to bilateral TMJs.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
ROBIN PRESCHER 				7/18/05				Page 4


Surgical option 2 (no treatment for the TMJ pathology):
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft it posteriorly and shift the posterior aspect towards the left.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to lengthen the posterior aspect and shift it to the left. 
Nasoseptoplasty.
AP reduction genioplasty.
The patient will likely need total joint prosthesis reconstruction of the TMJs at a subsequent operation.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine and retain the occlusion. 