MICHELLE PRICE									05/16/2008

Michelle is 25 years old, referred by Michael Montgomery, DDS, 7551 Callaghan Road, Suite 210, San Antonio, Texas 78229.  Primary concerns that Michelle has includes the following:
TMJ popping and noise.
Severe TMJ degeneration.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Open bite.
Bite getting worse.
Difficulties eating and chewing. 

Michelle does have some arthritis in her hands particularly in her thumbs, but has no other joint involvement apparently.  
Michelle’s jaw problems began in about 2003 when she was 20 years old of unknown etiology.  The only factor going on at that time is that she did start birth control pills at about the same time that her TMJ problems began.  In 2003, she developed pain and clicking in the left side.  In 2004, she had a splint made by Dr. Michael Duffy.  In 2005, she had lysis and lavage procedure performed to the left joint without improvement.  In February 2006, she had a left disc repositioning and possible Mitek anchor or some kind of pinning to hold the disc in place.  Following that, the right side started clicking and popping and creating pain.  In 2007, she saw Dr. Robert Lemke in San Antonio who performed lavage again.  Also, he constructed a new splint.  She has since gone to see Dr. Michael Montgomery who has been adjusting Michelle’s splint.  Michelle’s current medications include Klonopin unknown dosage that she takes occasionally at night and Advil that she takes for pain when necessary.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo.  The only other joints that really bother her at this time are her thumbs.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime.  She gets headaches three to four times per month at about a level of 4 in the frontal and temporal areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at about a level of 7, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 7, diet at 5, disability at 4.  She has a slight frontal branch of the facial nerve deficit on the left side.  
CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Michelle has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The nasal tip is about 3 mm off to the right side.  The mandibular dental midline and chin are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Michelle has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheek, and nose.  She has a little prominence of the nasal dorsum.  The chin appears a little bit AP deficient by probably about 12 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars in place.  She has moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Her lower bicuspids are tipped lingually.  She has some lingual tori bilaterally.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Both the upper and lower arch appear transversely to be somewhat narrow.  She has a slight Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally and this may in fact be due in part to her splint therapy that she has been on that has postured her mandible forward.  She has an anterior open bite of about 4 mm.  She has a slightly reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch and an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.  She has a crossbite tendency bilaterally, and, in fact, a definite crossbite on the left side in the molar area.  She has an accentuated curve of  Wilson with the lower bicuspids and reverse curve of Wilson with the maxillary bicuspids, although the molars are fairly flat.  Oropharyngeal tissues and structures look normal.  Intranasally, she has a large septal spur off towards the left side that on the CT scan appears to have hit almost against the lateral nasal wall and provides significant obstruction on that side.  Turbinates appear quite large on both sides.  She has surprisingly better airway than one would suspect with the clinical and radiograph evaluation of this area.  Michelle does recall that she had her wisdom teeth removed in 2003.  Michelle appears to occlude only on her first and second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the temporalis muscle, but not too much discomfort throughout the head and neck area.  She has some crepitus-type noises in both joints, but a little stronger on the right side, but still fairly fine crepitus noises.  Maximal incisal opening is 37 mm, opening without discomfort 23 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 4 mm, to the left 6 mm.
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has root canals on the mandibular right second molar, maxillary right second bicuspid, and maxillary left second bicuspid.  Vertical height of the mandibular condyles and condylar necks are extremely short.  It appears that there has been some significant arthritic and resorptive changes that have occurred within the joints.  There is an anterior open bite present. 
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears quite arthritic.  There appears to be significantly decreased joint space vertically.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow.  The condyle is actually postured forward in the fossa probably about 3 to 4 mm and would explain the slight Class III occlusal tendency.  This condylar positioning was likely introduced with the occlusal splints that were designed to actually posture the jaws forward.  There is a Mitek anchor or some kind of metal device within the joint.  On opening, there is moderately good translation of the left joint, but greater restriction in the right joint.   
Right TMJ tomogram shows that a condyle that has significantly arthritic changes.  The condylar head and neck is extremely short.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  The condyle is postured forward in the fossa probably 2-3 mm.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a high mandibular occlusal plane angle.  She has a skeletal Class relationship.  She has lip incompetence.  She has a decreased oropharyngeal airway of about 6 mm at the soft palate level and probably almost 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  
Waters view shows a severe deviation of the nasal septum with a large spur extending off into the left side of the nose, but also the bony septum curves off into the right side of the nose above the spur.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Michelle states that stressful situations increase her pain levels.  
Basic diagnoses for Michelle would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia. 
Anterior open bite.
Slight Class III occlusion.
Occluding only on the first and second molars bilaterally with all other teeth out of occlusion.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Severely deviated nasal septum with large spur extending out to the left side. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.
Significant crowding in the lower anterior arch.
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. 
Reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:	
 
MRI of left and right TMJ.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Align the upper arch in two different occlusal plane levels.  Align the four incisors at an elevated plane by placing an upward step in the archwire between the cuspids and lateral incisors.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid root distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure.
CT of jaw and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.  
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance down graft the posterior aspect and expand the maxilla.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen or buttock). 
Bilateral coronoidotomies.
Nasal septoplasty.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion and retain.

I gave Michelle a prescription for an MRI.