XIMENA QUIROS									08-29-03

Ximena is 13 years old and referred by Dr. Ronald de la Cruz from Sabana Norte, 50 W. Interfin Bank, P.O. Box 3537-1000, San Jose, Costa Rica.

Patient History

Ximena is in good health with no major medical problems. 

She gives no history of headaches, TMJ pain, earaches, vertigo, etc. She states that she doesn’t have any noises in her joints. 


Patient Concerns

Her teeth don’t fit together
She has a significantly gummy smile
Makes noises when she sleeps
Mouth breathing particularly when sleeping
Cannot chew with her lips together

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Ximena has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Sometimes when she smiles she has a little bit of hyperfunction on the left side of her upper lip as compared to the right side. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 9 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline. She has some slight AP maxillary deficiency. She has significant lip incompetence of probably about 10 mm. Chin is retruded, and chin-neckline is short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. Chin is probably a good 10 to 12 mm AP deficient. 

Intraorally, Ximena has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth are nicely aligned and leveled. In the upper arch, she also has all of her teeth back through the second molars present and are well-aligned and leveled. She has some hyper-inflammation of the gingiva in the upper arch probably due to excessive exposure. She has almost a full class II cuspid relationship being probably at least 5 mm Class II. She has an overjet of probably about 5 mm and vertical overbite of probably about 4 mm. She has had her lower third molars removed, and this was done by Dr. Oscar Reiche. Transverse occlusal plane appears fairly level with the eyes, but the right side appears to be about a millimeter lower than the left side compared to the ears. I feel the symmetry is better with the eyes. 

To palpation, she had only some very minimal tenderness over the TMJ area of maybe 1 to 2. TMJs, however, seem to function very smoothy and no other signs or symptoms of having any TMJ problems. 

Intranasally, septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side, and there is a spur at the base of the septum on the left side. Turbinates are quite large, particularly on the left side, that seem to cause some significant obstruction of the airway and the right side at least anteriorly although the turbinate is quite large, but with the deviated septum, the airway appears better, although difficult to assess the posterior aspect. Oropharynx appears clear. She has her tonsils and appears to have some adenoid tissue posteriorly but no inflammation present.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that there may be a little mucous cyst in the right sinus. Turbinates appear fairly large. A spur is seen coming off the left side of the septum. Impacted maxillary third molars are present. Good space between the upper lateral incisor and cuspids. Absent mandibular third molars. Condyles look a little bit different sizes on this particular radiograph. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good shape. Could be a little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep but not very long vertically. Joint space appears fairly good superiorly and posteriorly.

Right TMJ tomogram appears that she is postured forward a little bit here. There is an increased posterior joint space. Condyle looks similar in shape to the opposite side. Articular eminence is perhaps even more shallow on this side than the opposite side. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses all appear fairly clear. Turbinates appear a little bit large, although there may be some airway passage on the right side. Septum is deviated a little bit off toward the left side. Left side appears pretty much obstructed. About one month ago, she did have sinusitis and took an antibiotic for that. 

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship. She has a huge adenoid mass in the nasopharynx area which is probably causing most of her nasal airway obstruction. Tonsils are seen on the radiograph. Significant vertical maxillary excess is noted. Oropharyngeal airway dimensions are fairly good, and again the major obstruction is at the nasopharynx area where she has a huge adenoid mass.

Bolton’s analysis shows a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm in the anterior six teeth. Also, in a Class I position there is a transverse maxillary deficiency. Deficiency is probably about 5 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Anterior vertical maxillary excess
Transverse maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Class II occlusion
Hypertrophied turbinates
Severely hypertrophied nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue
Severe nasal airway obstruction
Impacted maxillary third molars
Severe lip incompetence (9 to 10 mm)
High occlusal plane angulation
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of approximately 2 mm

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Continue to align and level maxillary arch keeping the maxillary lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally as they currently are
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately no more than 2 mm of tooth structure to help compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy 

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly approximately 7 to 8 mm, expand it, and decrease the occlusal plane angulation
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Bilateral partial turbinectomies
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy
Surgical removal of impacted maxillary third molars x 2

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
