SIEW QUAH 										01/22/2010

Siew is 41 years old.  She is referred Dr. Warner Young, Redmond, WA.  Siew developed TMJ problems as best as she can remember in her early 20s.  She cannot remember if she had any before then or not.  She did have some clicking and popping at that time.  She began orthodontic treatment in August 2005 that included extraction of maxillary bicuspids and alignment and leveling of the arches.  In November 2008, Siew underwent bilateral sagittal split osteotomies and a vertical mandibular midline osteotomy to advance the mandible and narrow it.  Dr. Dale Bloomquist performed the surgery.  She has had continued problems since surgery.  

She gets headaches about 2 times per week at a level of 4 in the frontal and temporal areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 4, diet at 2, disability at 1.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, and gets occasional vertigo but no hearing loss.  The only other joint that she has a problem with is her neck where she has been told she has arthritis.  She has GERD.  She is aware of clenching or grinding her teeth at night.  

The primary concerns that Siew has at this time include the following:

Pain when chewing.
Pain in the TMJ joints. 
Limited mouth opening.
Inability to chew on the left side. 
Transverse narrowness at the angles of the mandible and loss of some of the angular definition particularly on the right side. 
Tilting of the jaw structures. 

Siew does states she has some mild snoring and moderate daytime somnolence,  but no sleep apnea.  She is predominantly a nasal breather. 

CLINICAL EVALUATION.  In frontal view, Siew has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is maybe just slightly to the left side 1 mm.  The chin midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline.  The chin may be just slightly asymmetric to the right side 1 or 2 mm.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded by probably about 4 mm and the mandible is retruded by probably 12 mm.  The chin neckline is short, although the chin neckline is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Siew has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  The teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.  The right cuspid may be about 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch, she is missing probably the first bicuspids.  Siew has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  She has a vertical overbite of about 1.5 mm.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1.5-2 mm higher than the left side.  Intranasally, the turbinates look mildly enlarged but the septum is straight and there appears to be reasonably good airway.  She has a left posterior open bite of about 1-2 mm in the molar area.  The maximal incisal opening is 28, but only about 16 mm without pain or discomfort.  The excursion movements are about 5 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex evidence of previous surgery with 3 bone screws in each ramus and a bone plate in the symphysis area.  She has some loss of periodontal bone around some of the teeth and the teeth overall have relatively short roots.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  The septum appears fairly straight.  The condyles appear small.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear and turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Transverse width between the mandibular bodies appears somewhat narrow.  There appears to be more of an open bite on the left side in the molar area than on the right side.  

Axial view shows that the turbinates actually are fairly large and the sinuses are clear.  The septum is reasonably straight.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good mediolateral width but the joint space is narrow vertically.  The lateral rim is fairly flat. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that may be a little bit more arthritic with perhaps some loss of vertical volume.  The joint space is significantly decreased.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly only about 1-2 mm.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is very narrow anteroposteriorly with just a little bit of anterior beaking.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  The condyle is very narrow anteroposteriorly.  There is increased anterior joint space.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with some significant deformation and, in fact, it is hockey stick shaped.  It is very narrow anteroposteriorly.  It is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  There is increased anterior joint space.  The right articular eminence is steeper than the left side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Siew has a high occlusal plane angle.  She has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue measures about almost 8 mm and at the soft palate level measures about 6 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Siew would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction on the left side and without reduction on the right side with deformation of the right disc.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and transverse asymmetry. 
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia as well as transverse asymmetry. 
Right maxilla cuspid being 2 mm higher than the left cuspid.
Posterior open bite on the left side of 2 mm.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Missing maxillary first bicuspids extracted for orthodontic reasons and four bicuspids.
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Lower lip ptosis with exposure of about 4-5 mm of the lower incisors when the lower lip is relaxed. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

OPTION 1.

1.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
	b.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies to maintain a Class I occlusion and allow the 
                        proximal segment and condyles to move inferiorly to accommodate the discs 
                        within the joint space. 
	c.	Remove bone plate from mandibular symphysis and resuspend the mentalis	 		muscles.
2.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

OPTION 2.

1.	Surgery.	
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 		counterclockwise direction advancing the chin approximately 12 mm.
            c.	Midline symphysis osteotomy to widen the mandible.
	d.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction 			advancing it about 4 mm at the incisor tips and down grafting it posteriorly about 4	 	5 mm.
	e.	Remove bone plate from mandibular symphysis and resuspend the mentalis 			muscles.
2.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

OPTION 3.

1.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

OPTION 4.

1.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts 			total joint prostheses.
	b.	Midline symphysis osteotomy to widen the mandible.
 
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction and level it transversely.
	d.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	e.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 