MYRIAM PRIETO									09-30-02

Myriam is 36 years old and referred by Dr. David Corral from Fort Worth.

Patient History

She is seeing Dr. Moody Alexander in Arlington. She had orthodontics done previously in Kansas City by Dr. Jack Okerstrong, and since moving down here, Dr. Alexander is following her and has made her some new retainers. She has had her gallbladder removed. She has had no other surgeries. At one time she had some problems with glaucoma in the left eye, but she is not currently having any problems with that. Her bite is open a little bit on the left side. 

Myriam’s problems began about two years ago of unknown etiology. She was in orthodontics at the time. She also was having some abdominal problems at the time, and this seems to be when things started. She had orthodontics from the age of 33 to 35. She has had her retainer she originally got in Kansas City changed out by Dr. Moody Alexander for a fixed upper retainer and no lower retainer. She does get earaches on the left side. She gets vertigo sometimes but no tinnitus.

Patient Concerns

Constant pain and pressure with the left side being much worse than the right side.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Difficulties eating and chewing.

She rates her headaches on the right side in the frontotemporal area at a level of 8 and occasionally in the posterior head level at a level of 8. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, overall pain at 5, jaw function at 6, diet at 4, and disability at 5.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Myriam has fairly good facial symmetry in the upper and middle third face. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary dental midline may be shifted to the right about a millimeter. Mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Chin midline is about 3 mm of so to the right. Myriam does have a slight cant in the occlusal plane angle with the right being about 2 mm higher than the left side.

In profile view, she has some good facial symmetry and balance. 

Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids and has the rest of her teeth back through the third molars present. In the upper arch, likewise she is missing first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the third molars. She has about a 2-mm anterior overbite and Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has a slight open bite tendency on the left side where it appears that none of the molar teeth are touching. Turbinates are moderately enlarged, but it appears she has adequate nasal airway. Oropharynx appears clear. 

To palpation, she has moderate to severe pain in the left temporalis muscle with moderate pain right temporalis muscle and bilateral masseters, high moderate pain to palpation over the left TMJ, and mild to moderate pain over the right TMJ. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly, although she is limited in jaw mobility. Incisal opening with reasonable comfort is 18 mm. Maximal incisal opening is about 50 mm. Excursive movement to the right was 4 mm and to the left about 5 mm. No discrete clicking or popping is noted. She is not aware of having any history of clicking or popping.

Current Medications

The only medication she takes is baclofen 10 mg tablet, 1 tablet 2 to 3 times per day. When her pain problems get worse, she does take Advil.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of all teeth except for the first bicuspids. She has a root canal in the mandibular right second molar and maxillary right cuspid. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch. Condyles look relatively well formed and relatively proportionate in size.

Waters view shows some vertical facial imbalance with the left side being a couple of millimeters lower than the right side with asymmetry at the inferior border. Chin is noted to be rotated off towards the right side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of anterior beaking present. Posterior joint space may be slightly decreased. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ shows some significant flattening of the anterior head of the condyle and some mild anterior beaking. Posterior teeth appear to be apart. Vertical joint space looks pretty good. Articular eminence looks moderately steep. Good translation in both joints is noted. In fact, translation is better than in the MRI.

Cephalometrically, she appears to have a good skeletal Class I relationship, but there is a vertical discrepancy in the occlusal plane level and at the inferior borders.

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ possible osteochondroma and articular disc dislocation in a medial and anterior direction and perhaps without reduction.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation predominantly in a medial direction and with questionable reduction.
Mandibular hyperplasia.
Left-sided posterior open bite.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Earaches.
Vertigo.

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Place appliances on upper arch back through first molars.
Place appliances on mandibular arch back through first molars.

Surgery
Left TMJ possible high condylectomy (if continued progressive growth is identified) and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor).
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion