DAVID POWDERMAKER							11-17-04

This is the first that I have seen David in about a year-and-a-half. Dr. Howard Cohen has been managing his pain problems. David has been getting progressively worse psychologically, pain wise, etc. He states he can’t really work anymore because of the pain, and the pain medications don’t allow him to think clearly or put proper sentences together. His mind is foggy at times, and he wants to go on disability. He this summer saw Dr. Karl De Leuw at Mayo Clinic. Dr. De Leuw told David that his philosophy is to try to decrease jaw function, stay on a very soft diet, and evaluate the psychiatric problems and try to treat those before progressing on with jaw surgery. I told David that I believe that a good portion of his problems, physically, pain wise, emotionally, and psychiatrically, are in part due to the pathology created by the TMJs. He also has neck problems that are also contributory. I believe that the total joint prostheses would be the best option he has to try to improve his situation. I cannot guarantee that it would significantly decrease his pain, but I feel that this is his best option to decrease and hopefully eliminate the pain and headaches that are directly related to the TMJ problem. It will not affect pain associated with any other factors such as neck pathology, central nervous system problems, etc.

David is currently on the following medications:
Duragesic patch 50 mcg/hr
Norco 5 to 6 tablets per day
Xanax 1 mg b.i.d. 
Klonopin 2 mg tablets q.h.s. 
Vistaril 25 mg occasionally 
Soma
Effexor

He gets earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, and has slight hearing loss. Other joints that bother him include his neck, fingers, and occasionally his wrists. He gets electrical “snaps” that occur in his neck and go up into the back of his head. He has almost continuous headaches, and they are there everyday at an average of 8 involving the frontal, temporal, posterior head, and top of the head areas. He rates his TMJ pain on an average day at 5, but the joint pain on occasion can get to a 10. His average daily pain is at 8. He rates his jaw function at 9, diet at 9, and disability at 8. Maximal incisal opening is 25 mm and on opening without severe pain 15 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 5 mm and to the left 3.5 mm. His occlusion is remaining stable, and he has about a 2-mm overbite relationship. He has high moderate to low severe pain over the temporalis muscles, SCMs, posterior neck muscles, masseter muscles, and moderate pain over the TMJs, styloid areas, and milder pain over the medial pterygoid muscles. 

David wanted me to place him on disability. I told him I would not do that, and it should come from Dr. Cohen since he has been treating and managing David for the past year-and-a-half. I told him I would be happy to do a report for Dr. Cohen describing David’s current situation and recommended treatment but that I would not place him on disability. 

Recommended treatment at this time would be as follows:

Surgery, Stage I
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts

Surgery, Stage II
Cervical surgery as indicated to correct any co-existing neck problems

Physical therapy and rehabilitation therapy as necessary

Pain management therapy to wean off of the medications


DAVID POWDERMAKER			11-17-04			Page 2

Radiographic Evaluation

Radiographic evaluation shows the presence of three bone screws in each of the mandibular ramus body areas from the previous sagittal split osteotomies. Also there are bilateral Mitek anchors in the condyles. Condyles don’t look particularly bad on the Panorex but really difficult to assess them. Sinuses look relatively clear. He has all of his teeth except for the third molars. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic. Joint space actually looks fairly good. However, the posterior head of the condyle appears fairly flat. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears somewhat more arthritic than the opposite side. Appears to be an osteophyte developing behind the condyle. Appears to be some significant anterior beaking present on the condyle. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a decreased oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level of about 4 mm. Otherwise the radiograph is fairly unremarkable except for the bone screws in the ramus  on each side of the  mandible. 