NATASHA RAMDHANIE								9/7/05

Natasha is 30 years old, referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich and Dr. Jack Utley.  Natasha was doing very well until about 1999 when her legs and arms began to go numb.  She was diagnosed at that time as having psoriatic arthritis.  She underwent treatment with prednisone, methotrexate and Indocin.  This did seem to help her.  She did weigh about 230 pounds before starting that medication and within 4 months had lost 65 pounds.  She went to a different rheumatologist and this one placed her on Sulindac and methotrexate but this caused her to have bleeding gums, severe GI problems, rapid weight loss and even loss of her hair.  This required hospitalization.  In January of 2005, she began orthodontic treatment with Dr. Jack Utley.  She has since moved to Dallas about 3 weeks ago and is now seeing Dr. Goldreich.  In the past, she has had physical therapy involving pool exercises.  She also has received chiropractic treatment in the past from Dr. Young.

Natasha currently takes the following medications:
Tramadol 50 mg.
Darvocet 100/650.
Hydrocodone 5/500.  She takes 1 of either of these medications at night.  
Valium 5 mg tablets q.h.s.

Natasha has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or hearing loss but does get occasional vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her neck, back, shoulders, elbows, wrists, hands, fingers, hips, knees, ankles, feet and toes.  She does have some problems with her pelvic bone as well.  She has had problems particularly this year where she has had significant left hip problems to the point that she had to be taken by ambulance to the hospital for treatment.  She had a severe reaction to Sulindac and methotrexate as previously described.  She has no known allergies to jewelry.  She has pain down through her arms and hands as well as numbness and tingling in those areas.  She probably has involvement of neck pathology that is creating the neurological factors.  She drinks 1 cup of coffee per day, occasional tea and occasional chocolate.  There is no other apparent family history of joint problems.  Natasha gets headaches in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area at about a level of 9 on the left side and a level of 4 on the right side.  She rates her average daily TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 8, diet at 7, disability at 6.  

In frontal view, Natasha has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 35 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 to 2 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 1 to 2 mm to the left.  Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much aligned with each other.  In profile view, Natasha has fairly good balance with the upper lips, cheeks and nose.  Chin appears retruded.  Chin is retruded by maybe 10 to 12 mm.  Chin-neckline appears to be long.  She has a slight head postured forward neck position.  The chin-neck angle, however, is well defined.  She has a little bit of fullness in the submental area.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.  A little bit of crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has full appliances on all of her teeth.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a little crowding in the upper anterior arch.  She has an anterior open bite of 5 mm.  
NATASHA RAMDHANIE			9/7/05					Page 2


She occludes predominately on the first and second molars with the rest of the teeth pretty much out of occlusion.  She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.  She has an end-on Class II occlusion on the left side and closer to a Class I on the right side.  The oropharynx looks relatively clear.  The uvula is relatively normal in length as is the soft palate.  Faucial pillars look relatively normal.  Natasha has been told that she has fairly severe snoring.  During the daytime she has moderate tiredness.  She is not aware of sleep apnea problems.  She does have a sleep disorder secondary to pain as she does wake up frequently at night.  Intranasally, right turbinate is enlarged.  The nasal septum deviates off towards the left side.  The left turbinate appears more normal in size.  It appears that there may be adequate airway on both sides even with the large turbinate on the right side.  Maxillary transverse occlusal plane is fairly level.  To palpation, she has mild to moderate pain on the temporalis masseters, medial pterygoids, TMJs, shoulders and moderate pain in the styloid areas and high moderate in the left SCM.  Maximal incisal opening is about 31 mm.  Excursive movement is about 7 mm to the right and 6 mm to the left.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  All other teeth are present.  She has a root canal on the right first molars in both the maxilla and mandible.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Left TMJ appears arthritic.  Right joint cannot see it.  

Waters view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The bony septum appears relatively straight.  She appears to have a passable airway.  The sinuses look clear. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows significant osteoarthritic changes with flattening of the condylar head and loss of vertical height.  There appears to be osteophytic formation extending out posterior on the condyle.  Articular eminence has essentially been eroded away.  Decreased joint space anteriorly.  There may be some erosions present in the fossa. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows very similar findings as the left side with significant flattening of the condyle and absence of the articular eminence.  There may be a posterior osteophyte developing off the posterior head of the condyle.  On opening, there is moderate translation of the TMJs with greater translation on the right side as compared to the left side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiographic shows that Natasha has a high occlusal plane angle in the lower arch.  Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat reduced but not real severe.  She occludes only on the first and second molars with all other teeth being out of occlusion.  She has an anterior open bite of about 5 mm.  The lower incisors may be somewhat over-angulated.  Upper incisors actually have fairly good axial inclination.  There does appear to be just a slight tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1.4 mm.  
NATASHA RAMDHANIE			9/7/05					Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ connective tissue autoimmune disease (probable psoriatic arthritis.)
Generalized connective tissue autoimmune disease affecting practically every joint in her body. 
Maxillary hypoplasia.  
Mandibular hypoplasia.
Anterior open bite.
Class II end-on occlusion on the left side and closer to a Class I on the right side.
Accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.
Slightly reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch.
Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Over-angulation of lower incisors.
High occlusal plane angulation. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Blood test, HLA typing to evaluate for genetic markers.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Consider extracting mandibular first bicuspids, maxillary second bicuspids.
Align and level maxillary arch to close the extraction space.  To try to maximize anterior anchorage and lose posterior anchorage so that the upper incisors are minimally retracted.  Tip the lateral incisor roots mesially and cupid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch closing the extraction space and retracting the lower incisors.  Also, slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1.5 mm of tooth structure to correct for the teeth size discrepancy. 
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and down graft it posteriorly.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Consider small augmentation genioplasty. 
5.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 