INAM RAHHAL									02/17/2006

The patient is 43 years old and is referred by Dr. Imad Tamimi.  She apparently is in good health and takes no medication and has no allergies that she is aware of.  Inam began orthodontic treatment in March of 2001 and finished in August of 2002.  On August 25, 2002, she had maxillary and mandibular osteotomies performed.  The outcome was unfavorable and a month later she was taken back to surgery on September 25, 2002, to redo.  The initial surgery was done with wire fixation and the second surgery was done with bone plates in the maxilla and the bone plate in the chin.  An outline of her treatment that Inam prepared is attached to this report. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Neurological problems with sensitivity to the upper lip, numbness in the chin.
Protrusion of the upper jaw.
Asymmetry in the lower right side of the jaw.
Gums showing in the lower jaw when she smiles. 
Osteotomies in the upper jaw were exaggerated and the jaw moved excessively upwards.  
Deviated nasal cartilage off towards the left side and nose looks bigger.
Clicking and crepitus in the jaw joints particularly when eating. 
Limitation of mouth opening. 
Small broken bone remains in the upper right maxilla. 
In general, looks are worse than before treatment.
Inam feels that her lips look old. 

Inam has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing at night or during the day.  She has no problems with headaches.  She has TMJ pain at about a level of 4.  She rates her average daily pain at about a level of 4.  She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 5, disability at 5 relative to jaw function and about 9 or higher with the esthetic result that she has.  She has some altered sensation in all the perioral tissues including the lips, chin, cheeks and nose.  

In frontal view, Inam appears to have excessive fullness of the upper lip.  Nasolabial lines are fairly well obliterated.  The nostrils are flared.  The lower cartilages are flared.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip is at least -3 mm.  Maxillary midline is shifted just slightly off to the right side about 1/2 mm and is close to being on the facial midline.  The chin is a little bit off to the right side probably a couple of mm.  In profile view, she has some problems in the nasal dorsum.  The maxilla appears as though it is protrusive probably 3 to 4 mm.  Facial height actually looks fairly reasonable proportion-wise.  Chin-neckline is a little bit short.  The mandible appears retruded probably by 6 mm or so.  Intraorally, Inam is missing mandibular right second molar with the third molar drifted forward in the second molar position.  On the left side, she is missing the third molar.  A little bit of crowding in the arch.  A little bit of accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship by about 2 mm.  Mandibular dental midline and maxillary dental midline are off by about 2 mm.  Inam has about a 1 to 2 mm overjet relationship and about a 2.5 mm deep bite relationship.  The left first molars are in crossbite but no other teeth.  The oropharynx tissues appear healthy.  The uvula appears normal length.  
INAM RAHHAL				02/17/2006				Page 2

It appears the soft palate may be moderately elongated but the faucial pillars look relatively normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates are relatively normal size.  The nasal septum is deviated severely off towards the left side.  Significantly decreased functional airway in the left side of the nose as compared to the right side.  Inam is not aware of any problems with snoring and has no sleep apnea symptoms. To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, she initially had loud audible multiple clicks and pops in the left joint at about 10 to 15 mm of opening but after that initial exchange I did not hear any further noise.  On the right side, she had consistent popping in the joints around 20 mm of opening and about 10 mm of closing.  When she opens she does deviate off to the left side and it could mean that she may have adhesions on that side or perhaps even a closed lock situation.  Maximal incisal opening is 34 mm.  Opening without much discomfort 15 mm.  Right excursive movements 6 mm and the left 11 mm.  When Inam has her lips relaxed, she shows 9 mm from the lower incisor edge to her lower lip. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the presence of bone plates in the maxilla and bone screws.  She has root canals on the maxillary left first molar, right first bicuspid, root canals and mandibular left first second molar and mandibular right first molar.  There are interosseous wires from the previous sagittal split areas.  The condyles both look arthritic with the left looking worse than the right side.  The sinuses look relatively good but difficult to confirm on this view.

Waters view shows that the septum is deviated significantly off to the left side but the maxillary sinuses are not very clear.  Frontal sinuses and ethmoid sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  She has bone plate in the chin area.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly and superiorly displaced in the fossa with significantly decreased joint space.  Significant arthritis is present in this joint.  There is some anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  Images indicative of arthritis and articular disc dislocation.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows some very unusual architecture in the joints, however, her head may have been tilted superiorly quite a bite at the chin area.  The condyle has an unusual rotation to it.  There is a severely decreased posterior and severe joint space with significant arthritic changes.  Articular eminence appears moderately steep.  On opening, there is significant restricted translation of the left condyle but the right one has better mobility and at least translates out underneath the articular eminence.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the following basic findings:
Vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
AP maxillary excess.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Anterior mandibular vertical excess. 
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway but not too significant.
INAM RAHHAL				02/17/2006				Page 3


Inam reports that she was aware of having clicking and popping before her surgeries but her joints are much worse now than they were before hand. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Vertical maxillary deficiency anteriorly and posteriorly.
AP maxillary excess.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Anterior mandibular vertical excess. 
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Crowding of lower anterior arch.
Accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
TMJ pain. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
MRI of left and right TMJs.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1.5 to 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward.  Be careful not to remove any tooth structure from the left lateral incisor.  The tooth is already small in size as compared to the other incisors.  
     3.   Surgery
	     a.	Bilateral TMJ disc repositioning with Mitek anchors	
     b.    Multiple maxillary osteotomies with bone plate stabilization and hydroxyapatite          grafting
     c.    	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with	 bone screw stabilization
     d.    Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy
     e.    	Removal of previously placed hardware		
                               Maxilla:  Bone plates x 4, Screws x 13
                               Mandible:  Bone plate x 1, Screws x 4, Stainless steel wires x 2
     4.    Post surgical orthodontics to finish and retain

I did talk to Inam about the fact that her joint situation has been present for awhile and that the prognosis is affected by the length of time that her discs have been out of place and the fact that she has had previous orthognathic surgery.  I still believe that she would do fine with disc repositioning though there is a risk it would not hold up and she could require total joint prostheses in the future.  