B111
B111 is 34 years 11 months and 3 weeks of age. She will be 35 next week. B111 is in good health with no major medical problems. Her TMJ problems began when she was about 14 years of age shortly after she got out of orthodontic treatment. B111 had orthodontic treatment from the age of 11 to 13. She believes her TMJ problems began when she was about 14 years old shortly after her appliances were removed. Her jaw has slowly become more retruded. She has had TMJ problems for approximately 20 years. She gets periods times now where her jaw will get stuck where she cannot open it. She has a lot of grinding in her joints and occasionally will have a significant pop. She has no real significant problems with headaches, but she has TMJ pain at a level of 5, average daily pain at 5 predominantly through the jaw muscles, and she rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 6, and disability at 5. She has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus and vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her shoulders, hips, wrists, and fingers. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night. She takes the following medications:

Ibuprofen Zyrtec p.r.n. BCP.
Primary concerns that B111 has include the following:
TMJ pain. Muscle and jaw pain. Difficulties eating and chewing.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In the frontal view, B111 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 5 mm. The maxillary midline is on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline and chin are probably 1 mm off to the left side. In profile view, B111 is probably about 4 mm AP deficient in the maxilla and the chin is retruded about 15 mm. Chin neckline is very short and chin neck angle is not well defined. Intraorally, B111 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has appliances on that reach all the way to the second molars. The teeth appear to be nicely aligned and leveled. She has some lack of attached gingiva around the lower anterior, particularly the left central incisor that is developing a Stillman's cleft in that area. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present and they also appear to be nicely aligned. She has a Class I end-on cuspid relationship that is slightly worse on the left side than the right side. She is probably 3 mm Class III. She has about a 2 mm overjet. She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm. The transverse occlusal plane is fairly level. Oropharyngeal tissues appear normal and healthy. The nasal airway looks fine. Turbinates are mildly to moderately enlarged, but B111 puts no nasal airway obstruction. She also does not snore nor does she have daytime somnolence. She is predominantly a nasal breather at night. She may have a slightly head postured forward neck position. To palpation, B111 has some mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles, but nowhere else to palpation. On opening, she has significant crepitus in both TMJ joints with no evidence of disc reduction. Incisal opening is 50 mm and 35 mm without discomfort. Excursion movements are 10 mm in each direction. B111 finds it difficult to keep her teeth together, but also difficult to open up and hold her mouth open.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and braces on all the rest of the teeth. The sinuses appear relatively clear. Both condyles appear arthritic. Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear, but the inferior turbinates look quite large and appear to constrict the airway. In coronal view, the turbinates likewise appear quite large, although the bony septum is fairly straight. Sinuses are clear. Left TMJ tomograms show that she has advanced arthritis and sclerosis and osteophytic formation on the head of the condyle. She has significant anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Right TMJ tomogram shows also advanced arthritis with significant anterior beaking. There is decreased vertical joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Sclerosis is present on the head of the condyle. Left TMJ coronal view shows that the condyle has fairly good mediolateral width, but advanced arthritis is present. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly fairly significantly, probably 4 to 5 mm. There is significantly decreased joint space and it appears that there is bone-on-bone contact at the lateral rim of the fossa. Right TMJ coronal view also shows advanced arthritic changes and significantly decreased vertical joint space. The lateral pole of the condyle is significantly lower positioned as compared to the medial pole. There is very minimal joint space, and there is bone-on-bone contact between the condyle and the lateral rim of the fossa. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B111 has a retruded maxilla and significantly retruded mandible. She has a high occlusal plane angle. Her oropharyngeal airway is only about 3 mm at the soft palate level and 4 mm at the base of the tongue (normal dimension is 11 mm).

B111's orthodontist is Dr. XXXX.
Basic diagnoses for B111 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis. AP mandibular hypoplasia.
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Class II end-on occlusion. Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3.5 mm (normal 11 mm).
TMJ pain. Difficulties eating and chewing. Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of approximately 1.5 to 2 mm.
Over angulation of the lower incisors.
Lack of attached gingiva in lower anterior arch with development of a Stillman's cleft around the left central incisor.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Periodontal evaluation and grafting to lower anterior arch. Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol). Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward, move the anterior aspect superiorly, and posterior aspect inferiorly to decrease the occlusal plane level.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). Bilateral coronoidotomies with bone plate stabilization. Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

