KARLA RAMIREZ									08/11/2008

Karla is 18 years old and referred by Marco Navarro, DDS, 2501 Cornerstone, Edinburg, TX 78539, telephone #956-972-0013.  Karla is in good health with no major medical problems.  She takes Advil as her only medication.  She had previous orthodontics from the age of 12 to 13 and then she began orthodontics again on May 18, 2007.  She had maxillary second bicuspids and mandibular first bicuspids extracted as well as all four third molars removed.  She has been under orthodontic treatment since that time.  The spaces in the arches are getting close to being closed.  Karla's joint problems began about 2 or 3 years ago of unknown etiology.  The only treatment she has had to date has been orthodontic treatment.  Karla gets headaches 2 to 3 times a week in the temporal areas bilaterally at about a level of 7.  She gets pain in the left TMJ at a level of 3, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 4, diet at 6, and disability at 4. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Karla has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is zero.  Maxillary midline is about 2 mm off to the left side.  The mandibular dental midline is a little bit closer to being on the facial midline as is the chin.  Karla has fairly good balance between her upper lips, cheeks, and nose.  Chin appears retruded and probably 10 to 12 AP deficient.  Chin neckline is a little bit short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids.  She has Class III mechanics on from lower bicuspid to upper first molars.  She has an anterior deep bite of at least 5 to 6 mm.  She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch and a slightly reversed curve of Spee in the upper arch.  She has a full Class II occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues appear normal.  Tonsils are slightly enlarged particularly on the right side.  She does have some mild snoring.  Karla has a Bolton's difference of 2.75 mm.   

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, the maxillary second bicuspids, and lower first bicuspids.   Sinuses look relatively clear.  
Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The turbinates are fairly large and appear to obliterate most of the nasal airway.  Nasal septum is reasonably straight in the bony area.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows that there might be some decreased joint space vertically.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows that there appears to be reasonable joint space present.  The condyle has fairly good morphology and articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II and dental Class II occlusal relationship.  There is a slightly increased occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the soft palate level and closer to 4 mm at the base on the tongue.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, she has some noise in her joints, but it may be the condyles coming out over the articular eminence more so than a disc displacement.  However, it is possible that she may have displaced discs, but make no noises.  Karla has an external nasal deformity with a dorsal hump present.  She would like to have this removed.  Therefore, a rhinoplasty would include:

Removal of the dorsal hump. 
Narrow the transverse width of the nose and the tip of the nose. 
Basic diagnoses would be as follows:    

Probable bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia.  
AP maxillary hypoplasia.  
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Class II occlusion.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of approximately 3..5 to 4 mm (normal 11 mm).
Snoring.
Daytime tiredness.
Missing maxillary second bicuspids, mandibular first bicuspids. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.  
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.
External nasal deformity.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Open at least 1 mm of space between the maxillary laterals and cuspids to help compensate for the significant tooth size discrepancy of 3 mm.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Continue to close up the posterior space, but try to lose posterior anchorage so the lower incisors are not overly retracted.  
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors, if  confirmed that the discs are displaced.    
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward slightly and down graft it posterior as well as correct any transverse discrepancies that may be present.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
External rhinoplasty.
3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.


