ANGIE RAMIREZ								01/28/2011

Angie is 37 years old and referred by Dr. George Adams.   

She has had a previous C-section, nasal septoplasty, and also in high school she got hit in the right side of the jaw and it fractured apparently her cheekbone and she had surgery to repair that.  She does have some residual numbness from that injury.  Angie is not sure exactly when her jaw problems began.  She feels her lower jaw has always been somewhat retruded.  She became aware of having joint problems when she was about 35 (2 years ago), but it has become more severe during the past 6 months.  She gets headaches about 3 times a week at a level in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 7, diet at 7, disability at 3.  She gets earaches occasionally, tinnitus occasionally, and vertigo occasionally.  She has some hearing loss on the left side, but no other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also during the day.  She had orthodontics at the age of 7 to 8 and then again at the age of 15 to 16 at which time she may have worn head gear.  In her adult life, she had orthodontic appliances on from 1994 to 1996, 1999 to 2001 including linguals.  She got her last set of orthodontic appliances on in April 2010.  

She takes the following medications:

Effexor 300 mg q.d.
Motrin 2 tablets 2 to 3 times per day.
Tylenol PM p.r.n. 

She has moderate snoring, moderate daytime somnolence, but is not aware of significant sleep apnea problems.  She is predominantly a mouth breather at nighttime and also during the day. 

On frontal view, Angie has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  The right cheek might be just a little less prominent than the left side.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, the maxilla is probably about 4 mm AP deficient.  The chin is 15 to 18 mm AP deficient.  She has a slight head postured forward neck position.  She has some fullness in the submental area.  Chin neckline is moderately defined.  Intraorally, Angie has got all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  The lower teeth appear slightly over inclined.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Angie has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being probably about 3 mm Class II.  She has small upper lateral incisors.  She has got probably about a 1 to 2 mm over jet.  She has about a 2 mm vertical overbite.  She has had her wisdom teeth removed.  She does have a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being only about 1 mm higher than the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  She does have an elongated uvula.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated significantly off to the right side anteriorly, but a little bit further back in it appears to be a little bit better aligned.  Turbinates are probably moderate in size.  Right nostril is quite constricted.  To palpation, she had mild tenderness over the left masseter, left TMJ, and left retromandibular area.  The maximum opening is 34 mm, opening without pain 22 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 4.5 mm and to the left 8 mm. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars The sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  She appears to have arthritic changes in the joints particularly on the left side.  

Coronal view shows that she has moderately enlarged turbinates.  Sinuses are large and clear.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear with the left sinus significantly larger than the right side probably due to the previous trauma.  In the axial view, the septal cartilage is tipped off towards the right side.  The turbinates are probably moderate in size.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show that she has some advanced arthritis in this joint with anterior beaking and significantly decreased joint space.  There very well could be areas of bony contact.  The articular eminence appears a little bit sclerotic and has a moderate inclination and is somewhat elongated particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is also quite arthritic.  There is significant anterior beaking and degenerative changes with some sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  There is decreased joint space anteriorly between the anterior head of the condyle and the articular eminence.  There appear to be some degenerative changes even in the articular eminence.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination and is elongated.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears degenerated with sclerosis and small cystic formations within the condylar head.  There is significantly decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly only about 2 to 3 mm.  There may be areas of bone-on-bone contact.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is somewhat arthritic.  There are some cystic areas within the condyle.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  The joint space is slightly greater on this side compared to the opposite side.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Angie has got a retruded maxilla and mandible.  The lower incisors are somewhat over angulated.  Oropharyngeal airway is slightly less than 5 mm at the soft palate level and about 7 to 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  The occlusal plane has a moderate inclination.  
Basic diagnoses for Angie would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe deformation and non-salvageable.  
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia. 
AP microgenia.  
Class II end-on occlusion.  
Slight over angulation of lower incisors. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Nasal septum deviated off towards the right side blocking the airway.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Be sure lateral incisor roots 			are tipped mesially and cuspid roots are tipped distally to make room for 			interdental osteotomies. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 			removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.  
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses.  
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a 					counterclockwise direction. 
	c.	Bilateral mandibular coronoidotomies. 
	d.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	e.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy. 
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  