LINDA QUINONES									04-19-04

Linda is 52 years old and referred by William M. Hang, DDS, MSD, 101 N. Westlake Blvd., Ste. 202, Westlake Village, CA  91362.

Patient History

She has had carpal tunnel problems in her hands. She takes vitamins and no other medications. When was 13, she had a traumatic injury to her knee where she fractured her kneecap and cut some of the ligaments. She had surgery for that to repair it, and she really doesn’t have any significant problems with it now. She does have scoliosis. She has one spot in her back that is extremely tender as a result of the scoliosis. She does have some back symptoms, but she takes good care of it, and it doesn’t cause her too much of a problem. Linda’s problems began around the age of 32 years old. Linda believes that the onset may have been caused by the stress of being a divorced single parent and all those responsibilities. She had previous orthodontics from age 20 to 32 that included extraction of two maxillary teeth. She has had acupuncture where she received it two times a week for two months with no improvement. She has been on detoxant herbs without improvement. She was placed on St. John’s Wart high doses for six months with no improvement. She has had chiropractic treatment without improvement. 

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, but does get some vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her neck, upper back, hands, particularly the left, and fingers. She does have scoliosis, and she has carpal tunnel on the right hand. She does have redness around the joints in her fingers. She is aware of nighttime clenching and also during the day. Her snoring is quite significant. She was told that she needed a CPAP machine. She apparently has been told that she snores extremely loudly like a man, a football player. Linda does get daily headaches in the frontal area, behind her eyes, and in the temporal areas that average about a level of 3. They used to go away by mid afternoon. She gets daily TMJ pain at a level of 5, overall daily pains at 5, jaw function at 6, diet at 3, and disability at 5. 

Patient Concerns

Headaches 
TMJ pain
Wakes up exhausted
Severe snoring
Wakes up during the night
Wakes up gasping for air
Face feels frozen in the mornings when she wakes up
On opening in the mornings, she has a lot of cracking and significant noise in her joints
Jaws lock up
Daytime somnolence

Current Medications

The only medications she currently takes is vitamins.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Linda has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Masseter on the right side might be a little bit larger than the left side. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -2. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline.
In profile view, Linda might have some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe about 2 or 3 mm. Chin is retruded by about 12 mm. Chin-neckline is very short, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. As Linda postures her mandible forward about 10 mm, it significantly improves her overall facial profile and balance and actually creates a good chin-neckline. 

Intraorally, Linda has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Lower teeth appear to be slightly overangulated. The lingual labial thickness of the lower incisors appears slightly _______. In the upper arch, she is missing her first bicuspids and does have her cuspids in place. A little bit of a diasthema between the central incisors. She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has about a millimeter of overbite. She has a Class I cuspid, Class II molar occlusal relationship. Linda has had her tonsils removed. Interestingly, on the right side, she has a scar band that tethers the right posterior faucial pillar back toward the posterior pharyngeal wall, decreasing the airway a little bit more than on the opposite side. Otherwise, oropharyngeal tissues look fairly good. 

Intranasally, the turbinates are fairly large. They appear to be creating some blockage of the airway. Right side seems to have more blockage than the left side. Luminal valves are constricted bilaterally. By holding the luminal valves open, Linda could breathe easier through her nose with significant improvement. Linda feels like she is always holding her head up, and she is not sure exactly why, but if she is sitting for a while or in a meeting, she feels that she is using her hands to hold her head up higher. She says her head begins to feel heavy. 

She has no known allergies. She has a lot of problems with jewelry and can only wear gold jewelry. Cheap earrings cause her ears to swell and breakout. Likewise, cheap metal watch bands for instance will cause her arm to become discolored. 

To palpation, she has some mild to moderate tenderness over the SCMs and also over the TMJs. Maximal incisal opening is 52 mm. She could open to about 40 mm without too much pain and discomfort at this moment. She can move 11 mm in each direction. However, there are times when she gets locked up where she can’t open and can’t eat. 

On opening, she has significant audible popping in both joints with the left side being louder than the right side. Opening click on the left side occurs somewhere between 35 and 40 mm of opening with a closing click at probably about 15. On the right side, the click is a little bit softer and occurs after the left at probably about 40 to 45 mm of opening with a closing click at about 15. When Linda clenches, she gets significantly more activity in the right masseter muscle and temporal muscle than she does on the left side. She does have hypertrophy of the right masseter muscle and temporalis muscle greater than on the left side.

Radiographic Evaluation

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good form with some sclerosis on the head of it. It is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. Perhaps a slight decreased posterior and posterosuperior joint space. 

Left TMJ  tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have some anterior beaking. Appears to be a little bit more arthritic. A little hard to see the cortical bone in these views. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. Maybe a slightly decreased joint space posteriorly and superiorly in one of the views. 

Open view shows good translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows she holds her head tipped up some. Oropharyngeal airway at least in the soft palate area appears decreased to about 3 mm. At the base of the tongue, the airway is closer to 7 to 8 mm. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are fairly clear. Turbinates are moderately large. Clear airway is not really identifiable. Not much of a right frontal sinus but a large left frontal sinus. Midlines appear fairly well-aligned. 

Panorex radiograph shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Nasal airway actually appears fairly good. She is missing upper first bicuspids. However, it could be cuspids and will determine that when we do our clinical exam. Is missing all four third molars. Condyles appear on these views to be okay. No other pathology noted. 

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
High occlusal plane angulation of 16 degrees (normal 8 degrees)
Missing maxillary first bicuspids
Hypertrophied masseter muscles with the right larger than the left
Hypertrophied temporal muscles with the right larger than the left
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with 3 mm at the soft palate level (normal 11 mm)
Hypertrophied turbinates
Constricture of the nasal luminal valves
Nasal airway obstruction
External nasal deformity
Sleep apnea syndrome
Severe snoring
Daytime somnolence

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anteriors to decrease the slight overangulation and to help us provide a better anterior fit particularly following the closure of the maxillary diasthema between the central incisors

Possibly repeat the sleep study

Consider Botox injections to masseter muscles and temporalis muscles with greater injections on the right side as compared to the left side to try to decrease the hyperfunction and hypertrophy of these muscles

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction and decrease the occlusal plane angulation
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it posteriorly
Partial inferior turbinectomies
Reconstruct nasal luminal valves
External rhinoplasty

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 


Review of static films agrees with our previous interpretation. In the coronal views, in both joints she has arthritis, and both discs appear to be anteriorly and laterally displaced. 

MRI

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows significant erosions on the head of the condyle. Osteophytic projection out anterior to the condyle toward the lateral aspect of the joint. More medially, the condyle has a little bit better shape, and anterior beaking is present there. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There appears to be decreased anterior joint space particularly out laterally and decreased vertical joint space as well as posterior joint space. Not much disc is seen medially. Appears to be more evidence of disc out laterally compatible with lateral displacement to the articular disc. On the T2 films, there is really no inflammation in the joint and no fluid in the joint spaces. Arthritic changes on the condylar head are quite apparent. Discal tissue is much more evident out laterally than it is in the medial aspect of the joint. 

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle, and the disc appears to be reduced in the open view. 

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with arthritis changes but not quite as severe as the opposite side. Out laterally there appears to be a lot of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Decreased posterior and superior joint spaces are present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The disc is quite evident at the most lateral aspect of the condyle and best seen in that position. More medially there is no evidence of disc tissue. Out laterally, the disc is anteriorly displaced. These findings could be compatible with lateral displacement of the articular disc. 

On opening, there is not quite as good translation on this side as the opposite side. It appears that the disc may reduce. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space.

Impression:

Left TMJ significant arthritis with articular disc anterolaterally displaced but reducing on opening
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly and medially displaced with reduction on opening


