GABRIELA QUINTERO							06/01/2011

Gabby is 14 years old, birth date 01/26/1997.  Her orthodontist is Dr. Rogelio Zambrano Margain, DDS, Avenue San Pedro 211 NTE, Col Del Valle, San Pedro Garza Garcia, N.L. Mexico 66220.

Gabriela has been in orthodontic treatment since August 2006.  The main emphasis of the orthodontics has been to align and level the arches.  Gabby has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain nor myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 0.  She takes no medications.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  The other joints that bother her are her neck and back occasionally.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  

In frontal view, Gabby has very good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  The left eye is just slightly higher by 1 to 2 mm than the right one.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin and the lower front teeth.  The nasal tip may be just 1 to 2 mm off to the right side.  In profile view, the upper lip may be retruded just maybe 2 to 3 mm and chin is retruded about 8 to 10 mm.  The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is relatively well defined.  As Gabriela postures her mandible forward into a normal overjet over bite relationship, it significantly improves her facial balance.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present with the second molars only partially erupted.  The distal part is still covered in soft tissue.  She has buildups on the first molars.  The mandibular left cuspid is in lingual inclination and trapped over to the first bicuspid.  She has no lower arch wire at this time.  She does have a transverse cant in the occlusion with the left cuspid being probably 2 mm higher than the left cuspid.  She has basically a Class II cuspid relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of almost 8 mm.  The mandibular left first bicuspid is almost 1 mm wider than the right first bicuspid.  Gabby has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  The incisal opening is 55 mm and excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of impacted mandibular third molars and maxillary right deformed third molar.  There is calcification between the mandibular first and second bicuspids.  She is missing the maxillary left third molar.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight.  Turbinates are mildly enlarged.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Axial view shows that the turbinates are little bit enlarged, but the septum is straight and the sinuses appear clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have reasonably good morphology.  The joint space is fairly well balance.  The articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology with just some slight anterior beaking.  The joint space looks fairly well balanced.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good morphology.  Joint space may be slightly narrowed.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that seems to have fairly good joint space between it and the fossa.  There is slight decreased medial joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly only about 1 to 2 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some slight AP and posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia and significant AP mandibular hypoplasia.  She has adenoid tissue in the nasopharyngeal area.  The oropharyngeal airway measures only about 3 mm at the soft palate level and also at the base of the tongue.  There appears to be a tooth size discrepancy in the bicuspid area with the lower bicuspids being relatively larger than the upper bicuspids.  This tooth may be able to be slenderized to make them more compatible with the rest of the arch.  She does have an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.  The upper arch is fairly flat.  In the lower arch, the vertical discrepancy is probably 3 to 4 mm.  She has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of about 2 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Gabby would be as follows:

Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
AP and vertical microgenia.
Impacted mandibular third molars and maxillary right third molar.
Partial soft tissue impaction of mandibular left and right second molars.
Lingual position of mandibular left cuspid.
Lingual inclination of mandibular bicuspids and first molars.
Class II cuspid molar relationship with an anterior deep bite of approximately 8 mm.  
Tooth size discrepancy in the bicuspid area with the lower bicuspids being at least 0.5 mm larger than the upper bicuspids and with the left first bicuspids being at least 1 mm larger in size.
Tooth size discrepancy of lower anterior arch with the lower teeth being 2 mm larger in size to be compatible with the upper anterior teeth.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Remove soft tissue overlying the second molars.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Correct slight malrotations of 			the cuspids. 
	b.	Increase height of turbos on the first molars to open the bite more.
	c.	Expand the lower arch by removing the first molars and bicuspids labially.
	d.	Begin moving left cuspid into the arch.
	e.	Slenderize lower bicuspids removing at least 0.5 mm of tooth structure 			from the second bicuspids and right first bicuspid and remove 1 mm of tooth 			structure from the left first bicuspid. 
	f.	Slenderize the lower anterior six teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure.
	g.	Align and level the mandibular arch.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a clockwise 			direction.
	b.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the chin and 
                        lengthen it vertically.
	c.	Removal of impacted third molars x3.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  