CHANEL RAFIE							07/25/2007

Chanel is 17 years old, referred by Dr. Allen Gandy, 8756 Teel Parkway, Ste. 336, Frisco, TX 75034.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Crossbites.
TMJ problems. 

She desires to have a straight bite and the underbite corrected and have her teeth fit together properly.  Chanel does have some facial asymmetry involving particularly the mandible.  This has gotten a little more prominent as she has gotten older. 

In frontal view she has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is 17 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 to 2 mm.  Maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline is probably about 4 to 5 mm off to the right and chin is probably about 6 to 7 mm off to the right side.  In profile view, Chanel has some deficiency in the maxillary projection probably about at least 5 to 6 mm.  The chin appears to be in fairly good AP balance.  The upper lip filled out and the chin actually appears to have fairly good AP balance.  Chin-neckline and chin-neck angle appear fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Chanel has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth appear fairly well aligned and level.  The right cuspid appears to be about 3 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch Chanel has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch the right cuspid is about 1 mm posterior to the left cuspids.  Intraorally, Chanel has a full Class III occlusion the left side of about 7 mm, on the right side it side it is about 5 mm.  She has a 1 mm vertical overbite anteriorly.  She has an anterior in the right posterior crossbite.  There appears to be a posterior yaw in both the maxilla and mandible of probably around 2 to 3 mm off towards the left side.  The uvula, soft palate, faucial pillars and tonsils appear relatively normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear mild to moderately enlarged.  The septum appears fairly normal though it may be slightly deviated to the left.  There may be just some mild nasal airway obstruction.  She may have some mild snoring.  No daytime somnolence except when she stays up until 4 in the morning studying.  No history of sleep apnea and no sleep disorder.  Of interest is that Chanel's mother had a similar kind of jaw deformity.  Her lower jaw was set backwards 13 mm on one side and 11 mm on the other side plus she apparently had a chin reduction performed as well.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, she has subluxation of the condyles particularly on the right side and upon closing there is a definite click in the left joint of probably about 25 to 30 mm.  On the right side there also could be a click but not as discernible as the left side.  Maximal incisal opening is about 55 mm.  Excursive movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows that she has 4 developing third molars with the uppers impacted and the lowers may be partially erupted or soon to erupt but not enough room for them to erupt completely.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  The condylar heads and necks appear elongated. 







 CHANEL RAFIE		07/26/2007				Page 2
 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Some increased anterior joint space compatible with anteriorly dislocated disc.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  The articular eminence is moderately steep and there is increased anterior joint space.  On opening there is good translation of both joints.

Waters view shows that the bony septum is at least relatively straight.  The turbinates appear fairly large and appear to obliterate most of the nasal airway.  Sinuses are clear.  Frontal sinuses are fairly large.   

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral condylar hyperplasia being worse on the left side.
Bilateral TMJ medial displacement of the articular disc. 
Deviated mandibular prognathism. 
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Class III occlusion being worse on the left side as compared to right side. 
Anterior and right posterior crossbite.
Impacted third molars x4.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction. 
 External nasal deformity.
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.  

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Open a slight space between the upper lateral incisor and cuspid to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy.  The space does not need to be more than about ½ mm.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Continue to align and level the mandibular arch.
Assess to determine if active condylar hyperplasia is still present. 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies (if condylar hyperplasia is confirmed) and articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible back on the facial midline and level it transversely. 
Maxillary osteotomies to advance it about 5 to 6 mm. and level it transversely. 
Bilateral inferior turbinectomies.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Consider vertical reduction genioplasty.
Consider external rhinoplasty. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.


