CRISTOBAL RAMIREZ								05/09/2008

Cris is 15 years old, referred by Dr. Marco Navarro.  Cris is under orthodontic treatment with Dr. John Gerling, 4900 N. 10th Street, McAllen, Texas 78504, but Cris was referred to us by Dr. Marco Navarro.  His office is in McAllen, Texas.  Primary concerns that Cris has is that his bite is not right.  Cris has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  Jaws function relatively well.  He has no facial numbness or nerve deficits. 
CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Cris has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm on the left, 4 mm on the right.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline maybe about 1 mm off towards to the right.  Chin may be about 2 mm off  to the right.  Cris has some slight increased facial fullness on the left-hand side.  In profile view, Cris has some AP maxillary deficiency of 5 mm and chin appears retruded by 15 to 18 mm.  Chin neckline is quite shorter, though the chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  The lower third face appears somewhat elongated.  Intraorally, Cris has all of his lower teeth back through his second molars erupted and banded.   He has got a third molar on the left side, but the right side is not evident.  Occlusion and teeth appear fairly well aligned and level.  He has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars present.  He has a  Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by probably about 3 mm and on the left side it is probably 5 to 6 mm Class III.  He has an anterior open bite of 2 mm.  The mandibular left cuspid appears to be about 2 mm more anterior than the right cuspid in the lower arch.  However, the maxillary occlusal plane is fairly level.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Uvula is moderately enlarged.  His soft palate may be moderately elongated particularly at the posterior fascial pillar area.  The fascial pillars appear fairly constricted.  The tonsils are moderately enlarged, but non-inflamed. He is predominantly a nasal breather particularly when he sleeps.  He does have some mild snoring.  He does not have any real significant daytime somnolence.  He is not aware of any sleep apnea issues.  Cris has smooth jaw function.  No tenderness around the head and neck area to palpation.  Maximal incisal opening is 62 mm.  Excursion movements are about 5 mm in each direction.   Nasal examination shows that Cris has an enlarged turbinate on the left side, but the right side appears relatively normal.  The septum appears normal.  He has an extremely wide columella and narrow nostrils. Luminal valves inside, however, look okay.  Opening up the nostrils improved his airway particularly on the right side, but to a lesser extent on the left side. 
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars. The rest of the teeth are present.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  
Waters view shows that the nasal septum is fairly straight.  Left turbinate appears quite enlarged.  The right one looks small.  The sinuses appear clear.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have reasonably good morphology.  Joint space is thin, but the fact that there are no TMJ symptoms the disc is likely in place but thin.  Articular eminence normal in inclination.  
Left TMJ tomogram is more difficult to evaluate.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space is more difficult to identify.  The condylar neck appears a little bit longer in length than the opposite side.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Cris has a high occlusal plane angle, occlusal Class III skeletal, closer Class 1 kind of jaw relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal.  
Basic diagnoses for Cris would be as follows:
Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia with greater growth on the left side as compared to the right side.
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Vertical maxillary excess. 
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Class III end-on occlusion, being worse on the left side.  
High occlusal plane angle.
Anterior open bite.
Impacted third molars x4. 
Hypertrophied left nasal turbinate.
Extremely wide columella with significant constricture of the nostrils.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:	
 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisors roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Continue to align and level the mandibular arch.  
Evaluate growth to confirm the presence or absence of active condylar hyperplasia.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies to eliminate the disproportionate growth with articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchors.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, decrease occlusal plane angle, and correct the transverse discrepancy. 
Left nasal partial turbinectomy.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to vertically reduce and AP augment the chin.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4. 
Reconstruction of the columella. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.