ANDREA QUIROS 								10/28/2011

Andrea is 20 years old, birth date 11/08/1990.  She was referred by Dr. Oscar Reiche and Dr. Ronald Delacruz.  Andrea’s TMJ problems began in about 2008 following the orthognathic surgery.  She did see a TMJ specialist who gave her some exercises and some vitamins, but this did not improve her situation.  She has had no further treatment.  She gets headaches about every 2 weeks at about a level of 4 in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 7, diet at 4, disability at 3.  She has no problems with earaches.  She did have some tinnitus 3 weeks ago, but that has gone away.  She has no vertigo but may have some slight hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her neck that she injured in an accident and her lower back bothers her.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at nighttime and also during the day.  Andrea says she has some mild snoring and moderate daytime somnolence.  She does not claim any sleep apnea.  She breathes her mouth at nighttime and also during the day.  

In frontal view, Andrea has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2-1/2 mm but the maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, she has fairly good balance with the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  Chin appears a little AP deficient of probably 6 to 8 mm.  Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids, but the rest of her teeth appear fairly well aligned and level.  She has pretty thin attached gingiva around the lower incisors and has a little bit of gingival stripping.  In the upper arch, she is missing the upper lateral incisors and has cuspids in the lateral incisor position.  Andrea has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being approximately 3 to 4 mm Class II.  She has about a 1 mm vertical overbite and she has got about a 3 to 4 mm over jet.  Her bite relationship has been getting progressively worse.  After the orthodontics and orthognathic surgery, her bite fit together fairly well.  To palpation, she has mild to moderate tenderness over the TMJs and mild tenderness over the masseters, retromandibular area, shoulders, and left medial pterygoid.  On opening, the functions reasonably smoothly with an occasional click in the right joint.  The maximal incisal opening is 45 mm, opening without pain 29 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 8 mm and to the left 9 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and maxillary lateral incisors.  In the mandibular arch, third molars are absent as well as the first bicuspids.  She has four screws in each ramus from the previous sagittal split osteotomies.  She has significant arthritic changes in her temporomandibular joints.  The turbinates appear enlarged, although the septum appears reasonably straight.  The sinuses appear clear.  

Coronal view shows in this cut that the septum is reasonably straight.  Turbinates are quite enlarged but the sinuses are relatively clear.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear, but turbinates are quite large and bulbous.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone resorption.  There is significant anterior beaking present.  There is decreased vertical and anterior joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate slope.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant condylar resorption.  There is a large anterior beak present similar to the opposite side.  There is decreased vertical and anterior joint space.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant resorption.  There are a lot of degenerative changes in the head of the condyle.  There is decreased vertical and lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that lost considerable volume vertically.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  there appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact at the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is about 8 mm and at the base of the tongue is about 8 mm.  She has almost a 4 mm over jet relationship.  

Basic diagnoses for Andrea would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation and condylar resorption compatible with adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR).  
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
TMJ pain.
Missing maxillary lateral incisors and mandibular first bicuspids.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Rotate the distal aspect of the cuspids 			labially.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgical Treatment Option 1:
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
	Surgical Treatment Option 2.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses.  
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  