AMANDA RACZ									02/15/2008

Amanda is 13 years old and a self-referral.  She has a history of asthma and uses a ProAir HFA inhaler and albuterol.  She has had an adverse reaction to amoxicillin.  According to Amanda, her jaw problems began in about June 2007 when she developed some clicking noises in her jaw joints of unknown etiology.  She began orthodontic treatment in August 2004 and the braces were removed in September 2007.  Earlier in the orthodontic treatment, she  had expanders in both the upper and lower jaw, but did not receive her full braces until she was 11 ½ years old.  She does have retainers. She has had no other treatment for her TMJ issues.  

Amanda gets daily headaches about a level of a 6 on the right side and perhaps a level of 4 on the left side in the frontal, temporal, and top of the head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 4, diet at 5, disability at 2.  She gets earaches, right side worse than the left side, occasional tinnitus, occasional vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  Primary concerns that Amanda has would include the following:

	1.	Jaw joint pain.
	2.	Headaches.
	3.	Difficulties eating and chewing.
	4.	Difficulties breathing through the nose.
	
CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  Amanda does have some dark circles beneath her eyes.  Upper lip length is 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 3 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Amanda has a head postured forward neck position.  Maxillas are retruded by probably 5-6 mm and chin is retruded by at least 12 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, Amanda has all of her teeth back to the second molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars.  She has a slight Class II occlusal tendency and about a 2-mm overjet.  She has about 0.5 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look relatively normal.  Tonsils are moderately enlarged.  In the past, she has had trouble with strep throat, getting it at least twice a year, but she has not had it for about 2 years.  Amanda may have some mild snoring problems, but nothing real significant.  She apparently has some moderate daytime tiredness that she feels has been getting worse more recently.  She is not aware of sleep apnea problems.  She has some mild tenderness of the temporalis muscles, masseters, medial pterygoids, styloid areas, and slightly higher with TMJs.  Joints seem to function reasonably smooth on opening, but on excursion she had a glitch in the right joint.  On opening, the mandible does deviate significantly probably 3-4 mm to the left side.  Maximal opening is 45 mm, opening without significant discomfort 35 mm.  Excursion movements to the left 8 mm, to the right 9 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four developing third molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  Difficult to evaluate the joints.  Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Nasal septum is reasonably straight.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone some resorption.  There is flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of peaking on the top of condyle.  Articular eminence is moderately steep and somewhat elongated.  The joint space looks fairly well balanced.  Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit of flattening on the anterior and it appears it has lost some volume.  There may be some decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is moderate translation of both joints.  Lateral cephalometric radiographic shows that she has a rotated maxilla and mandible.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  There is some adenoid tissue still in the nasopharynx.  Tonsils are moderately enlarged.  However, the oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good.  She has a skeletal Class II and slight occlusal Class II occlusal relationship with about a zero overbite and about 2 mm overjet.  

The basic diagnoses would be as follows:

1.	Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption.
2.	AP maxillary deficiency.  
3.	Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
4.  	AP mandibular deficiency.
5.	Slight Class II malocclusion. 
6.	TMJ pain.
7.	Headaches.
8.  	Hypertrophied turbinates.
9.	Nasal airway obstruction.
10.	Impacted third molars x4.
11.	Nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue, but probably not causing a significant airway problem.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

	1.  	Presurgical orthodontics.
a.  Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots medially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
b.  Align and level mandibular arch.  
	2.  	Surgery.
a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.  
b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and down graft it posteriorly.  
b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
d.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
e.  Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4. 
f.  Consider possible reduction of the nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue.
3.  	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.