JASON RASCO								05/09/2011

Jason is 20 years old.  Birth date is 0723/1990.  Referred by Dr. Brian Pruitt, Dallas, TX.  Jason has never seen Dr. Pruitt, but Dr. Pruitt gave him my name. 

On 02/19/2011 at a school function, a confetti cannon went off and apparently the end of the PVC pipe cannon shot off and hit Jason in the left side of the mandible fracturing his jaw in several places.  It caused fairly large lacerations as well as the multiple fractures and also fractured some teeth.  On 02/21/2011, Jason was taken to the operating room and arch bars were placed.  The surgeons elected not to proceed on any further with the surgery because of some significant swelling of the tongue.  Jason remained intubated and was taken back to surgery on 02/25/2011 where intramaxillary fixation was placed and the fractures reduced and a large bone plate placed on the left side of the mandible.  Jason’s postoperative hospital course was confounded with complications, and he was hospitalized for a total of 51 days.  He got an infection apparently twice of C. difficile.  He had a PIC line in that at one time may have gotten infected.  Jason’s overall condition is complicated with the presence of an immune deficiency problem of A gamma  globulin anemia.  In addition, he continues to have some difficulties with pancreatitis that is an additional complication from the surgery.  In the morning, Jason’s bite generally fits together fairly well, but then during the day the mandible tends to shift towards the right side and his occlusion shifts and changes.  Currently, Jason has no problems with headaches, rates pain in his left TMJ when opening at about a level of 5 with no pain on the right side.  He has no other pain problems around the head and neck area.  He rates his jaw function at 4, diet at 3, disability at 5.  He has some numbness in the lower left lip and chin area.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxing day or night.  

In frontal view, Jason has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  He has a little bit more fullness vertically in the left side which may be some residual swelling.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is probably about zero.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is off to the left side about 2 mm.  The chin may be just slightly to the left about 2 mm.  In profile, he has fairly good facial balance.  Intraorally, Jason has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present.  He has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars, but he has got fractured teeth on the right side including half the crown on the central incisor is missing and most of the entire crowns of the lateral incisor and cuspid.  When he bites in centric relation, his teeth actually line up fairly well as does his chin.  He has about 2.5 mm vertical over bite and basically a Class I cuspid relationship.  He has a posterior cross bite on the right side extending probably from the cuspid all the way back through the second molar.  When Jason closes, he tends to hit his incisors first and the right posterior teeth come together, but he does not feel that the left teeth touch.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  He has a bone plate in the left mandible extending from the distal of the first molar forward to the distal of the lateral incisor with six hole plate and three screws in each side.  He does have fractured crowns of the maxillary right central incisor, lateral incisor, and cuspid.  The rest of the teeth appear to be intact.  The sinuses look reasonably healthy.  The condyle appears somewhat broad in an anteroposterior dimension.  The mandibular fractures appear to be healing very well.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he appears to have a skeletal Class I occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 to 7 mm at the soft palate level and 6 to 7 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear and appear healthy.  The septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side back in the bony area.  The right turbinate is quite large with the left one being relatively normal. 

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the right turbinate is quite large compared to the left side, although the septum appears reasonably straight.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with some anterior beaking and increased vertical joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with some anterior beaking.  The articular eminence is fairly steep.  There is increased vertical joint space present.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width.  There may be some osseous changes on the head of the condyle.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  Vertical joint space looks perhaps slightly excessive.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is flat across the top.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  There appears to be some increased vertical joint dimension.  

Dental model analysis shows that there are some fractured crowns on the mandibular left first and second molars.  Jason has had previous orthodontics from the age of 12 to 14.  Jason did have HBO treatment while in the hospital and had 15 dives.  He does have PE tubes in both ears currently.  These were placed for the HBO treatments.  On coronal x-rays of the left TMJ, it appears that there is a decreased medial joint space, but also a decreased lateral joint space as well.  

The doctors will include Chadwick Sargent, DDS, 4702 67th Street, Lubbock, TX 79414, phone #806-797-4455.  His general dentist is Dr. Jane Estes Tindol Weatherbee, 1809 Pine Street, Abilene, TX 79601, telephone #325-677-2645.  The other person is Dr. Robert Sugerman at Medical City Hospital; he is an immunologist.  

Basic diagnoses for Jason would be as follows:

Previous multiple fractures to the mandible sustained 02/19/2011.
Malunion of mandibular fractures. 
Mandibular transverse hyperplasia. 
Right-sided posterior cross bite.
Fractured teeth that include maxillary right central incisor, lateral incisor, cuspid, second bicuspid, mandibular right second bicuspid, maxillary left first and second bicuspids, first molar, and mandibular left first and second molars. 
Residual PE tubes bilaterally in tympanic membranes.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Temporary restorations as necessary to repair fractured teeth and anterior 	aesthetics including possible endodontics on the right maxillary lateral incisor and 	cuspid. 
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Place appliances on maxillary arch and align and level the teeth.
	b.	Place appliances on mandibular arch and level and the teeth.
3.	Surgery.  
	a.	Right mandibular sagittal split osteotomy.
	b.	Left mandibular parasymphysis osteotomy between the right central 			incisor and lateral incisor to narrow the right posterior mandible.  
	c.	Removal of PE tubes from ears.  
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
5.	Restorative dentistry to reconstruct the dental arches.  
