KAYLA RANEY									06/27/2007

Kayla is 17 years old, referred by Dr. Devek Frech, Wichita Falls.  She has had tubes inserted in her ears and she has had her adenoids removed in 1996.  Otherwise, she is in good health.  She takes no medications.  When Kayla was 9 years old she was under a waterfall and water hit her jaws and made her jaws ache and she had some clicking.  Otherwise, she occasionally gets some clicking in her jaw joints.  She does have some soreness she points to in the masseter muscle area.  Three years ago Kayla was hit in the mouth with a softball and actually posteriorly displaced her front teeth.  Kayla just got her braces on about 3 weeks ago.  Kayla has some significant daytime somnolence.  When she can she will take a nap for 3 to 4 hours during the day.

PRIMARY CONCERNS: 
Jaw and teeth malalignment. 
Pain and discomfort in the jaw area.

Kayla gives a history of clenching her teeth at nighttime and she sometimes does that during the day as well.

In frontal view, Kayla has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  There may be a little bit more prominence on the left side as compared to the right side but not too significant.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 6 mm.  Maxillary midline and mandibular dental midline as well as chin are fairly well aligned on the facial midline.  The nasal tip is deviated a little bit off towards the left side out 2 mm.  

In profile view, Kayla has an obtuse nasal labial angle.  Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by about probably 2 to 3 mm.  Maxilla is retruded by probably 5 to 6 mm.  Chin is retruded by approximately 18 mm.  Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Kayla has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  The lower incisors appear flared out.  Bicuspids appear transversely constricted.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  Her incisors are posterior to the lateral incisors.  She has a Class II division II malocclusion.  She is almost a full Class II.  She has about a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Transverse occlusal plane is fairly level.  The left ear may be down 2 to 3 mm compared to the right side and the right eye may be elevated perhaps a couple of mm compared to the opposite side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  The uvula may be mildly elongated but soft palate looks relatively normal.  Faucial pillars may be mildly constricted.  Tonsils appear relatively normal in size.  When Kayla sleeps, she is aware of breathing through her mouth.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated down off towards the right side.  Turbinates are mildly enlarged particularly on the left side though the airway is a little bit better on the left side than the right side because of the deviated septum.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the masseters, right TMJ and styloid areas.  Left TMJ is not particularly tender to palpation.  On opening she has a click in the left TMJ at 15 mm and closing click of probably 5 to 10 mm.  The right joint seems to function reasonably smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 57 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is 8 mm, left 9 mm.

KAYLA RANEY				06/27/2007				Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of 4 third molars that are unerupted.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  Both condyles appear somewhat arthritic in nature.  Tooth size discrepancy shows that there is a Bolton's difference of 3.5 mm.  

Waters view shows that the bony septum is at least reasonably straight.  Turbinate on the left side is quite large and it appears to obliterate most of the nasal airway.  On the left side, the turbinate appears relatively normal in size and there appears to be a passable airway.  Sinuses appear clear.  Frontal sinus is fairly large.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is flattened along the posterior head.  There appears to be reasonably good joint space surrounding it with a good posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows there is actually what appears to be increased vertical joint space.  Condyle appears a little bit more arthritic on this side.  It appears there may be some loss of vertical volume.  There is some anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is moderate in angulation.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Kayla has some anterior vertical maxillary excess, posterior vertical maxillary deficiency, AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency as well as a skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship.  She has a significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of only 5 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue in one area it is only about 2 to 3 mm wide.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations. 
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Severe crowding in lower anterior arch.
Mild crowding of upper anterior arch.
 Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Nasal airway obstruction.
 Impacted third molars x4.
 High occlusal plane angulation.
 Myofascial pain. 
 TMJ pain.
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3.5 mm.

KAYLA RANEY 				06/27/2007				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
MRI of left and right TMJs. 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Try to expand the bicuspid areas.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to expand the bicuspid areas.  Slenderize the anterior teeth removing 3 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the significant tooth size discrepancy and help keep the lower incisors from being flared too far forward.  Slenderize the first and second bicuspids as well because of the tooth size discrepancy in that area.  This should help minimize the forward tipping of the lower incisors.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the mandible superiorly and advance it decreasing the occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Surgery removal of impacted third molars x4.
Augmentation genioplasty.

This should get Kayla the best possible outcome.  I will need to wait until we get the MRI so that we can finalize the treatment plan for her.

