DANIELLE RAY									06-30-04

Danielle is 16 years old and referred by Dr. Tom Pitts, 4786 Coughlin Parkway, Reno, NV  89506.

Patient History

Danielle has rare but occasional panic attacks and tachycardia. She has had her wisdom teeth removed and has had physical therapy for TMJ problems. She has been evaluated by Dr. Charles McNeill at UCSF Dental School, San Francisco, and Dr. Peter Chase, University of Pacific Dental School. She has had bicuspids extracted. She has been diagnosed with having anteriorly displaced articular discs and flattened condyles. Otherwise, Danielle is in good health. She takes minocycline 100 mg two times a day. She has had an adverse reaction to SULFA oral medications.

Danielle’s problems began about three years ago of unknown etiology. She did have orthodontic treatment that began about the age of 8 to 10 where she wore headgear on and off for about two years. She then switched orthodontists and was under treatment from about the age of 11 to 15. At the beginning of that round, she had two upper first bicuspids extracted and left the lowers in. They have not ever been able to get her bite to fit together. She has had physical therapy for the past nine months that included total body balancing and manipulations, and then she also had TMJ specific physical therapy. She also has been through Crozat splint treatment to try to recapture her articular discs. For the last three months, she has had an orthotic device. She has problems now with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, and has vertigo problems that used to be quite prevalent of a problem about a year ago. Other joints that bother her include her right wrist that she previously fractured, and her ankles are bothersome. She does have an allergy to SULFA but no known allergies to jewelry. She feels that she does probably have some nocturnal clenching. She used to get quite frequent headaches but now since she has gotten her orthotic they occur only about once a week. They used to occur three times per day. She rates her headaches at a level of 8 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area bilaterally. She rates her TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 5, diet at 7, and disability at 4.

When Danielle was born, she apparently had a form of cervical rotation that was abnormal. She eventually has grown out of it pretty much but will still occasionally when she gets tired rotate her head off to one side. 

Patient Concerns

TMJ problems
Teeth don’t fit together very well
Difficulties eating and chewing
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Difficulties sleeping and has been told she has insomnia
Snoring
Predominantly a mouth breather when sleeping

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Danielle has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is almost 4 mm. She has a little bit more fullness on the right side of the face than the left side by probably about 4 mm. Maxillary dental midline is about a millimeter off to the left. Mandibular dental midline is about a millimeter off to the right. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly well-aligned with each other. 
In profile view, the maxilla is retruded by probably about 4 mm. Chin appears retruded at least 15 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short. She has a lot of fullness in the submental area. Lower third face appears elongated. She had an obtuse nasolabial angle. She has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip. She has a high mandibular plane angle. She has some hyperfunction of the mentalis muscle. 

Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has a 2x2 retainer in the lower anterior arch. A little bit of crowding in the lower anterior arch. She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. Lower anterior teeth appear a little bit overangulated. In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids. She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship bilaterally being slightly Class II perhaps on the left side. The right cuspid appears to be about a millimeter lower than the left cuspid. Ears are a little bit different in vertical height with the left one being probably about 3 mm higher than the right one. Oropharynx appears clear. 

Intranasally, the septum appears fairly straight, but she does have hypertrophied turbinates and what appears to be decreased oropharyngeal airway. Turbinates appear a little bit inflamed. Intraorally, she has about 1 mm of overbite relationship. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, styloid areas, and milder pain over the medial pterygoids, SCMs, posterior neck, and shoulder area. As she opens, she has a shift in the mandible toward the left side of about 2 to 3 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses are clear. Missing all four third molars and the maxillary first bicuspids. A little bit of foreshortening of some of the roots. Condyle appears a little flattened on the left side but appear larger than the condyle on the right side which appears a little bit small. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears quite small anteroposteriorly and appears to have lost vertical dimension and overall volume. Articular eminence is moderately steep but not very long in length. Appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has obviously lost vertical dimension. It is quite broad anteroposteriorly and appears to have some significant anterior beaking, almost osteophytic formation, out front. Articular eminence is quite a bit more shallow on this side, and there is decreased posterior, superior, and anterior joint space. This condyle appears to quite arthritic. 

On opening, there is good translation of the right condyle that is much greater than the left condyle. There is some cratering out of the left condyle, and again the condyle appears quite broad compared to the right side. There is decreased joint space superiorly between the condyle and articular eminence. The left eminence is significantly flatter than the right eminence.

Waters view shows that the turbinates are fairly large, and at least the left side appears almost totally obliterated. Sinuses appear relatively clear. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a very high occlusal plane angle. Appears to have loss of vertical height of the condyles, and, therefore, a high mandibular plane angle as well. Appears to be a skeletal Class II relationship. Upper incisors appear somewhat overangulated. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is about 8 mm and at the base of the tongue about 6 mm. She does have a significant amount of adenoid tissue up the nasopharynx yet. Turbinates appear to extend beyond the hard palate and appear quite large vertically demonstrating a possible area of nasal airway obstruction.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
AP microgenia
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasopharyngeal adenoid mass
Nasal airway obstruction
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Headaches
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Sleep disorder
Masticatory dysfunction
Missing maxillary first bicuspids
High occlusal plane angulation
Mild tooth-size discrepancy 
Overangulation of lower incisors
Overangulation of maxillary incisors
Enlarged crown, maxillary right central incisor compared to the left incisor

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Keep maxillary lateral incisors tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract to help correct for the tooth-size discrepancy and also to decrease the overangulated teeth

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies with bone plate stabilization and hydroxyapatite grafting
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Bilateral turbinectomies
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy
HTR implant to anterior mandible

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
