ROBERT AARON RAND							07/14/2011

Aaron is 18 years old, birth date 08/05/1992.  He was referred by Dr. Farhad Moshiri, 1320-B East Kingsley, Springfield, MO 65804.

Aaron originally had orthodontics when he was about 12 to 13.  He thinks his bite was very good at the completion of treatment and the treatment was provided by Dr. Kirkpatrick in Tulsa, OK.  The family has since moved to Branson, MO.  At that time from about the age of 16 through 18, Aaron’s bite began to change and shift.  Aaron’s bite has opened anteriorly and the lower jaw has shifted backwards.  Current treatment includes a retainer type of device in the upper jaw now with TADs placed to try to intrude the posterior teeth.  

Aaron has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, and no myofascial pain.  He rates his jaw function at 2, diet at 2, disability at 0.  He takes no medications.  He has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He is allergic to sulfa drugs.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxing and he breathes primarily through his mouth at night when he sleeps.  However, he is not aware of having any problems with snoring, daytime somnolence, nor sleep apnea.

In frontal view, Aaron has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  The nose is deviated a little off towards the right side.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4.5 mm.  The maxillary midline and mandibular dental midline and chin are all pretty much on the facial midline.  The nasal tip is off to the right side about 4 mm.  The maxilla is retruded probably 5 to 6 mm.  The chin is retruded about 25 to 28 mm.  The chin neckline is extremely short, although the chin neck angle is defined.  Intraorally, he has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch.  The lower right bicuspids are tipped lingually.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has TADs inserted and a device to try to intrude the posterior teeth.  He has an open bite of probably about 5 mm.  Part of his bite has been increased because of the device that he has in place.  He has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship of probably 3 to 4 mm.  Aaron has been in the orthodontic device that covers his bicuspids and molar teeth with the springs attached to the TADs for over a year and the bite has yet to be corrected.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  The uvula is somewhat thickened.  Intranasally, the nasal septum is deviated significantly off to the right side anteriorly and pretty much occludes the right nostril.  There is a curvature of the inferior part of the septum off to the left side.  The nasal airway is at least moderately obstructed.  The nostrils are narrow particularly on the right side.  To palpation, Aaron has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, he has a click in the right joint at probably about 40 mm of opening and about 30 mm of closing.  On the left side, he had some glitches on that side, but not a significant overt click.  The maximal incisal opening is 51 mm, excursion movement to the right 7 mm, to the left 7 mm.  He has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of impacted maxillary third molars and mandibular right third molar and the absence of a left third molar.  There is a 3 x 3 retainer in the mandibular arch.  He has the device fixed in place on the upper teeth extending from first bicuspid through second molar.  There are stabilizing transpalatal arch wires.  Although there are TADs in place, they are not readily seen on this particular radiograph.  The condyles appear small and arthritic.  

Coronal view shows that turbinates are enlarged.  The bony septum is reasonably straight.  There is a little increased sinus thickening in the floor of both left and right maxillary sinuses.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are reasonably clear in this view.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the left side.  Septal cartilage anteriorly is deviated very significantly off towards the right side and there is a little bone spur coming off the left side that appears to block a significant part of the airway.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that there has been significant condylar resorption that has occurred in this joint.  The condyle has lost vertical volume and is very narrow anteroposteriorly.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  The joint space is actually fairly thick,  There may be a little bit of anterior beaking elements present.  The condyle is somewhat posteriorly positioned.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has small in size and has lost considerable volume, but not as significant as the left side.  There is significantly increased vertical joint space.  Some elements of anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant resorption, but still has reasonably good mediolateral width.  The joint space may be somewhat increased vertically.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant resorption, but not as significant as the opposite side.  The vertical joint space is even a little bit greater on this side compared to the opposite side.  The condyle still has fairly good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Aaron has a retruded maxilla and severely retruded mandible.  He has a high occlusal plane angle.  He has an anterior open bite of about 5 mm.  He has a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship.  He has a decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of about 5 mm at the base of the tongue and about 7.5 mm at the soft palate level.



Basic diagnoses for Aaron would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR).
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia but anterior vertical hyperplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Anterior open bite of about 5 mm.
Class II end-on occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Impacted maxillary third molars and mandibular right third molar.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Severely deviated nasal septum.  
Nose deviated off towards the right side approximately 4 m.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:   

1.	MRI of left and right TMJs.
2.	Surgery Stage 1:  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair 	with Mitek anchors (depending on MRI results).
3.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Remove current device.
	b.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they 		are needed.
	c.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider slenderizing the lower anterior 		teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retracting.
4.	Surgery Stage 2.
	a.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction advancing pogonion approximately 22 mm.
	b.	Maxillary osteotomies to intrude the anterior aspect, but down graft it 			posterior and correct any transverse problems that may be present.
	c.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	d.	Nasal septoplasty.
	e.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x3.
	f.	External rhinoplasty.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 


Depending on MRI findings, I may recommend that the TMJ surgery be separated out and be done as soon as possible and then the orthodontics be done and the major orthognathic surgical procedures performed next summer.  This would help preserve the discs and improve the prognosis as compared to waiting and doing it all next summer.  