SILVIA SHAZA RAMOS								02-09-04

Shaza is 45 years old and referred by Steve Watson, DDS, MD, 5824 W. Plano Pkwy., #101, Plano, TX.

Patient History

Shaza’s problems began in about 1980 or 1981 of unknown etiology. She was aware that back then her jaw joints clicked and popped. In 1982, she was swimming and opened her mouth to get a breath and couldn’t close her mouth after that. She had orthodontics done in Mexico beginning in approximately late 1997 through probably ’98 or ’99. She then went and saw Dr. Doug Sinn, who recommended that she see Dr. Pat Brady to begin orthodontics which began in about 09/1999. Her orthodontics was completed in 06/2001. She had orthognathic surgery in 12/2000 by Dr. Sinn that included a maxilla and a genioplasty. Since that time, she has had increase in some of her symptomatology. She gets some earaches and rarely gets tinnitus. For the past two months she has off and on developed some vertigo but no hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her lower back, left shouder, and left knee. No problems wearing jewelry, and she has no other allergies. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

Patient Concerns

Difficult swallowing
Difficulty breathing through the nose
Wakes unable to catch breath
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Jaws get tired chewing 
Difficulties eating and chewing
Difficulty opening the mouth
Snoring
Tiredness during the day
Difficulties sleep at night
Restless sleep
When blowing her nose, she feels like a valve shuts off the airway between the back of her throat and her nose

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Shaza has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -1. Maxillary midline may be off to the left about 0.5 mm but actually not too bad. Mandibular dental midline is about 1 to 2 mm off to the right. She has premature contact on the left teeth, and right side she doesn’t feel meets at all.

In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Could be just some slight AP deficiency at subnasale 2 to 3 mm. Chin is retruded about 20 mm. There is essentially no chin-neck angle.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars. She has a 3x3 retainer in the lower arch. She appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has a Class II end-on occlusion on the left side by about 2 mm and on the right side by about 4 mm. She has an overjet of about 3 mm. She has a vertical overbite of 1 mm. She doesn’t feel as though the teeth on the right side touch but hits predominantly on the left side. She seems to hit predominantly on the left maxillary cuspid, mandibular cuspid-first bicuspid. It is very difficult to see the oropharynx, but it does appear clear. Uvula is just moderate in size. Soft palate appears to be a little bit posteriorly positioned. 

Intranasally, she has an enlarged turbinate on the left side. It appears that the right turbinate has already been removed. Holding the nostril open and expanding the luminal valve significantly improved her airway actually dramatically on the right side. On the left side, it improved the airway as the luminal valve was opened but not quite to the extent because of the large and partially obstructing left turbinate. 

She gets headaches about every three weeks that can occur in the frontal and temporal posterior head area and also on the top of the head. It doesn’t always occur in all these areas at the same time. She is more aware of headaches she gets on the left side that occur around the left eye and back through the temporal area. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, overall pain around the head and neck on an average day at 4, jaw function at 6, diet at 6, and disability at 7. Maximal incisal opening is 36 mm. Opening without significant discomfort 27 mm. Excursive movements are about 4 mm in each direction. She has severe crepitus in both joints on opening. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the right masseter and mild to moderate pain over the right temporalis, left TMJ, right styloid area, and right posterior neck area. 

Shaza began developing some breathing problems after the surgery and had a sleep study done that showed she had some mild to moderate sleep apnea problems with desaturations down to 86%. Dr. Sinn referred her to an ENT specialist, who had recommended a UPPP procedure for her. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four bone plates in the maxilla. Left sinus looks a little bit more opaque than the right sinus. She has a bone plate in the chin area. Both joints appear quite arthritic and appear that they have lost some significant volume. She has a 3x3 retainer on the lower anterior arch and a 2x2 retainer in the upper arch. She is missing all four third molars. 

Waters view shows that the bone plates seem to come around right in the nasal floor area. Left turbinate appears enlarged. Appears to be a right turbinate, although it is not quite as evident clinically. Sinuses appear a little bit opacified on the left side perhaps. Ethmoid and frontal sinuses appear clear. Some asymmetry in vertical position of the chin. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is extremely small in size, having lost vertical anteroposterior volume. Articular eminence is extremely shallow. Severely decrease vertical joint space. Increased posterior joint space. Condyle and joint appear quite arthritic. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has lost significant vertical and anteroposterior volume. Condyle has slightly increased posterior joint space but decreased vertical joint space although a little bit greater than the opposite side. Articular eminence is extremely shallow. This joint is quite arthritis.

Opening views show that there is fairly good translation in the right joint, but the left joint seems to exhibit some decreased transilatory movements. 

Cephalometric evaluation shows that she has an extremely high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway is significantly decreased being only about 4 mm at the soft palate level and 5 mm at the base of the tongue. Occlusal plane is quite high. Mandible appears retruded. 
Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with displaced, severely deformed articular discs and perforations
Severe AP mandibular deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency 
Class II end-on occlusion 
Occludes only on the left side with the anterior and all the right teeth out of occlusion 
High occlusal plane angulation of 26 degrees (normal 8 degrees)
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of 4 mm (normal 11 mm)
Hypertrophied left turbinate
Constricture of luminal valves bilaterally 
Significant nasal airway obstruction
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Severe snoring
Sleep apnea syndrome
Daytime somnolence
Sleep disorder
Difficulty swallowing
Masticatory dysfunction

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Maintain space between the upper lateral incisors and cuspids for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch

CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies with bone plate stabilization and HA grafting
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)
Left turbinectomy
Reconstruction of bilateral luminal valves
Remove bone plates from maxilla x 4 and screws x 16 and remove bone plate from anterior mandible with 4 bone screws

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
