SHARON RANEY									01/12/2011
 
44-year-old female.  Sharon is a singer and her current situation is interfering with her abilities to pursue her singing and acting career.  She was involved in a motor vehicle accident in 1987 at the age of 20 and developed left TMJ problems and severe pain.  In addition, she was in an MVA in 2005, and, although she did not hit her jaw directly, her head and jaws were shaken around quite a bit.  She was diagnosed with fibromyalgia about 11 years ago.  Primary problems since the accident in 1987, she has had migraine type headaches.  They occur predominantly on the left side and she gets them two to four times a month.  When she gets her headaches, they are around about an 8.  Her average daily TMJ pain is at 4 and her average daily pain including headaches and myofascial pain is at a level of 8.  She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 7, disability at 3.  She some gets some earaches, some tinnitus occasionally, and vertigo occasionally.  Other joints that bother her include her shoulders, thumbs, right hip, left knee, neck and back.  To palpation, she has mild to moderate pain through most of the head and neck area with the TMJ pain levels being at a 6.  She has crepitation in her joints, the left side greater than the right side.  Occlusally, she has a Class I occlusion on the left and Class II end-on occlusion on the right, and an overbite of 3 mm.  Upper lip length is 22 mm.  Tooth lip relationship is 3 mm.  The maxillary midline and mandibular dental midline are shifted 1 mm to the left and chin is about 4 to 5 mm to the left.  In profile, the upper jaw is retruded about 4 mm and the chin is retruded about 10 to 12 mm.  She is missing all four third molars and the maxillary left first molar, mandibular left second molar.  She has moderate to severe snoring, severe daytime tiredness, and she does wake up unable to catch her breath at times.  Her turbinates are enlarged and she has a deviated septum.  Intraorally, oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy with a slightly elongated uvula, but with narrow fascial pillars.  Her incisal opening is 45 mm and right excursion movement is 7 mm and left excursion movement 8 mm.  There is a cant in the transverse occlusal plane with the left side being 3 mm higher than the right side.  

Basic diagnosis would be as follows:  

Bilateral TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction with severe deformation.  There is more condylar resorption on the left side than the right side. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia. 
Moderately high occlusal plane angle.
Transverse facial asymmetry with the left cuspids being about 3 mm higher than the right cuspids.  
Class II end-on occlusion on the right side, Class I on the left side.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Deviated nasal septum.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Snoring.
Daytime somnolence.  
Sleep apnea.
Narrowed fascial pillars.  
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Restorative dentistry to salvage remaining teeth and those requiring crowns having 	temporary crowns placed. 
2.	Orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
3.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
4.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement as well as correction 			of asymmetry with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect, advance about 			4 mm and level it transversely.
	c.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
	d.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	e.	Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
	f.	Nasal septoplasty.
	g.	Reconstruct posterior fascial pillars.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
6.	Restorative dentistry to replace missing teeth and finalize the occlusion. 

The additional problems she has been diagnosed with include the following:

Scoliosis.
Fibromyalgia.
Irritable bowel syndrome. 
Fibroids of the uterus.
Osteoarthritis of the neck and bulging disks.
Allergies to dust, mold, cats, seasonal, etc.
Asthma.

She did have injections for allergies for 13 years, but currently is not on injections.  