LUZ MARY RAMOS								08/22/2008

Luz Mary is 31 years old.  Referred by Duane C. Keller, DDS, 3955 Bayless Avenue, Suite 100, St. Louis, MO 63125.  Luz Mary’s TMJ problems began in about 2004 at the age of 27 of unknown etiology.  She wore a splint from 2005 to 2007.  She then orthodontics from November 2007 through June 2008.  This initial treatment was performed in Cali, Columbia.  She rates her headaches at a level of 4 in the temporal areas bilaterally and on the top of the head that occur about 3 times a week.  She oftentimes wakes up with the headaches, then they may go away, but then they return later in the day.  She rates her average daily TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 6, diet at 6, disability at 3.  She takes no medications.  No earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at night.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Luz Mary has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline as in the mandibular dental midline.  Chin may be just slightly off to the left side about 2 to 3 mm.  In profile, she has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Luz Mary has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Her teeth are nicely aligned.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva, although somewhat thin around the two central incisors.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She actually has all of her mandibular left third molar in place as well.  She appears to occlude on the second and third molar on the left side with all other teeth out of occlusion.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 3 mm lower than the left side.  She has a Class II occlusion on the left side by probably 3 to 4 mm and on the right side by about 2 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  The nasal airway shows that the septum appears to be deviated a bit off to the right side anteriorly and the turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  There could possibly be an airway problem, although she is not aware of it.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the left TMJ, right temporalis area, right shoulder, and mild tenderness over the left masseter and left posterior neck area.  On opening, she can feel a little crepitus in the left joint.  Maximal opening is 31 mm, opening without significant pain about 25 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 5 mm with pain and to the left about 8 mm.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary and mandibular right third molars, but all of the rest of the teeth are present.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  The left condyle appears a little bit arthritic compared to the right side.  
Waters view shows that there is a significant deviation of the nasal septum off to the right side, and there is also a fairly large spur coming off the right side that impinges into the right turbinate.  The left turbinate appears quite large and fills the entire left side of the nasal airway.  There appears to be obvious nasal airway obstruction.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have reasonably good architecture.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be some excessive vertical and anterior joint space.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is little bit flattened on the anterior head.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints. 
similar picture as the right side with loss of most of the condylar head and neck and with flattening of the articular eminence and the condyle positioned anteriorly in the fossa.  On opening, there is some translation of the condyles.   
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is vertical difference and asymmetry in the occlusal plane level with the left side being higher than the right side.  Oropharyngeal airway dimension measures about 7 mm at the soft palate level and about 9 mm at the base of the tongue.  There is slight increased occlusal plane angulation.  

Basic diagnoses for Luz Mary would be as follows:    

Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly disc dislocated without reduction. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Maxillary posterior vertical hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Class II end-on occlusion being worse on the left side. 
Occludes only on the maxillary and mandibular left second and third molars.
Open bite extending from and occluding the left first molars through the right second molars.
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal septal deviation and spurring. 
Nasal airway obstruction.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisal roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract to correct for the slight tooth size discrepancy and decrease the inclination of the lower incisor.
Surgery.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible to the right and level the transverse occlusal plane as well as advance it about 5 mm.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the occlusal plane, down graft posteriorly, and maximize occlusal fit.
Partial turbinectomies. 
Nasal septoplasty.
3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

