LINDA RAU										10/31/2007
DOB:  03/08/1949

PREVIOUS SURGERIES:
Sternum for sarcoidosis.
Gallbladder removal.
Shoulder manipulation.

She has been diagnosed as having sarcoidosis, mitral valve prolapse, rheumatoid arthritis, hypothyroidism and asthma.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: 
Spiriva.
Advair. 
Synthroid.
Maxzide. 
Cytotec.
Naproxen. 
Aspirin.

Her pain problems began earlier this year.  By radiographic evaluation she has had long-standing TMJ issues that apparently have been relatively asymptomatic until more recently.  She gets noises in her joints that she states are like popping and grinding.  She has pain predominately in the left TMJ.  She rates her average TMJ pain on a daily basis at 6, average daily pain at 5, jaw function and diet at 5, disability at 1.  She rates her headaches at a level of 5 in the frontal and temple areas.  She has crepitus in both TMJs.  Historically, Linda states that when she was in high school she remembers episodes of having a closed lock situation that occurred in her jaws and she had to manipulate her jaws to get it open.  However, her pain problems did not really begin until early in 2007 where she became aware of gravely kind of sounds originated initially in the left side but now also involving the right side. 

In frontal view, Linda has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much along the facial midline as is the chin.  Mandibular dental midline is probably a couple of mm off to the right side.  She does have some significant crowding.  This may throw her maxillary midline off to the left just a touch.  In profile view, she has a little bit of an obtuse nasal labial angle.  Maxilla may be retruded 3 mm or so.  The mandible is retruded by about 15 to 20 mm.  Chin-neckline is extremely short and chin-neck angle is not defined.  Intraorally, Linda has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has significant crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has crowns on the right first and second molars.  There is some mild crowding in the upper anterior arch.  She has Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side by probably about 4 mm and likewise on the left side of 4 to 5 mm.  She has an overjet of probably about 3 mm.  She has about at 6 or 7 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  There may be some mild constricture of the faucial pillars.  Nasal airway looks fairly clear.  
LINDA RAU					10/31/2007				Page 2

The turbinate on the right side may be just slightly larger than the left side but there still appears to be good airway.  She has some mild snoring but no daytime somnolence or sleep apnea symptoms.  To palpation, Linda has some moderate tenderness over the masseter muscle and some milder tenderness over the TMJs.  She has significant crepitation in both TMJs with it being actually audible on the left side.  Maximal incisal opening is about 38 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is about 6 mm and to the left 9 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION"
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  There are a lot of restorations on the posterior teeth extending from the second bicuspids through the molars.  The condyles appear somewhat arthritic with the left side appearing smaller in size than the right side.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Waters view shows that the bony septum is fairly straight.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears somewhat sclerotic and there appears to be decreased joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Some anterior beaking is present and there is decreased vertical joint space.  On opening, there is some restricted translation of the right condyle compared the left side but both condyles come down beneath the articular eminence.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Linda has some AP maxillary deficiency and some significant AP mandibular deficiency.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway actually looks fairly good with just some restriction at the base of the tongue.  She may have some increased anterior mandibular vertical height.  Linda does report having a Cockatiel bird that they took care of for about 5 years, roughly 1986 through 1991 or 1992.  The bird finally died that may have been due to could exposure.  In 2005, she had an asthma attack and a lung infection where she lost her voice for about 9 months. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:  
Bilateral TMJ rheumatoid arthritis. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
High occlusal plane angle.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm (normal dimension of 11.)
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
 Myofascial pain.
 Severe crowding of lower anterior arch. 
LINDA RAU					10/31/2007					Page 3

 Moderate crowding of upper and arch.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:  
Distraction osteogenesis of the mandible.
Placement of appliance.
Vertical midline osteotomy.
Initiation of distraction appliance 10 days postsurgery with expansion of the lower arch of approximately 8 mm. 
Hold expansion for four months.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. 
CT scans of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery stage 2.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. 
Augmentation genioplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

