HEATHER RANSOM		Telephone Conversation 			06-03-03

Heather is 24 years old. 

Patient History

Her TMJ problems began in about 1982 or 1983, and I had previously seen her in 1995. I had diagnosed her with ICR. In about 1993 or 1994, she underwent double-jaw orthognathic surgery and a genioplasty by Dr. Gerald Hansen in Los Vegas, Nevada. Problems were encountered during surgery, and he had difficulty the maxilla and the fact that it became avascular when he tried to reposition it superiorly. She was referred to me for evaluation, and it was at that time that I identified the ICR and apparently reworked a plan but it was never completed. In January of 1998, Heather was hit head-on by a drunk driver, and she hit the side of her head and was in a coma for four days. She is not really sure if that worsened her TMJ problems or not because she has had headaches since that time. The headaches are predominantly in the temporal areas bilaterally and go to the back of the head. It is quite probable that these headaches may be related to joint problems that were exacerbated by the auto accident. She takes Excedrin and Advil for her headaches. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. She gets headaches three to four times per week at a level of 7, and they occur in the temporal and posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain at 3 and overall pain on an average day at about a level of 5, jaw function at 2, diet at 3, and disability at 0. To palpation, she has tenderness over her TMJs but no tenderness over the temporalis or masseter muscles. She does have some pain and discomfort in her neck. Other joints that bother her include her thumbs, which she feels is related to chronic popping of her finger joints, and she has problems with her knees and ankles. She has an allergy to PENICILLIN and does have difficulties wearing cheap earrings. She snores even though she sleeps on her side. She is tired in the mornings, and it is usually until noon that she really wakes up and gets over some of her tiredness. 

Patient Concerns

Headaches 
TMJ pain
Teeth and jaws don’t fit together 
Difficulties breathing through the nose
Snoring
Daytime tiredness

Basic Diagnoses

Based on photographs, models, lateral cephalometric radiograph, MRI, and telephone conversation, her diagnoses are as follows:

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with questionable salvageability
AP mandibular hypoplasia
Vertical mandibular excess
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Anterior vertical maxillary excess
Class II end-on occlusion
Anterior open bite tendency
Missing four first bicuspids
Mild crowding in upper arch
Mild crowding in lower arch
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 1 to 1.5 mm
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction
Snoring
Sleep apnea symptoms 

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies 
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth to remove about a millimeter to 1.5 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy 
