MATTHEW CHRISTOPHER REEVES						02-10-03

Matt is 13 years old and referred by Dr. Al Bishop. 

Patient History

Matt is in good health with no major medical problems. Matt’s primary concern is that his teeth and jaws don’t fit together well. He has always had this problem, so he himself is not really aware of any significant problems. Matt does get headaches about one time per week in the posterior head area. Headaches average about a level of 6. The only medication he takes is ibuprofen for the headaches. 

Matthew has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joint problems. He is mouth breather particularly when he sleeps. Not aware of any clenching or bruxism. Gets headaches about one time per week in the posterior head area. They register at a level of 6. He is not aware of any TMJ pain or other pain around the head and neck area. He rates his jaw function at 3, diet at 2, and disability at 0. He takes ibuprofen for the headaches. His headaches began about three to four years ago of unknown etiology. No correlation of the headaches in reference to eating or jaw function.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Matt has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 4 on the left, 5 on the right. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline or maybe just about 0.5 mm to the left. Mandibular dental midline actually looks like it is pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin.

In profile view, Matt has some lip incompetence. Chin appears somewhat retruded. Chin-neckline is short, although the chin-neck angle is well defined. Lower third face appears somewhat elongated. Upper lip may be retruded by 2 to 3 mm, and chin is back approximately 15 mm. 

Intraorally, Matt has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars pretty much erupted it. Right second bicuspid and second molar are still on their way in. Has adequately attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. Lower anterior teeth are fairly prominent through the buccal cortex. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth also back through the second molars with the second molars still erupting in. Has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side and closer to Class I on the left side. Upper lateral incisors appear a little bit slow. Lower arch appears fairly symmetric. In the upper arch, the left cuspid is probably a millimeter to two posterior to the right cuspid. Has an anterior open-bite of probably 1 to 2 mm. Transversely, the maxilla appears fairly level at the cuspid area. Maxillary right central incisor is probably a millimeter to 1.5 mm lower than the left one. The tonsils are of moderate size. Otherwise, oropharynx appears clear and healthy.

Intranasally, the turbinates are of moderate size as best can be seen toward the anterior part, but the posterior part cannot be visualized. Luminal valves cause some mild constricture but probably nothing too significant. Columella base is just slightly wide but, again, probably not contributory to any nasal airway problems.

To palpation, Matt had just some mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles, styloid areas, and SCMs. Joints function very smoothly. Incisal opening is 58 mm. Excursive movement in each direction is approximately 8 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of all teeth but with the four third molars developing but unerupted. Sinuses look relatively clear. Turbinates appear moderately large but no really significantly. Large radiolucency in the area of the mental foramina. What can be seen of the condyles, they look relatively normal. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates are moderate in size with the left one appearing a little bit larger than the right one. Transverse occlusal plane looks relatively flat.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Could be artifact at the posterior border of the condyle that makes it look a little bit unusual there. The joint space otherwise looks good. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology with a little bit of flattening on the posterior head and a little hockey stick shape to it. Articular eminence is a little bit steeper on this side than the opposite side. Joint space actually looks reasonably balance.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyles, and both condyles look reasonably normal. The condyles come anterior to the articular eminence. 

On the cephalometric radiograph, he actually wasn’t biting down all the way. There is a high occlusal plane angle. Anterior open-bite present. Oropharyngeal airway may be slightly decreased at the base of the tongue. Has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. 

Basic Diagnoses

Anterior and posterior vertical maxillary excess
AP mandibular deficiency
AP microgenia
Anterior open-bite
Class I occlusion on the left, Class II end-on on the right
Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
Crowding, lower anterior arch
Slight tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of about 1 mm
Headaches 
Mouth breather
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4
Overangulation of the maxillary and mandibular incisors
Hyperplastic turbinates

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch placing a compensating step in the arch wire to align the cuspids with the posterior teeth and the four incisors in a slightly elevated occlusal plane level. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about a millimeter of tooth structure. Also slenderize the bicuspids and retract, maximizing posterior anchorage. Can remove about a half a millimeter of tooth structure from each lower bicuspid

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly and upright the incisors with interdental osteotomies between the lateral incisors and cuspids
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible up into proper position
Surgical removal of impacted third molars
Partial turbinectomies
HTR implant to anterior mandible

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

He may need a turbinectomy to make room for the superior repositioning of the maxilla so as not to cause significant airway problems postsurgery.