ARUN REDDY								10/22/2010

Arun is 32 years old and referred by Pushkar Mehra.  He is currently having orthodontics done by Joshika Beejesh.  He is at Walnut Central Orthodontics, 9669 N. Central Expressway, Suite 105, Dallas, Texas 75231.  

Primary concerns Arun has includes the following:

Recession of upper jaw.
Under bite problem.
Soreness in mouth most of the time. 
Difficulties breathing through the right side of his nose.

In frontal view, Arun has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is -3 mm.  The maxillary dental midline is probably about 2 mm to the right.  The mandibular dental midline and chin are pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, Arun has some ptosis of the nasal tip.  This makes the nasolabial angle acute.  He actually has fairly reasonable projection of the upper lip to the cheeks.  When he opens his jaw probably about 5 to 6 mm, his profile is actually fairly good with just some slight increased fullness in the chin area.  Arun does have some bilateral infraorbital hypoplasia with the cheeks being probably about 6 to 7 mm AP deficient.  Intraorally, Arun has all of his lower teeth back through the third molars present.  He has spacing between the lower central and cuspid that equal to almost an incisor on each side.  He has probably a good 4 mm of space in the right side and 3 mm on the left side.  In the upper arch, he has braces on back to the second bicuspids, but has molars all the way back to the third molars present.  He has a full Class III cuspid relationship with anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites.  He has a large diastema between the central incisors of probably 4 mm and has a supernumerary tooth in place.  He has about a 1 mm anterior open bite at the incisor area.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal in architecture.  Tonsils are mild to moderately enlarged.  Intranasally, turbinates appear moderate in size and the septum at least anteriorly seems reasonably straight.  On holding the nostrils open, Arun could breath easier through his nose.  To palpation, Arun has no pain around the head and neck area.  On opening, he has a click in the left joint at 30 mm of opening and 30 mm of closing.  Right joint seemed to function relatively smoothly.  The maximal incisal opening is about 82 mm.  The excursion movements are about 7 mm in each direction.  Arun has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain.  He rates his jaw function and diet at 0 and disability at 1.  He has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, hearing loss, or other joint problems.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  Arun is unaware of when his joint problems began or the etiology.


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth.  There is spacing between the mandibular lateral incisors and cuspids.  There is a supernumerary tooth between the maxillary central incisors.  He has a root canal in the mandibular right first molar.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  The septum is reasonably straight.  The turbinates are enlarged.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  The turbinates are enlarged and seem to block a good portion of the airway more towards the posterior aspect of the nose.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little sclerotic on top, particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little flattened across the top.  The articular eminence is more shallow on this side compared to the opposite side.  The joint space may be a little bit decreased posteriorly. 

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is fairly wide.  There is decreased lateral joint space and there appears to be a little extra outgrowth from the lateral pole of the condyle that is almost in contact with the lateral rim of the fossa.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite broad in width.  There may be some decreased joint space in the right side at the lateral aspect of the joint.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has some vertical hypoplasia as well as perhaps some mandibular mild prognathism.  Oropharyngeal airway looks very good.  He has a skeletal and occlusal Class III jaw relationship.  

Basic diagnoses for Arun would include the following:

Left TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Maxillary vertical and AP hypoplasia.
Mandibular prognathism.
Class III occlusion.
Over angulation of maxillary incisors.
Bilateral diastemas between the lateral incisors and cuspids in the mandible.
Large diastema of approximately 4 mm between the maxillary central incisors. 
Supernumerary tooth between the maxillary incisors. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
External nasal deformity.
Malaligned third molars.
Bilateral infraorbital hypoplasia. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
2.	Removal of supernumerary tooth from between the incisors.
3.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Retract maxillary central incisors and close the 			diastema.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make 			room for interdental osteotomies.  Maintain about 1 mm of space between the 			crowns of the maxillary lateral incisors and cuspids.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Push cuspids forward and shift the anterior 			diastemas to between the cuspids and first bicuspids.  Keep cuspid roots tipped 			mesially and first bicuspid roots tipped distally.  Do not change the angulation of 			the mandibular incisors.  
	c.	Be sure to band all the teeth back through the second molars.  
2.	Surgery Stage 1.
	a. 	Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. 
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft it about 5 to 6 mm and advance it 			forward.
	d.	Bilateral mandibular anterior body ostectomies.
	e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	f.	Extraction of all four third molars.
	g.	External nasal reconstruction.
3.	Surgery Stage 2:  Bilateral infraorbital implants.  
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.	