KETINA REAL									02/05/2008

Ketina is 35 years old, referred by Dr. Mark Ozier, 7151  Preston Road #401-D, Frisco, Texas 75034.  Primary concerns that Ketina has include the following:

1.  Cannot chew.
2.  Cannot eat.
3.  Significant difficulty swallowing.
4.  Ears ring.
5.  Headaches.
6.  Face numbness particularly on the left side.
7.  Neck pain.
8.  Eye floaters.

She would like to eliminate her pain and be able to eat and swallow without pain or difficulty.  She does have mitral valve prolapse.  Ketina’s TMJ problems may have begun back in 1993 when she was involved in a motor vehicle accident.  She sustained a whiplash injury in that accident.  About 10 years ago (about 3 or 4 years after the accident), she developed significant problems with eating and also developed clicking and popping noises in her joints.  Her situation got worse.  She did receive some chiropractic treatment after the accident and again in 2005.  She has been treated with splint therapy in 2006 and 2007 through the Monarch Dental Clinic and then also by Dr. Charles Holt.  Dr. Holt also placed her on some topical cream to help decrease her pain and discomfort. The splint therapy tends to increase Ketina’s headache and pain situation.    

Ketina rates her headaches that she gets about 3 times a week at a level of 7 and they occur in the frontal, temporal, posterior, and top of the head on the right side, and probably level of 8 on the left side in the frontal, temporal, posterior head, and top of the head area.  She rates her average daily TMJ pain at 7, but it can easily escalate to 9.  Average daily pain is at 6, jaw function at 9, diet at 10, disability at 8.  Ketina cannot even eat soft foods at this time and is on a liquid diet.  

She gets tingling sensations in the left side of her face to include her left cheek, lower lip and chin area.  She gets earaches left side greater than right side, tinnitus left side greater than right side, and vertigo.  She has no other joint problems except her neck may have an associated problem.  It is difficult to tell if it is muscle or cervical vertebrae.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  She is allergic to the following medications or has had at least an adverse reaction to penicillin, Keflex, clindamycin, Levaquin, Toradol, and azithromycin.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In the frontal view, Ketina has fairly good left-to-right facial asymmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 0.5 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are pretty much on the facial midline.  Right eye is about 2 mm higher than the left eye.  In profile view, she has fairly good vertical and AP symmetry.  Mandible may be just slightly AP retruded, but the chin is strong.  Chin neck line is maybe slightly short, but the chin neck angle is well-defined.  She has a brachiocephalic facial morphological profile.  She has lip incompetence of about 5 mm.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back to the third molars present.  She has some moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch.  She has adequate attached gingiva.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship.  She has an anterior overbite of about 3 mm.  She has an overjet of about 7 mm.  Oropharyngeal airway looks good.  She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and the incisors are almost 5 mm above the flat plane.  Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Septum appears relatively normal.  There may be some mild to moderate airway obstruction.  She is not aware of snoring, has some moderate daytime somnolence, but not aware of sleep apnea.  She has a moderate sleep disorder and wakes up frequently at night, sometimes unable to breathe through her nose or because of pain issues.  She feels as though her nasal airway is stuffy a lot.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth including the third molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Condyles look reasonably good.  Waters view shows that the bony septum is at least straight.  Turbinates appear fairly large and appear to block a lot of the airway.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a hockey stick shape.  There is some peaking on the top of the condyle.  There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep, but somewhat elongated.  Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a better morphology and appears to have better spacing around it.  On opening, there is some restricted translation in both joints, but clinically she has fairly good translation movements. Cephalometric radiograph shows she has an overjet of about 6 mm and an anterior overbite of about 3 mm.  She has a skeletal and occlusal Class II jaw relationship.  Upper incisors are over-angulated and she has an accentuated curve of  Spee in the upper arch.  Lower incisors also appear slightly angulated.  It appears she may have an extremely low occlusal plane angulation.  Oropharyngeal airway looks good with 9 mm at the soft palate level, and, in the base of the tongue, it measures only about 6-7 mm, but in this x-ray she is holding her tongue quite low in her mouth.  Dental model analysis shows that there is a slightly accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch of about 2 mm and an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch of about 5 mm.  In a Class I cuspid relationship, there is some significant transverse maxillary deficiency.  There is crowding of the lower arch of probably about 3-4 mm.  Numerically, there is not a significant tooth size discrepancy, but the anteroposterior width of the centrals is a little excessive and in realty there probably is about 2-mm difference.

Diagnoses for Ketina would be as follows:

1.  Left side TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and significant 
 	    deformation.     
2.  Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocated at the lateral aspect of the joint.
3.  AP mandibular deficiency.
4.  Transverse maxillary deficiency.
5.  Posterior vertical maxillary excess.  
6.  Class II occlusion.
7.  Anterior overbite of 3 mm.
8.  Hypertrophied turbinates. 
9.  Nasal airway obstruction. 
10.  Severe TMJ pain.
11.  Severe headaches.
12.  Myofascial pain being worse on the left side. 
13.  Malaligned third molars x4.
14.  Brachiocephalic facial morphology. 
15.  Overangulation of maxillary incisors.
16.  Mild crowding of the lower anterior arch. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

	1.  Surgery Stage 1.
	     a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
	2.  Presurgical orthodontics.
a.  Align and level maxillary arch in two occlusal plane levels. Align the four incisors    at an elevated level compared to the posterior teeth by placing a step in the arch wire.  Try to extrude the cuspids at least 1 mm to level them more closely to the occlusal plane of the posterior teeth. Tip lateral incisor roots medially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
b.  Align and level mandibular arch.   Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from floating them any further forward and to correct for a slight tooth size discrepancy.
	3.  Surgery.
a.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to decrease the angulation of the maxillary incisors, expand transversely, and move the posterior aspect superiorly to increase occlusal plane angulation. 
b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance mandible but rotate the posterior aspect superiorly to decrease occlusal plan and mandibular plane angles. 
c.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.  
d.  Extraction of four malaligned third molars.
	3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.