KAITLIN RAY									10/26/2007

Kaitlin is 16 years old and is referred by Dr. Farhad Moshiri.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS: 
I cannot chew solid foods.
I cannot speak properly.
Jaw gets sore.
Mouth hurts when smiling.

The only medications she takes are multivitamins.  Her objective for seeking treatment would be to have normal mouth and bite relationship and have a balanced profile.  Kaitlin apparently ever since her young years has had a bit of a jaw malalignment problem.  When she was in about the first grade, some orthodontic mechanics were tried including use of the headgear to try and improve her bite relationship.  This did not hold and relapsed.  Dr. Moshiri has been following her for about three years now.  In December of 2006, Dr. Moshiri began orthodontic treatment. 

Kaitlin has an unusual condition of when she was an infant and at 6 weeks of age it was identified and it is called the Kaitlin Ray syndrome right now because it was such an unusual situation.  Apparently the histiocytes would attack her own bone marrow.  They would then migrate to the skin surfaces.  She was treated with some cancer medications.  When she was about 3 years old, suddenly the disease process went away and she has had no problems since then.  

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss or other joint problems.  She has no headaches, TMJ pain or myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 8, disability at 4.  She thinks she probably clenches at night when she is sleeping.  

In frontal view, Kaitlin has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  The nasal dome is somewhat wide.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other.  In profile view, Kaitlin has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  It could be just 1 to 2 mm deficient in upper lip projection.  The mandible and chin appear prominent by probably 5 to 6 mm.  Chin-neckline is elongated.  Chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, she has all her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has increased curve of Wilson particularly on the left side.  She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  Teeth are fairly well aligned and level.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has slight increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch.  She has a full Class III occlusal relationship.  She appears to have small upper lateral incisors.  She has an anterior crossbite and bilateral posterior crossbites.  The crossbites posteriorly is a little bit greater on the right side than the left side but probably in part due to the accentuated curve of Wilson in the lower left quadrant.  She has about 3 to 4 mm lip incompetence.  She has about a 2 mm reverse deep bite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  The uvula is mildly hyperplastic.  The soft palate is normal.  Faucial pillars are relatively normal.  
KAITLIN RAY				10/26/2007				Page 2

Tonsils are of moderate size but appear healthy and noninflamed.  Turbinates are fairly large but there still appears to be a passable airway at least anteriorly.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head or neck area.  Joints function smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm.  Excursive movements are about 7 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars that are developing but unerupted.  Difficult to evaluate the sinuses particularly the left one.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  Condylar heads and necks appear elongated.  Vertical height of mandibular bodies appears short vertically particularly on the left side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows elongated condylar heads and necks.  Articular eminences are moderately shallow.  Joint space appears somewhat narrow.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with elongated heads and necks.  Articular eminence relatively shallow.  Joint space appears somewhat narrow.  On opening there is good translation of both condyles as they both come anterior to the articular eminence.  

Waters view shows that the bony septum at least is straight.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged with what appears to be some airway blockage on the left side.  The sinuses appear clear.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Kaitlin has a Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship.  Slight vertical difference at the inferior border of the mandible with probably the left side being about 3 to 4 mm shorter vertically as compared to the right side.  Oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal.  There is a slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the left cuspid being 1.5 mm higher than the right cuspid.  In the upper arch and lower arch there is about 1 mm vertical difference with the left side being higher.  Maxillary and mandibular anterior teeth are all relatively small in size with the upper laterals being considerably smaller.  Width of the lower anterior six teeth is probably 5 to 6 mm less than normal.  There is a tooth size discrepancy of about 1.5 mm.  Dental model analysis shows that there is a transverse deficiency in the maxilla.  Upper laterals and cuspids are already properly setup.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Mandibular prognathism. 
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Class III occlusion. 
Impacted third molars x4.
Lingual inclination of mandibular left posterior teeth, particularly the second bicuspid and first molar creating an increased curve of Wilson.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1.5 mm.  
Small anterior teeth in both the maxilla and mandible.

KAITLIN RAY				10/26/2007				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Open 1 mm of space between the lateral incisors and cuspids.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally for interdental osteotomies.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Use cross arch elastics from the lingual of the lower second bicuspid and first molar to the labial of the upper arch to try to upright those teeth and decrease the accentuated curve of Wilson. 
Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchors.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand and maximize the occlusal fit. 
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
