ELIZABETH REED									01/06/2011

Elizabeth is 28 years old and referred by Dr. Devek Frech, 3621 Maplewood Avenue, Wichita Falls, Texas 76308.

Elizabeth does not know when her joint problems began, but by the age of 25 she woke up one morning with a closed lock situation.  The etiology of her TMJ problems are unknown.  She did have orthodontic treatment from about the first grade through the eighth grade (ages 6 to 13 years old).  After her joint problems became acute, she had splint therapy from about March through July 2007 and then chiropractic treatment from 2008 to 2009.  Elizabeth gets headaches about 2 times a week primarily in the left temporal area at a level of 7.  She usually gets them in the evenings, but sometimes she will wake up with them in the morning.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 7, diet at 6, disability at 3.  The only medication she takes is ibuprofen.  She gets occasional earaches, tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her right wrist and her ankles.  She believes she does clench her teeth some at nighttime.  

In frontal view, Elizabeth has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face, but some slight asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  She has a prominent tubercle in the upper lip and some deficiencies laterally in the vermilion.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 5 mm at the tubercle area and 7 mm lateral to the tubercle.  The maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are pretty much on the facial midline.  The chin is shifted about 2 to 3 mm to the right.  In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is probably 3 to 4 mm posterior to subnasale.  The maxillary is probably 6 to 8 mm AP deficient.  Chin is 18 to 20 mm AP deficient.  There is definition of the chin neck ankle.  She has a lip incompetence of probably 7 to 8 mm.  Intraorally, Elizabeth has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has some thin attached gingiva but appears adequate.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has small upper lateral incisors.  She has 0.5 mm vertical over bite.  She is basically fairly close to being Class I cuspid, although may be 1 to 2 mm Class II.  The uvula is moderately elongated, but the rest of the structures are relatively normal.  Intranasally, turbinates appear moderate in size, but the septum appears reasonably straight.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the masseters, TMJs, milder pain over the temporalis, retromandibular area and SCMs.  On opening, she hears grinding noises in the joints  On excursion, she had a pop in her left joint.  The maximal incisal opening is 45 mm, opening without pain 27 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 6 mm, to the left 7 mm.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side.  


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has root canals in the maxillary left first and second molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Bony septum appears reasonably straight.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Difficult to evaluate the TMJs.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are fairly large and appear to block most of the functional airway. 

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates are enlarged and occupy the majority of the nasal airway.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some sclerosis on top and it is posteriorly and superiorly positioned in the fossa and decreased joint spaces in those areas but an increased joint space anteriorly.  The articular eminence is moderate steep. 

Right TMJ sagittal view likewise shows a condyle that has some sclerosis on the superior and anterior head.  There is decreased superior and posterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle appears to be a little bit shorter vertically as compared to the opposite side.  There is decreased superior and posterior joint space, but increased anterior joint space.  

Coronal left TMJ shows decreased superior joint space.  The condyle has fairly good mediolateral width and there is decreased space superiorly as well as at the lateral aspect of the joint.  There is a little bit of irregularity in the superior surface of the condyle.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 mm.  There is continued decreased joint space in that area.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Elizabeth has a retruded maxilla and mandible, although she is fairly close to being skeletal and perhaps Class I occlusion and probably mildly skeletal Class II relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway is surprisingly good with oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level of about 8 and at the base of the tongue at about 6 mm.  

Basic diagnosis for Elizabeth would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs anteriorly dislocated without reduction.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia but anterior vertical hyperplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Slight Class II end-on occlusal relationship.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 2 mm shorter than the left side.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Partial nasal airway obstruction.
TMJ pain.
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJ. 
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots 			distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 			about 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward and 			to correct for a mild tooth size discrepancy.  
3.	Surgery.  
	a.	TMJ reconstruction by one of the following methods depending on MRI findings:
		(i).	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 				anchors.
		(ii).	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 				Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise 			direction if Mitek anchors are sued to stabilize the articular discs.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward, move the anterior part 			superior and level the occlusal plane.
	d.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
	e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
	f.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen) if total joint prostheses are 			used.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  





