TANDI REHEIS									03/06/2006

Tandi is 27 years old and referred by Dr. William Johnson, 2500 S. McGee St., Suite 131, Norman, OK 73072.  Tandi's problems began when she was about 10 years old when she had some clicking and popping in her joints and some headaches and some TMJ discomfort.  Etiology is unknown.  In 1989, she first saw Dr. Robert Talley who fitted her with upper and lower flat plane splints.  This made a significance difference for her and she was symptom free for awhile.  She had a bionater for awhile but this did not really help her.  However, her clicking, popping and frequent bilateral headaches have continued.  In 1993, her problems were getting worse and Dr. Talley recommended orthodontics.  She wore braces for 18 months but saw no difference in her bite or jaw pain.  She went back to Dr. Talley and had infrared treatment and some other treatment modalities.  In May of 2004 she began medications for the first time which included Skelaxin.  Her dentist, Dr. Griffith placed some onlays on her teeth and this significantly worsened her pain and muscle problems.  Incisal opening was limited to 20 minutes by July of 2004.  She saw Dr. Sparks, a chiropractic specialist.  He wanted to do 36 adjustments but after 2 adjustments her pain got so much worse that she discontinued following up with him.  She underwent a procedure to try and unlock her closed lock situation by Dr. Daniel Tylka in January of 2005.  Dr. Tylka eventually was able to get Tandi up to 30 mm of incisal opening.  However, her pain and headaches continued.  She underwent additional physical therapy in February through May of 2005.  In May of 2005 she had bilateral TMJ arthroscopies performed.  Since then she developed grating sounds in both joints.  Popping and clicking started again for her by July/August of 2005.  She continued with splint therapy but has not improved.  She was evaluated in December of 2005 by Dr. William Johnson who then referred her here.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
TMJ joint pain.
Joint clicking and popping. 
Temporal and suboccipital headaches. 
Neck and shoulder tension.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Ortho-Evra.
Soma 350 mg b.i.d.
Hydrocodone 5/500 q.h.s.
Fish oil 2 times per day.
Folic acid b.i.d.  

She has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus but no vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her neck where she has a disc problem.  Her hips occasionally will bother her.  She does do some clenching but it is better controlled with the splints.  She may be clenching some during the day but at night she may likely do it if she does wake up with headaches.  

She has almost constant headaches that occur in her frontal, temporal and posterior head area at about a level of 7.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, overall average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 8, diet at 8, disability at 7.  In frontal view, Tandi has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  

TANDI REHEIS				03/06/2006				Page 2


Perhaps light increased fullness in the left angle area may be due to perhaps a little bit of masseteric hyperplasia.  Upper lip length is about 28 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much aligned on the facial midlines.  In profile view, she has very nice facial balance vertically and anteroposteriorly.  Intraorally, Tandi has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars in both upper and lower arches.  She has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has about a 3 mm vertical overbite relationship.  When Tandi bites down in her maximum occlusion she does not feel that her posterior teeth touch at all.  She says that her teeth have not fit together since the splint therapy began in 2004.  Intraorally, the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all look relatively normal.  The nasal structures look normal.  No history of snoring or sleep apnea and no significant daytime somnolence.  Tandi has loud audible popping in her joints around 15 to 20 mm and closing probably around 10 mm.  The right side was more obvious than the left side in the first round of opening and with the second round the same basic problem occurred.  She has some significant crepitation in both joints.  To palpation, Tandi has moderate to high moderate pain around the temporalis, TMJs, styloid, SCMs, posterior neck and milder pain around the shoulders and masseters.  On opening, she has loud audible clicks and pops somewhere around 15 to 20 mm of opening and then closing probably around 10 to 15 mm.  There is a crepitus that also accompanies her jaw function.  Maximal incisal opening is about 50 mm and about 35 mm without significant discomfort.  Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction.  On excursive movement she has a definite pop that she produced on the left side but the right side seemed to function reasonably smoothly.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  All the rest of the teeth are present.  The sinuses look reasonably clear.  The condyles appear somewhat arthritic particularly in the left side where there is some sclerotic bone associated with it.  Styloid processes are elongated bilaterally.  The turbinates appear relatively moderate in size.  Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  It appears that there is adequate airway.  There is some deviation in the nasal septum but nothing real significant.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows the presence of some sclerosis on the head of the condyle and a decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  A little bit of anterior beaking is present.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears more arthritic and there is some significant anterior beaking present.  Decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  In both sides the occlusion appears to be open in the molar area.  On opening there is actually fairly good translation of both condyles.  The arthritic changes are evident in the open views.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Tandi is essentially a Class I cuspid molar relationship but has posterior open bites but a good oropharyngeal airway.  

TANDI REHEIS				03/06/2006				Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with probable adhesions and perforations. 
Mandibular hyperplasia. 
Bilateral posterior open bites.
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain.
Significant masticatory dysfunction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Treatment option #1
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Treatment option #2
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies with bone screw stabilization. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
