MATTHEW RAY									07/02/2008

Matt is 17 years old and referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich.  Primary concerns that Matt has includes the following:  

Headaches.
Teeth and jaws do not fit together properly.  
Difficulty swallowing particularly pills.
Difficulties breathing through the nose. 
Snoring.
Daytime tiredness.

The only previous surgery Matt has had is he had an eardrum rebuilt in 1997.  Onset of jaw problems as far as Matt is aware began at about the age of 16 of unknown etiology.  He started orthodontic treatment in the 5th grade.  He is congenitally missing the maxillary lateral incisors.  The orthodontics treatment he has had so far has been directed to moving the cuspid teeth into the lateral incisor position and trying to align the teeth with the missing maxillary lateral incisors.  He gets headaches and would get headache 2 to 3 times per week during the school year at about a level of 5 in the frontal and temporal areas.  He would wake up with these headaches.  He rates his TMJ pain at 0, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 3, diet and disability at 0.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo.  No other joints bother him.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  He does have difficulties breathing through his nose and is predominantly a mouth breather.  He does have some snoring and daytime somnolence.  He is not aware of having any sleep apnea symptoms.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Matt has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline and chin are also pretty much on the facial midline.  Matt appears to have some increased facial fullness on the right side of the face with it being maybe about 3 mm more fuller at the angle area than the left side.  In profile view, Matt has some AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency.  Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale.  Upper lip is retruded by probably about a good 4 to 5 mm.  The chin appears to be retruded probably about 12 to 15 mm.  He does have a head postured forward neck position.  As Matt postures his mandible forward, he has improved facial balance.  Intraorally, Matt has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present.  He has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch, but he has some significant crowding of the lower arch.  The right cuspid appears to be elevated probably at least a couple of millimeters above the adjacent teeth.  He has a lot of inflammation around his lower incisors, but has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he is missing the lateral incisors.  He has significant transverse deficiency in the upper arch.  He has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars except for those missing lateral incisors.  He has an end-on incisor relationship where his right central and lower central lateral incisors are in occlusion.  He has bilateral posterior crossbites being much worse on the left side as compared to the right side and an anterior end-on incisor relationship.  He actually has an open bite involving the right centrals, laterals, cuspids, first and second bicuspids.  In the right side, most of the teeth appear to be in occlusion.  The maxillary arch is relatively level.  In the mandibular arch the left cuspid is about 2 mm lower than the right cuspid.  The nasal tip appears to be deviated to the right side probably 1 to 2 mm.  The oropharyngeal airway looks normal, and he actually has a nice broad width between the fascial pillars.  Septum appears to deviate a little bit to the left side.  Turbinates are fairly normal in size.  Occlusally, Matt has a slight Class III occlusion on the right side and about an end-on Class III occlusion on the left side.  He has about a 1-mm anterior open bite and bilateral anterior and posterior crossbites, being worse on the left side as compared to the right side.  TMJ joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Maximum incisal opening is 43 mm.  Excursion movement to the right is 6 mm, to the left 8 mm.  The joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  There is some mild tenderness over the masseter muscles and TMJs.  Tooth size analysis reveals a Bolton's difference of about 2.5 to 3 mm.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and maxillary lateral incisors. He has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  
Waters view shows that he has a relatively large septal spur off the left side of the septum posteriorly in the bony area that is blocking the airway.  It appears to be impressing into the left nasal turbinate.  The sinuses look reasonably clear.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space looks relatively normal.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit harder to visualize, but appears to have fairly reasonable morphology.  There appears to be decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is restricted translation, being a little bit greater on the right side as compared to the left side.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Matt has a head postured forward neck position.  His head is tipped up which opened up the airway somewhat more, but the airway at the soft palate level measures about 9 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 11 mm.  
Basic diagnoses for Matt would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Severe transverse maxillary deficiency.  
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Missing maxillary lateral incisors. 
Slight Class III end-on occlusal relationship.
Anterior and bilateral crossbite.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Large nasoseptal spur blocking off the left side of the nose. 
Headaches.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Missing maxillary lateral incisors.





Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Try to expand the cuspids and bicuspids.  Tip cuspid roots mesially and first bicuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth to keep from flaring them any further forward.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand the posterior maxilla approximately 15 mm and advance it.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a slight counterclockwise direction.  
Nasal septoplasty. 
Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.