GLORIA REED									06-07-04

Gloria is 64 years old and referred by Dr. Mike Steffen, 1601 S. Blvd., Edmond, OK  73013.

Patient History

She had previous colon cancer and had a sigmoid resection in 09/1999. She takes Miacalcin 1 spray per day. She is allergic to “SOLAMEDIAL.”

Gloria’s TMJ problems have an unknown onset and unknown etiology. She has seen Dr. Metcalf and Dr. Hough in reference to her ear problems, and they cannot find anything specific from their standpoint as to the cause of the hearing loss except perhaps association with the TMJ. She has no problems with earaches but has significant problems with tinnitus with the right side being significantly greater than the left side. No problems with vertigo, but she has significant hearing loss on the right side. Other joints that bother her include her right shoulder, right elbow, and right wrist. She is unaware of whether she has any problems with clenching and bruxism at nighttime, but she is sure she doesn’t have any daytime factors. She gets headaches about once every two to three weeks, and they occur in the frontal and temporal area bilaterally at about a level of 4. She recently has developed pain in the right TMJ at about a level of 5. On the average day, she really doesn’t have much pain around the jaws and claims no pain on an average day around the head and neck area. She rates her jaw function at 2, diet at 2, and disability at 0. The major concern she has is that when she sleeps she has to sleep on her back now because of pain on her right side and she used to sleep on the right side all the time. She does notice that before she goes to sleep she feels as though she has difficulties breathing and has to take a deep breath. Once she is asleep, her symptoms are not quite as significant. She does have snoring problems. 

She has significant hearing loss, particularly in the right ear. This is interfering with her abilities to do her job as a transcriptionist. It has become increasingly difficult for her to transcribe recorded work. 

Patient Concerns

TMJ problems
Tinnitus
Headaches 
Hearing loss
Sleep apnea symptoms 
Difficulties eating and chewing some foods

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Gloria has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is -2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted off to the left a couple of millimeters. Chin is pretty much on the facial midline. 

In profile view, Gloria has probably about 3 or 4 mm of maxillary AP deficiency. Chin is retruded about 10 to 12 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. As she postures her mandible forward as far as she can, it does improve her overall facial balance although the chin-neckline is still not really well-defined.

Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular right first and second bicuspids but has all the rest of her teeth back through the third molars. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the third molars. Has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side and a full Class II cuspid relationship on the left side. She has an anterior deep bite of probably 7 mm. She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch and in the upper arch may have just a slight reverse curve but not too significant. 

Intranasally, the airway looks fairly good. The septum may be deviated a little bit off toward the right side. She had a skin cancer removed from the right side of her nose, and there is a little bit of a cave in on the right side making her right luminal valve somewhat constricted, although the left side looks pretty much normal. Turbinates are relatively moderate in size, and there appears to be a good airway back inside the nose. 

Maximum opening is 52 mm. Excursive movements are about 12 mm in each direction. On excursive movements to the right, she has pain in the right TMJ area. On opening, her mandible does deviate to the right a couple of millimeters. On opening, she has an opening click at about 15 mm and a closing clicking at about 10 mm. She has crepitation in both TMJs that is actually audible. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the right temporalis muscle but no other pain to palpation. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the mandibular right first and second bicuspids are missing. Crowns appear a little bit smaller than normal size. Two pontics are part of a five-unit bridge. She has a root canal on the mandibular right second molar and mandibular left third molar. She has crowns on all three posterior teeth in the left mandible and also has a crown on the maxillary left second molar. Sinuses look clear. Nasal airway looks reasonably good. She has a significant amount of arthritis in the right TMJ area and to a lesser extent in the left TMJ area. Styloid process looks quite long and calcified on the left side and somewhat shorter on the right side. No significant pathology is seen. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a lot of sclerosis within the joint. Not a very good image of the joint itself. Some anterior beaking is seen. Condyle appears somewhat sclerotic. 

Left TMJ condyle shows up on one view. Condyle appears narrow anteroposteriorly. Decreased posterior joint space and increased anterior joint space. No flattening on the anterior head. Styloid process appears fairly long and overlaps the posterior border of the mandible.

On opening, there appears to be good translation of both condyles, and the condyles are not in really good focus. Translation on the left side is better than the right side. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear, and the nasal airway appears clear with just moderate size of the turbinates.

Cephalometrically, her head is tipped up some. Oropharyngeal airway appears to be moderate in size. At the level of the soft palate, the airway dimension is about 9 mm and at the tongue base is about 9 mm. Appears to have a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship. Has an anterior deep bite. She has a tooth-size discrepancy, and if we include the increased widths of the upper incisors, there is probably about 2 mm. Left mandibular bicuspids are larger compared to the upper left bicuspids. Right mandibular bicuspids pontics are smaller than the upper cuspids. 
Basic Diagnoses

Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and significant inflammatory tissue surrounding the condyle
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction
AP mandibular deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Slight vertical maxillary deficiency		SAME AS #5?
Class II end-on occlusion 
Anterior deep bite of 7 mm
Mandibular dental midline shifted 2 mm to the left of the chin midline and facial midline
Missing right mandibular first and second bicuspids replaced by pontics that are smaller than the actual original tooth size
Grossly enlarged mandibular right cuspid crown
Accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Left first and second bicuspids slightly enlarged compared to the left maxillary bicuspids
High occlusal plane angle
Retained third molars
Difficulties eating and chewing
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of approximately 6 mm (normal dimension 11 mm)
Right TMJ pain
Headaches 
Severe tinnitus 
Severe hearing loss, right side
Sleep apnea symptoms 
Snoring

Recommended Treatment

Decrease size of crown on the mandibular right cuspid to equal the size of the left cuspid. Keep cuspid aligned with the bicuspids and the space created leave it anteriorly between the cuspid and right lateral incisor

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch. Close up space on the right side and try to shift the mandibular dental midline 1 to 2 mm to the right. Consider stripping lower left first and second bicuspids to reduce the mesial distal width to make it more compatible with the maxillary bicuspids. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about a millimeter of tooth structure to help compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy of 1 to 2 mm

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, debridement, meniscectomies, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it posteriorly
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Bilateral fat grafts to the TMJs (harvest from the abdomen)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine and retain occlusion 

Restorative dentistry as necessary to achieve the best interdigitation which could include remaining of the bridge on the right side