B113
B113 is 58 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. B113 has had some difficult times over the years, particularly joint problems. He has had shoulders reconstructed and elbows that have been scoped. He has had arthrotomies on the right wrist. He has had reconstruction of the right hip. Both knees have been scoped and he has had two back surgeries. His most recent surgery was in April on his top part of his left lung. It did not go well. B113 does have:

COPD.
Emphysema.
MAC.
Aspergillus.
Since he had a partial lungectomy, he has had much less stamina and strength. He has had a sleep study by Dr. XXXX and she did send him on a CPAP machine with him. He has not used the machine yet. He takes about 15 medications which he has listed for us in the records that he brought. He rates his headaches at a level of 4 in the left frontal and temporal area and behind his eye. He rates his left TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 8, diet at 5, disability at 9. He is aware of clenching his teeth at nighttime and also during the day. He has some numbness in the left temple area and his left cheek area is a little hypersensitive perhaps.

In frontal view, B113 does have good facial symmetry and balance. B113 has some slight AP deficiency in the maxilla and in the mandible. He is probably about 3 mm AP deficient in the maxilla and 8 mm AP deficient in the mandible. B113 has all of his lower teeth except he is missing the mandibular left second bicuspid and second molar and he is missing mandibular right third molar. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth except for the maxillary right third molar. He is basically fairly close to being Class I on the right side and slightly Class II on the right side. The mandibular dental midline is shifted to the right about 2 mm. He has a cross bite with the right cuspid. Actually, he is Class II on both sides. He has got about a 2 mm anterior deep bite relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy. Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the left side. Turbinates appear moderate in size, but the left side airway appears to be fairly well blocked. The right side at least anteriorly appears to be reasonably open. To palpation, he has high moderate pain over the left temporalis, left SCM, left posterior neck, left medial pterygoid and milder tenderness over the left TMJ and retromandibular area. No pain to palpation on the right side. Maximal incisal opening is 40 mm, opening without significant pain 30 mm. The excursion movement to the right is 6 mm, to the left 9 mm. On opening, he does have almost audible crepitation in the left TMJ area. The right joint seems to function relatively smoothly.
Basic diagnoses for B113 would be as follows:

Left TMJ severe arthritis.
Left TMJ pain. Left sided headaches. Left sided myofascial pain. Left sided earaches.
Left sided tinnitus.
Left sided vertigo.
COPD, emphysema, MAC, aspergillus.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
2. Surgery. a.	Left TMJ condylectomy, debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Left TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen). c.	Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.

B113 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat arthritis. There is sclerosis on the top of the condyle. It is difficult to identify discal tissue within the joint. There may be some decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. There is sclerosis on the head of the condyle. The lateral rim is fairly flat. Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. It is very difficult to identify discal tissue. There could be anteriorly displaced discal tissue.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is fairly large and almost too large for some parts of the joint space. The articular eminence is moderately steep. There is no definable discal tissue, although there may be some remnants beneath the articular eminence and posterior to the condylar head. There may be compressed tissue behind the condylar head and the discal tissue beneath the articular eminence is quite short anteroposteriorly and only shows up in a few of the T2 films. On opening, there is restricted translation with just a few millimeters of anterior movement. There appears to be bone-on-bone contact between the condyle and the articular eminence.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is sclerotic on top. The articular eminence is moderately steep and not as steep as the opposite side. It is difficult to identify discal tissue, but there does appear to be compresses tissue in the joint area. In some views, there appears to be a remnant of the discal tissue beneath the articular eminence. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. It appears there may be some compressed tissue behind the condyle. On open view, there is significant restriction of translatory movements. It appears there could be some discal tissue, although it is significantly degenerated within the joint area. If there is any remnant of the disc in position, it appears to be adhesed to the fossa as it does have minimal translation with the condyle.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated with severe deformation and non-reducing with limited translation of the condyle.
Right TMJ arthritis and a disc may either be in place but significantly degenerated or displaced and significantly degenerated but with compressed tissue in the joint space. There is limited translation of the condyle.

