CAROLINE REED									12-08-04

Caroline is 16 years old and referred by Dr. George Adams, 2845 Parkwood Blvd., #100, Plano, TX  75093.
 
Patient History

Caroline is in good health with no major medical problems. The onset of Caroline’s problems is unknown, and the etiology is unknown. She has had orthodontic treatment since about the age of 10. Initially she had a butterfly maxillary expansion device and also lip bumpers. She had a Herbst appliance for 1-1/2 years from about the age of 13 to 14-1/2 years. She has had a tongue guard on the lower anterior teeth. She has had full orthodontic appliances for greater than two years. She has also had headgear use in the past. 

Currently she takes no medications. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She does get frequent sinus infections. She does clench and brux at night and also sometimes during the day. Interestingly her mother had orthognathic surgery about 11 years ago with Dr. Bob Buckles. Caroline gets headaches about two to three times per month primarily in the temporal area at about an area of 6. She gets pain and discomfort in her jaw joints that can occur anywhere from a few times a week to daily at about a level of 6. Average daily pain and discomfort is about a level of 4. She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 4, and disability at 2. 

Patient Concerns

Her teeth don’t fit together very well
Headaches that occur probably a couple of times a month
Difficulties breathing through her nose
Snoring

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Caroline has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 20 mm if the lip were filled out. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is 0.5 mm to the right. Chin is fairly close to being on the midline.

In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably a couple of millimeters. Maxilla is probably a good 4 to 5 mm AP deficient. Chin is probably about 10 to 15 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is shortened. Chin-neck angle is not well-defined. 

Intraorally, Caroline has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She does have some tongue spikes on the lower central incisors. Has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. A little inflammation of the gingiva is present. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Has a pegged cuspid tooth on the left side, and Dr. Adams has created space around that tooth. Has a curve of Spee in the upper arch. In centric relation, Caroline occludes only on the second molars occluding first on the left side and then the right side. She has almost a full Class II cuspid relationship on the left side and Class II end-on on the right side by about 4 to 5 mm. She has an anterior open bite of about 4.5 to 5 mm. She has a crossbite tendency on the posterior right side in the second molar area. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula and soft palate appear relatively normal in size, although the soft palate could be just a little bit long. Faucial pillars appear relatively normal. Tonsils are present, but they are small in size. 

There is a cant in the occlusion transversely with the right side being about 1.5 mm lower than the left side in the maxilla, and in the mandible the right side may be about 2 mm lower than the left side.

Columella is a little bit wide. Nostrils are a little bit narrow but not too significantly. Intranasally, right turbinate is a little bit enlarged right now and the left is relatively normal. Septum appears to have a relatively normal curvature in it with no at least visible obstruction caused by the septum. 

To palpation, she has some moderate discomfort and pain over the masseter muscles, styloid areas, and posterior neck area. She has some mild tenderness over the TMJs and left medial pterygoid area. 

On opening, the left joint had a glitch initially but then smoothed out. The right joint was fairly smooth. On excursive movements, there is audible clicking and popping in the left TMJ. Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 9 mm and to the left 10 mm. Incisal opening without discomfort is about 45 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of one developing third molar in the mandibular left side. No other third molars appear to be developing. Sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Small malformed maxillary left cuspid tooth. Both joints appear a little bit arthritic in shape. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are all clear and developing well. Turbinates are moderate in size with the right one being a little bit larger than the left one. The bony septum at least is relatively straight. The width of the nasal cavity may be a little bit narrow. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be a little bit arthritic. A little bit of an anterior beaking is present. Decreased superior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Probability that the disc may be out position. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit short in vertical height. Joint space may be a little bit narrow but difficult to tell. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Impacted mandibular third molars observed. 

Opening tomograms show fairly good translation of both condyles out and just slightly beyond the apex of the articular eminence. 

Cephalometric evaluation demonstrates a retruded maxilla and mandible with a high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway may be moderately decreased. At the soft palate level the airway measures about 5 mm. At the base of the tongue, it measures about 7 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis (ICR) and articular disc dislocation without reduction on the right and with reduction on the left
Maxillary AP hypoplasia
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia
Mandibular AP hypoplasia
Apertognathia
Class II occlusion 
Impacted mandibular left third molar
Accentuated curve of Wilson, upper arch
Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
Headaches
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Tooth-size discrepancy secondary to a small maxillary left cuspid
Overangulation of lower incisors
Slight overangulation of maxillary incisors
Occluding only on secondary molars

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJs

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up space around the upper left cuspid to equal the size of the upper right cuspid. Tip left lateral incisor root mesially and keep cuspid root tipped distally (left lateral incisor root now sitting against the left cuspid root). On the right side, tip maxillary lateral incisor root more mesially and keep the cuspid root tipped distally. The space is necessary for interdental osteotomies. Disengage maxillary second molars from the arch wire. Place a vertical step in the arch wire between the lateral incisors and cuspids so that the lateral incisors are aligned at a slightly elevated occlusal plane level as compared to the cuspids and posterior teeth. Placing a step in the arch wire will help extrude the cuspid slightly to get it into a more flat and parallel relationship with the posterior teeth
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure and retract lower incisors

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction advancing the chin approximately 15 mm
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxillary approximately 4 to 5 mm and correct the curve of occlusion as well as upright the maxillary incisors
Removal of impacted mandibular left third molar

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Restorative dentistry to build up the left maxillary cuspid
