APRIL REED										07/25/2006

April is 20 years old, referred by Dr. Tom Lowder, 2709 W. Huntsville, Springdale, AR 72762.  April's problems began in about October of 2002 when she caught an elbow in the face while playing basketball.  This seems to have started her TMJ problems.  Prior to that, she had orthodontics from the age of 10 to 14 by Dr. McBeth.  Treatment included Herbst appliances as well as maxillary expander.  Following her injury, she did see Dr. Scott Bolding and got an MRI and noted bilaterally disc displacements and recommended surgery.  April declined surgery at that time.  She then had some splint therapy by Dr. McNeel beginning in December of 2002 and January of 2003 but this did not help.  In addition, she had some physical therapy at that time.  She then had another splint made by Dr. Tom Lowder in 2003.  She has seen Dr. Makowski who wired her jaws together for two weeks because it was tending to dislocate.  She started having problems again and so he wired her together again for an additional four weeks.  This seemed to have worked.  She then was reasonably comfortable until after 1-1/2 to 2 months ago when she began developing significant headaches and TMJ problems once again.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Halcion 0.5 mg q.h.s.
Flexeril 10 mg tablets.  She usually takes just one at night.
Ibuprofen which she takes as needed for discomfort.

She has no problems with earaches but does have tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing of her teeth at night. 

She rates her headaches at a level of 5 in the temple area but it can easily escalate to a level of 8 and occur daily.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, facial pain and headaches at 6, jaw function at 5, diet at 6 and disability at 6.

In frontal view, April has fairly good left to right racial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is just maybe a ½ mm off to the right side and chin is just slightly off to the right side.  In profile view, April has some slight AP maxillary deficiency probably about 2 to 3 mm.  Chin is retruded by probably about 15+ mm.  Chin-neckline is extremely short and chin-neck angle is not defined.  Intraorally, April has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva although it is quite thin around the central incisors.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally being about at least 3 mm Class III on the right side and 2 to 3 mm on the left side.  She has an overjet of about 3 mm.  She has 1 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Transversely the occlusal plane is fairly level.  As April opens her mouth she tends to deviate significantly off towards the right side probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are all within normal limits.  The nasal septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  The left turbinate is moderate in size and at least anteriorly there is a reasonable airway.  The right side turbinate appears enlarged and appears to be ingested and could provide some significant nasal airway obstruction in its current condition.  

APRIL REED					07/25/2006				Page 2


To palpation, she has some mild discomfort over the masseter muscles, TMJs, styloid areas and mild tenderness over the temporalis, SCMs, posterior neck and shoulder muscles.  On opening, joints seem to function fairly smooth but on closing she has a pop of about 10 mm on both the left and right side.  In fact, the right side was more obvious than the left side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The rest of the teeth are all present.  There is a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Both condyles appear arthritic and appear to have lost vertical dimension.  Articular eminences are fairly steep.  There appears to be adequate room between the lateral incisors and cuspids.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The nasal septum appears to have some deviation.  Waters view shows that April has tilted up a little bit.  Oropharyngeal airway opens about 5 to 6 mm at the base of the tongue about 4 mm.  She does have a slight head tipped upward jaw position which would open up the oropharyngeal airway a little bit more than a flat head orientation. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows some flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of anterior prominence appears to be present.  Joint space looks reasonably good or may be slightly decreased in the posterior aspect.  Articular eminence is fairly steep. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be a little bit more arthritic than the opposite side.  There is a little bit more flattening on the anterior head and a little bit more anterior beaking present.  Superior and anterior joint spaces appear to be decreased.  On opening, there is excellent translation of the left TMJ and the right TMJ seems to show some restraint. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis with displaced non-salvageable disc on the right side and degenerated displaced disc on the left side.
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Class II end-on occlusion.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.

I discussed in detail with the family the treatment options.  Treatment options included attempting to reposition the articular discs although the prognosis is not real good particularly on the right side.  Also suggest using a sternoclavicular disc graft on the right side and reposition the left disc but again the predictability would be questionable.  The third option to correct the joint problems would be bilateral total joint prostheses.  
APRIL REED					07/25/2006				Page 3


After an extensive discussion with April and her parents, they appear to be more interested in the total joint prostheses because of the high predictability of treatment outcomes relatively to stability and elimination of pain and headache problems.  They do understand that it is not known as to the longevity of these prostheses.  Based on their desires, the following treatment plan will provide her the best result.
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and down graft the posterior aspect of the maxilla.
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
