ANA PAULA REIS DE SA								08/21/2010

Ana is 25 years old.  She has had previous orthognathic surgery with significant relapse.  MRI shows that left TMJ mild arthritis and an anterior displaced disc with reduction.  On the right side, she has severe resorptive arthritis and an anteriorly dislocated disc, non-reducing and non-salvageable.  Clinically, her upper lip length is 20 mm and tooth lip relationship is 3 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted 1 mm to left and chin 2 mm to the right.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm vertically shorter than the left side.  She has a Class II end-on occlusion with an over jet of 9 mm and an anterior open bite of 3 mm with a left open bite of 3 to 4 mm.  In profile, her mandible appears to be retruded 15 to 18 mm in her centric relation.  To palpation, she has some moderate pain over the masseter muscles and severe pain over the SCMs, posterior neck, shoulders, retromandibular area.  She has TMJ pain at a level of 9 on the right side and 6 on the left side.  In the right side, she gets crepitus and in the left side she has a pop at about 15 mm of opening and 10 mm of closing.  The incisal opening is 42 mm, left excursion movement is 7 mm, and right excursion movement 9 mm.  She says her right chest is becoming enlarged in the upper ribcage area and, in fact, to palpation she has a prominence there.   When occluding, she hits only on the right first molar mandibular second molar.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocated, severely deformed, and non-salvageable. 
Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with reduction.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Slight AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia as well as a transverse cant in the occlusion. 
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Anterior open bite, 3 mm anteriorly and 3 to 4 mm on the left side.
Occluding only on the right posterior molars.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe myofascial pain.
Headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts 			total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
	c.	Bilateral coronoidotomies (may be able to avoid it on the left side but will need it 			on the right side).
	d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla slightly and down graft it 	posteriorly. 
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I feel this treatment plan will get Ana the best possible treatment outcome.  Her stepfather is a physician which he understands well what needs to be done.  










