MELISSA REICH									10-10-03

Melissa is 15 years old and referred by Dr. Warner Young, 8299 161st Avenue N.E., #201, Redmond, WA  98052.

Patient History

She does have exercise-induced asthma. The only medication she takes is albuterol inhaler occasionally as needed.

She gives no history of TMJ pain, headaches, TMJ noises, earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. She may have a little hearing loss on one side but unrelated to the jaw situation. As best as Melissa can recall, when she was a lot younger, her teeth fit in a more normal position. It was only about in the sixth grade when she was about 11 when she first began to notice that the lower jaw began to grow more rapidly. Dr. Young does have some earlier records perhaps on Melissa that we could perhaps borrow and evaluate for growth. She did have some orthodontic treatment when she was in the fourth grade. She got her braces on about March or April of 2003. 

Patient Concerns

The jaws are not lined up properly
The teeth don’t fit together
Jaw alignment and bite are getting progressively worse 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Melissa has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary midline looks pretty much on the facial midline. Nasal tip is deviated just a little bit to the left a couple of millimeters. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm to the right of the maxillary midline. As Melissa shifts her mandible a little bit toward the left side about 2 mm, it appears her facial symmetry. Maxilla is probably about 4 mm to 5 mm AP deficient. Chin appears a little bit strong. Chin-neckline is elongated, and chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. She does have some lip incompetence of probably about 4 to 5 mm. Melissa has an anterior open bite of probably about 2 mm. On the right side, she has a full Class III malocclusion, and on the left side, she has a super Class III malocclusion. She is probably 9 to 10 mm Class III on the left side and about 7 on the right side. Some slight lower arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being about 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. The upper arch is fairly symmetrical. Maxilla is level transversely, but the mandible on the left side is down in the cuspid-bicuspid area probably 1 to 1.5 mm. She has bilateral posterior crossbites and an anterior crossbite. Oropharynx appears clear. Tonsils are present but of moderate size.

Intranasally, the left turbinate appears somewhat hyperplastic today, and the right turbinate is relatively moderate in size. Nasal airway is much greater on the right side compared to the left side today. She has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. TMJs seem to function smoothly. 

Incisal opening is 43 mm. Excursive movement in each direction is 6 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars. Turbinates look moderate in size. Sinuses appear relatively equal in opacity. There are four unerupted third molars present. All other teeth are present and accounted for. Condylar heads and necks look moderately long but actually look a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly. Difficult to see the tops of the condyles. 

Waters view shows the sinuses all look relatively clear. Left turbinate appears larger than the right turbinate. Mandibular asymmetry is seen with it shifted a little bit off to the right side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly. Condylar head and neck appear elongated. Joint space superiorly appears narrow which could be indicative of either a very thin disc or the disc slightly displaced anteriorly and/or medially. Articular eminence is moderately steep and a little bit elongated. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears similar to the opposite side. Superior and posterior joint space seems a little bit narrow. Condyle head and neck may be somewhat elongated. Articular eminence is moderately steep and a little bit elongated but not as significant as the opposite side. 

Opening views show limited translation in both joints. Clinically, however, she does have good translation.

Cephalometrically, Melissa appears to have AP maxillary deficiency and mandibular prognathism. She has a skeletal Class III and occlusal Class III jaw relationship. Her oropharyngeal airway is quite large. Tonsils can be seen. She has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia
Mandibular deviate prognathism
Maxillary AP hypoplasia
Class III occlusion 
Bilateral posterior and anterior crossbites
Basically a Class III malocclusion being slightly worse on the left side as compared to the right side
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Do not do any further expansion as the maxillary arch width is ideal for the width of the mandible at this time
Continue to align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Multiple maxillary osteotomies with bone plate stabilization and hydroxyapatite grafting
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 