AMY REINHART								03/11/2011

Amy is 31 years old.  Amy was referred to me by Dr. Ellen Hope, a neurologist in Edmond, Oklahoma.  Amy’s TMJ problems began when she was about 15 with clicking in her jaw joints.  At age 16, she began developing headaches.  She is a rodeo rider and started riding horses at the age of 18 months.  She has had at least four concussions at age 6, 14, 15, and 17.  At age 19, she got kicked in the jaw by a horse and she had a fractured mandible.  She apparently was not aware that the mandible was fractured until she was told by Dr. Jim Baker at one of his surgeries that he thought there was evidence of a previous fracture.  Amy has seen probably about 30 doctors for her problems.  She had orthodontics from the age of 15 to 17 including a palatal expander by Dr. Tony Stradesky in Ardmore, OK.  She was treated for years for migraine headaches and neck problems when, in fact, the etiology was from her TMJs.  It was not until she saw Dr. Robert Talley that it was diagnosed that she had TMJ problems.  She has worn splints with Dr. Talley from 2006 to 2010.  In August 2006, she had bilateral TMJ arthroscopy by Dr. Jim Baker.  In March 2007, she had bilateral TMJ disc repositioning with Mitek anchors.  She had physical therapy after each of the surgeries.  She had craniofacial manipulation in 2008.  Her last round of physical therapy began in September 2010 until the present.  In 2009, she had Botox injections but had an adverse reaction.  

Amy rates her headaches at a level of 8 that occur in the frontal and temporal areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 7, diet at 6, disability at 9.  She gets frequent earaches, occasional tinnitus, and frequent vertigo, but no hearing loss.  Other joints that she has some problems with include her shoulders, hips, knees and feet.  She has also been diagnosed with gastritis, acid reflux, depression, anxiety, and asthma.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also during the day.  She does have mild snoring, severe daytime somnolence, and is predominantly a mouth breather at night as well as during the day.  She even has difficulties blowing her nose because of the airway obstructions.  She also has high blood pressure, but so does her mother and brother.  She currently takes the following medications:

OxyContin 20 mg t.i.d. 
Lorazepam 0.5 mg 1/2 tablet t.i.d. 
Protonix 40 mg q.d.
Ambien CR 12.5 mg q.h.s.
Clonidine 0.1 mg b.i.d. 
BCP.
B12 shots. 
Inhaler that she uses 2 times per months for her asthma.  

During 2007 and 2008, almost weekly she would end up in the emergency room because of her severe pain problems and inability to eat and chew and with significant problems with nausea.

In frontal view, Amy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is zero.  The maxillary and mandibular midlines are pretty much on the facial midline.  The chin is just slightly to the right about 2 mm.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  The chin is a little bit deficient by maybe 6 to 8 mm.  Chin neckline is a little bit short and submental area is slightly full.  Intraorally, Amy has all of her lower teeth and upper teeth back through the second molars.  She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with about a 2 mm vertical overbite.  She has an elongated uvula, although it is quite thin.  Soft palate, fascial pillars and tonsils all look relatively normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates are extremely large and appear to block most of the airway.  Amy has had her wisdom teeth out.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The sinuses are clear.  The turbinates are enlarged.  The condyles appear arthritic and appear sclerotic particularly on the right side with a Mitek anchor present in each condylar neck area.  

Coronal view shows the septum is fairly straight.  The sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are excessively large and appear to be blocking most of the functional nasal airway.  

Axial view shows the sinuses are clear.  The turbinates are extremely large and long and extend all the way from the piriform avetures back probably just slightly beyond the hard palate.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is postured forward in the fossa.  There is advanced arthritis in the joint with sclerosis and anterior beaking and the entire beak is sclerotic bone.  The fossa also appears to be sclerotic.  There is decreased joint space anteriorly.  Mitek anchor is present.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with advanced arthritic changes and anterior beaking where the top of the condyle and anterior beaking are all sclerotic.  There is a Mitek anchor in the condylar neck area.  There is decreased anterior joint space.  The condyle is somewhat postured forward.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is sclerotic above.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is arthritic and slightly smaller in size compared to the left one.  There is decreased lateral joint space and vertical joint space.  There appear to be degenerated changes and sclerotic changes on the head of the condyle, but also in the fossa.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 4 to 5 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Amy has a retruded maxilla and mandible with a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway measurements measure only 3 mm at the soft palate and at the base of the tongue (normal measurements are 11 mm).  

Amy has severe pain throughout almost the entire head and neck area with a little bit less pain in the posterior neck and shoulder areas.  Maximal opening was 30 mm, opening without pain 4 mm.  The excursion movements are only about 1 mm in each direction.  As she opens and closes, she could feel gravely sounds in her joints.  

Basic diagnoses for Amy would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia. 
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 11 mm).
Hypertrophied turbinates causing severe nasal airway obstruction.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches. 
Severe myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Use bonded brackets so the patient will	 		have less trauma.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses.  
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise 			direction. 
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
	e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.  
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  