NANCY REYNOLDS								02/11/2009

Nancy is 63 years old, referred by Dr. Mark Geller.  Her primary concerns are as follows:

Jaw joint and jaw pain. 
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Teeth do not fit together very well. 
Severe sleep apnea.

Nancy has had no previous jaw surgery except for removal of her wisdom teeth, and then she had four second molars removed.  She has had orthodontics x3.  The only medication she currently is taking is HCTZ 25 mg 2 times weekly.  Nancy has bilateral TMJ pain at about a level of 4, average daily pain around the head and neck area at 3, jaw function at 7, diet at 4, disability at 6.  She does not have any significant problems with headaches.  She gets occasional earaches, no tinnitus, and has moderate problems with vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her hips, wrists, and her neck.  She has been diagnosed Raynaud’s syndrome.  She gets tachycardia at night, but this has recently stopped.  She does not believe she clenches and grinds her teeth.  She has had orthodontics actually four times.  She had it as a child in her early teen years.  She had removable orthodontics in her twenties, and then she had orthodontics when she was 38.  She was then involved in a motor vehicle accident.  She had the orthodontics again from 2003 to 2005 with Dr. David Nelson in Austin.  He used Invisalign.  She has had physical rehabilitation and also biofeedback for 2 years.  Maximal incisal opening is 37 mm and excursion movement to the right is 7 mm and to the left 4 mm.  On opening, she deviates significantly to the right side 4 to 5 mm.  She has crepitus in both joints.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the TMJs, retromandibular area, posterior neck, and left masseter area.  The date of onset of her TMJ problems was 1990 when she was involved in the motor vehicle accident, but she sustained some other injuries as well.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  Upper lip length is 23 mm.  Tooth lip relationship is 2 mm.  Maxillary midline is 1 mm to the right.  In profile, the maxilla and upper lip is 4 to 5 mm AP deficient and chin is 12 to 15 mm AP deficient.  Intraorally, she has a Class II end-in occlusion and missing all four third molars and all four second molars.  She states that she has moderate snoring at night and mild daytime somnolence.  She has moderate sleep apnea.  She is predominantly a mouth breather at night time sometimes.  She currently is not on a CPAP machine.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  Uvula may be slightly long.  Soft palate appears elongated.  There appears to be little room between the soft palate and the posterior pharyngeal wall area.  Nancy does have a fairly significant gag reflex.  Intranasally, turbinates appear moderately large.  Septum appears deviated off towards the right side.  Maximal incisal opening is 37 mm, and she could get to 32 without significant pain.  Excursion movement to the right 7 mm, to the left 4 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Axial shows that Nancy has extremely large inferior turbinates.  Sinuses look relatively healthy.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  
Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  She has quite large turbinates and the septum appears relatively straight.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows major arthritic changes within the joint.  At the lateral aspect of the joint, there appears to be bone-on-bone contact.  There is a little osteophyte sticking up off the top of the condyle.  There is significantly decreased joint space, particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 4 to 5 mm.  
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has severe arthritis and small cystic areas within the condyle.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 4 to 5 mm.  There appears to be bone-on-bone contact throughout most of the fossa area.
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes.  There is anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Posterior joint space is decreased.   
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with what appears to be bone-on-bone contact.  There is significant anterior beaking present.  There is sclerosis throughout most of the condylar head and even affecting the fossa area.  There appears to be some erosions in the articular eminence as well as the condylar head.  

Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary and mandibular second and third molars.  The condyles appear arthritic.  The septum appears as though there may be a spur coming off the left side, and the turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows there is some AP deficiency about the maxilla and mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway space measures about 3.5 mm at the soft palate level and about 3 mm at the base of the tongue (normal AP dimension is 11 mm).  She has a skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship and an anterior deep bite with severe degenerative changes.  The degeneration in the right joint is more advanced than the left side.    

Basic diagnoses for Nancy would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension  of 3 mm (normal 11 mm).
Severe sleep apnea.
Hypertrophied nasal turbinates causing nasal airway obstruction. 
Missing maxillary and mandibular second and third molars.
Anterior deep bite of about 5 mm.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 4.5 mm.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Sleep study with probably initiation of CPAP treatment until surgery can be performed. 
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally.  Open about 0.5 mm of space on each side between the lateral incisors and cuspids to help compensate for the tooth size discrepancy. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about at least 3 mm of tooth structure.  
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral coronoidotomies.
Bilateral partial nasal turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
