CARROLL REIDER									01/01/2011

Records have been sent to me by Dr. Bill Hang for evaluation and a phone consult.  Records forwarded included an I-CAT, facial occlusal photographs as well as a Panorex and lateral cephalogram.  Primary concerns she has include the following:

Obstructive sleep apnea.
Unable to eat or breathe properly.
Recessed jaw.
Headaches, TMJ, and jaw pain. 
Excessive grinding at night.
She feels her health is spiraling downward quickly.

She currently only takes Synthroid 175 mcg q.d.  She is currently under orthodontic treatment with Dr. Bill Hang.  In the past, she has been on Cymbalta, Wellbutrin, statins, allergy medications, asthma medications, estrogen, and progesterone.  

She believes her TMJ problems began when she was in her 30s some time in the 1990s of unknown etiology.  She rates her headaches at a level of 7 that occur predominantly in the temple areas, back of head, top of head and behind the eyes.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6 and average daily pain at 9.  She rtes her jaw function at 9 and is on a very soft liquid diet rating her diet at a level of 9 to 10.  She rates her disability at about a 9.  She clenches and grinds her teeth at night and also during the day severely.  She has constant ear congestion.  She has continuous ringing in her ears and frequent lightheadedness and dizziness.  She sometimes has general joint pain in her hands and knuckles.  She does suffer from depression, but is not being treated at this time.  She states that she is tired and she does not work.  She is just tired.

PHOTOGRAPIC EXAMINATION.  It is difficult to do a photo analysis because in the profile view her head is tipped upwards.  In the frontal view, she seems to have increased vertical facial height on the right side compared to the left side.  She is missing maxillary left second bicuspid and first molar as well as the maxillary right second molar.  She may have a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being a little bit lower than the left side.  The right side of the mandible appears longer vertically than the left side.  The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The mandible dental midline is shifted about 2 mm over to the right side.  In profile view, she may have some AP deficiency of the mandible.  Occlusally, she is missing the maxillary left second bicuspid, first molar, and right first molar.  In the lower arch, she has all of her teeth back through the third molars.  She has some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She does have diastemas between all of her anterior teeth.  She has brackets on the maxillary arch and none on the lower arch.  Panorex confirms the absence of teeth including the maxillary third molars, but the lower third molars are present.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Nasal airway appears clear except the left side appears more clogged up.  Right nasal airway appears somewhat obstructed.  There appears to be some amount of decay associated with the maxillary left second molar.  Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is some AP mandibular deficiency and the maxilla appears in reasonably AP position.  There is some degree of maxillary hyperplasia and some slight anterior vertical hyperplasia.  There appears to be a skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship.  She has a decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm at the base of tongue and 10 mm at the soft palate level.  There is some space between the dorsum of the tongue and the hard palate.  She has an anterior deep bite and a Class II skeletal occlusal relationship.  

Basic diagnosis would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and probable articular disc dislocations.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical and transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior deep bite of approximately 5 to 6 mm.
Crowding of the lower anterior arch.
Spacing around the upper anterior teeth.
She has a curve of Spee in the lower arch and slightly reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.  Align and level maxillary arch.  Close up some of the spacing 	around the upper anterior teeth unless it is planned that these teeth be bonded, but do 	consolidate some of the spacing between the upper lateral and cuspid to equal 1 mm of 	joint space.  
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with either Mitek anchors or total joint prostheses.
	b.	Mandibular sagittal split osteotomies to advance the mandible approximately 5 to 			8 mm (will be dependent on actual clinical examination of the patient).  
	c.	Maxillary osteotomies to expand, down graft it posteriorly and perhaps advance it 		slightly.
	d.	Consider UPPP procedures if soft palate and uvula appear excessively long.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
5.	Restorative dentistry to replace missing dental units and finalize the occlusal inter-	relationship.  