B114
B114 is 37 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. B114 is in good health. The only medication she takes is Celexa 30 mg q.d. B114 gets headaches at about a level of 4 once or twice a month, but does not feel they are directly related to her jaw joints. She rates her TMJ pain at 6 with the right side worse than the left side, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 6, diet at 2, disability at 1. She feels the onset of her TMJ problems began about 7 to 9 years ago of unknown etiology. She began splint therapy approximately 9 years ago and has had 3 splints. She currently uses an NTI that was made by Dr. XXXX. She has no trouble with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss. The only joint that bothers her is her left hip. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also during the day. She will take an occasional Advil for her pain, but most of the time just lives with her pain situation.

CLINICAL EVALUATION. In frontal view, B114 has fairly good facial balance in the middle and upper third face. She has some asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about -2 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm to the right and the chin is about 3 mm to the left. The left mandibular angle is about 8 mm shorter vertically on the left side than on the right side. In profile view, the maxilla may be retruded by about 2 mm. The chin is retruded by probably 6-8 mm. The chin neck distance is reasonably good and chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. Intraorally, B114 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some crowns on her posterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all her teeth back through the second molars present. She hits prematurely on the left side. She has a slight Class II occlusal relationship on the left by about 3 mm and on the right side she is almost a full Class II. She has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm and an over jet of almost 2 mm. She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left cuspid being 2 mm higher than the right cuspid in the upper arch and the lower cuspid being 4 mm higher than the right cuspid. Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy. Fascial pillars may be mildly constricted. Intranasally, the turbinates appear enlarged. She probably has moderate nasal airway obstruction. To palpation, she has moderate pain in the right retromandibular area and mild tenderness over the right masseter, medial pterygoid, and TMJ. On opening, she had relatively smooth function of the left joint, but some crepitus and popping noises in the right joint. Maximal incisal opening is 48 mm. The excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows she has root canals on the mandibular left and right first molars and maxillary left first molar. She has crowns on the left molars and on the mandibular left first molar. The condyles look arthritic. Bony septum appears straight. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged. Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Coronal view shows that the left sinus has fluid in it and left sinusitis. The right side shows some increased thickening of sinus membrane. The septum is reasonably straight at the level of the cut reviewed. Turbinates appear enlarged particularly in the right side.

Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged but with the right one pretty much obliterating the nasal airway. There is some thickening of the sinus membranes, being a little bit greater on the left side as compared to the right side.

Left TMJ sagittal view show a condyle that has severe arthritic changes with almost complete loss of the head of the condyle with resorption almost down into the neck of the condyle. The articular eminence is moderately shallow. There is joint space present vertically and also posteriorly.

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that has severe arthritis with anterior beaking and pseudocysts throughout the head of the condyle. There is decreased vertical joint space. The articular eminence is moderately inclined and the eminence is sclerotic as are portions of the head of the condyle.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone resorption with almost total loss of the condylar head. The joint space is reasonably well balance, although slightly decreased at the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ coronal view show a condyle that has severe arthritis. There is significantly decreased vertical joint space and areas that appear there could be bone-on-bone contact. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably a good 4 mm. There are some degenerative changes within the fossa.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B114 has a retruded mandible. The maxilla may be slightly vertically deficient. She measures an almost 10-11 mm vertical difference at the angles of the mandible with the right side being significantly lower than the left side. The mandible appears somewhat retruded. The occlusal plane is moderately high. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue about 6 mm.

Basic diagnoses for B114 would be as follows:
Left TMJ severe arthritis with loss of the condylar head and with a severely degenerated articular disc.
Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocated with bone-on-bone contact.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and transverse asymmetry.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia, left posterior vertical hypoplasia, and transverse asymmetry.
Slight Class II occlusion on the left side and almost a full Class II occlusion on the right side.
Anterior open bite of 2 mm with a right posterior open bite tendency.
Hypertrophied turbinates causing moderate nasal airway obstruction.
TMJ pain.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Left side of face 8 mm shorter vertically than the right side.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4 mm related to small upper lateral incisor.
History of clenching and bruxism.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Medications: Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s. to control the clenching and bruxism.
2. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Open about 1.5 mm of space around each maxillary lateral incisor to correct for the significant tooth size discrepancy. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with mandibular advancement and transverse leveling of the occlusal plane utilizing total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to transversely level, advance, and maximize the occlusal fit. c.	Bilateral mandibular coronoidotomies. d.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
5. Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors.

B114 MRI AGE: 37/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe degenerative changes with the condyle almost completely resolved. What is left is very sclerotic. There appears to be degenerative changes in the fossa as well. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good width with decreased vertical joint space and particularly out laterally there appears to be decreased joint space. There appears to be a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm. The articular disc appears to be medially displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is deformed and arthritic. It is quite sclerotic. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced, deformed, and short anteroposteriorly. On opening, there is some restriction of translation. The articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction and severe deformation. The articular eminence is peaked at its base.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a hockey stick shape to it with significant anterior beaking and degenerative changes on the superior head particularly towards the medial side. The articular eminence is steep. The articular disc is anteriorly positioned and sitting beneath the articular eminence, but it is significantly degenerated. On opening, it appears that the disc reduces, but it appears there may be bone-on-bone contact so it could possibly be a perforation through the disc. The translation is fairly good on this side.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ severe arthritis with displaced severely degenerated disc without reduction on opening.
Right TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced, but with reduction but with possible perforation present.

