ANN REILLY									08/19/2011

Ann is 21 years old, birth date 07/16/1990.  Referred by Dr. Gene Vandervoort, 44340 Premier Plaza, Suite 100, Ashburn, VA 20147.

Ann believes that her TMJ problems began she was about 12 years old when she was wearing some rubber bands for her orthodontics.  That is when she first noted some clicking and popping in her joints.  The etiology is unknown.  She had orthodontics from the age of 11 to 13.  She apparently was placed in a TMJ type of splint from 2003 until she lost that splint in about 200.  She reinitiated splint therapy in June 2010.  She has had chiropractic treatment.  She had her wisdom teeth extracted in June 2010.  Primary concerns Ann has include the following:

Jaws click, pop, grind and lock.
Joint pain.
Head, neck and shoulder pain.
Earaches, ringing in the ears.
Headaches.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Grinding and clenching particularly at night.  
Heartburn and indigestion with the possibility of it being acid reflux.

Currently, she takes:

Motrin as needed.
Claritin.
Benadryl Allergy p.r.n. 
Zantac p.r.n. 

Ann rates her headaches which she gets daily at a level of 5 that occur in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 5, diet at 3, disability at 4.  She gets occasional earaches, but has tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  She has no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her fingers, hip, ankles and lower back.  She has had an allergic reactive to cephalosporins, but does not know if she has a reaction to jewelry or not.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime.   

In frontal view, Ann has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandible dental midline is about 1.5 to 2 mm to the left as is the chin.  In profile view, she has good projection of the maxilla.  The lower lip and submental area are a little bit retruded.  Chin is relatively strong compared to the mandible.  Intraorally, Ann has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has good attached gingiva of the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  The maxillary right central incisor is in lingual inclination.  She has a slight Class II cuspid molar relationship being a little bit more so on the left side where she is about 3 to 4 mm Class III as compared to the right side where she is probably around 2 mm.  She has an anterior overbite of about 2 mm.  The occlusal plane appears fairly level.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal except for the uvula which is moderately hyperplastic.  To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the masseters, TMJs, styloid areas, posterior neck and shoulders and moderate pain over the temporalis and SCMs.  The maximal incisal opening is 42 mm, opening without discomfort 24 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 10 mm and to the left 8 mm.  On opening, she has an audible pop on the right joint with an opening click of about 25 mm and closing click at about 20 mm.  In the left joint, she has a softer pop at 15 mm of opening and 10 mm of closing.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Sinuses look clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  The styloid processes are relatively long.  The turbinates are difficult to evaluate.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are very clear.  The septum is fairly straight.  The left turbinate is somewhat enlarged, although the right side is relatively normal. 

Axial view shows that the septum is relatively straight.  The left turbinate is enlarged compared to the right side.  Sinuses are clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little bit arthritic with some flattening and anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence has fairly moderate inclination.  Posterior joint space is decreased. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows an arthritic joint.  There is somewhat of a depression in the head of the condyle and some anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat flattened on top, but has otherwise fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased lateral joint space and increased middle joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is somewhat arthritic with loss of vertical volume.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she just has a slight skeletal Class II relationship, but the oropharyngeal airway looks fairly good.  

Ann does report of an incident when she was a sophomore in high school where she was playing soccer and her legs were kicked out from under her and she fell back and struck her head on the ground twice.  She had a concussion and suffered from severe migraines for some time.  She probably injured her joints as well with this fall, although she had the onset of joint problems before then.  

Based on clinical, radiographic, and MRI analyses, Ann’s diagnoses are as follows:
 would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated with reduction on the right side and without reduction on the left side. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion being worse on the left side than the right side.  
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	Surgery Option 1.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to establish a good Class I 				occlusion and create space in the TMJs to accommodate the articular discs.
3.	Surgery Option 2.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ total joint prostheses (TMJ Concepts).
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  