DARLENE REK									01-21-04

Darlene is 45 years old and referred by Dr. Jimmy Eubank. 

Patient History

Darlene has had some female problems, and she had an ovary removed along with a benign tumor around 1978-1979. She also had a benign tumor removed from an ovary in 2002. She had a deviated septum treated in 1982. She had lower jaw surgery to advance her mandible. She is in good health with no major medical problems except those associated with her jaw currently. 

Darlene reports no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night, and she also catches herself clenching during the day. She gets daily headaches that range from 3 to 9. They occur predominantly in the frontal and temporal areas. They also occur down through the jaws. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, overall pain at 6, jaw function at 7, diet at 4, and disability at 6. 

As a child, Darlene fell and struck her chin. It is not known if anything developed as a result of that. During the last three to four years is when she has had an onset of pain problems in the jaws. The etiology of her current pain factors is unknown. Her pain has been increasing during the past two years. In 1984, she had orthognathic surgery for mandibular advancement by Dr. Louis Williamson in Hawaii. She did have orthodontic treatment at the age of 12 for approximately one year. She had her third molars removed at the age of 17 to 18. Since her jaw problems have become worse, Darlene had a bite plate made on 07/30/03, and Dr. Eubank made this for her. The splint did help some but has not totally corrected her problem. She also has had some dental work done on her teeth as well. 

The only medication that she takes is vitamins. She apparently has good pain tolerance and gets her teeth filled as necessary without Novocain including the placement of a crown on one of her teeth.

In reference to her genioplasty, Darlene relates that she had two probably Silastic implants placed by a plastic surgeon before she had the bone procedure done. She had problems with infection and with bone resorption beneath the implants. That is when she saw Dr. Williamson and had the Silastic implant removed and the bony osteotomy performed. She went to the first plastic surgeon and had the chin implant done twice, and both times it got infected and had to be removed. Then she went to a second plastic surgeon, who did a rhinoplasty as well as redid the chin, and that one did okay except she began developing some bone resorption beneath it. That is when she elected to go see Dr. Williamson.

Darlene has a very restless sleep pattern and basically a sleep disorder that could be related to sleep apnea problems. She wakes up at least every couple of hours and often wakes up due to her snoring. She is tired a lot during the day. She feels as though she has to take a lot of caffeine just to make it through the day as a stimulus. She does stay in bed longer than she used to, and she will lie down and take naps during the day for 10 to 20 minutes, and this seems to help her keep going.


Patient Concerns and Problems

Popping in the jaw joints
Pain
Pain increases with stress
Grinding and wearing of the teeth
Headaches

TMJ pain
Receding gums
Jaw vertically longer on the right side than the left side
Snoring

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, she has a little bit of vertical asymmetry with the right side of the mandible being a little bit longer vertically than the left side. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is a little bit off toward the right side about a millimeter. Chin may be a couple of millimeters off to the left.

In profile view, Darlene has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Chin appears somewhat deficient. Chin-neckline is short, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. Chin is probably retruded by about 12 mm or so. 

Intraorally, Darlene has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. Could have a little bit of gingival recession around some of her teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She is fairly close to being Class I cuspid-molar relationship but a little bit Class II end-on on the right side. Right mandibular angle appears to be a little bit lower than the left side by probably 3 to 4 mm. Transversely, the occlusal plane may be a little bit short vertically on the left side by about 1 to 2 mm. May have just a slight vertical discrepancy. Oropharynx appears clear and healthy since soft palate and uvula look relatively normal.

Intranasally, structures look reasonably good with turbinates being just moderate in size. Septum appears reasonably straight. Darlene gives an interesting history that she was married to an Arab for a while and developed significant allergies. After that relationship ended, and she went through a nutritional program, this helped her get rid of a lot of her allergies. 

Maximum opening is 52 mm, but she can open about 40 mm without significant pain or discomfort. Excursive movements are about 8 mm to the right and 8.5 mm to the left. 

On opening, there is a click at 30 mm in the right joint and a closing click at 20 mm. In the left joint, it seems to function relatively smoothly, but the disc is nonreducing as evident because the mandible shifts significantly to the left side about 4 or 5 mm on opening. As Darlene pushes forward, the mandible does shift off to the left side, but she can translate it forward approximately 7 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Radiographic evaluation shows that Darlene is missing her third molars in all four quadrants. She has a crown on the mandibular right first molar. She has some stainless steel wires in her chin area, and it appears that the only surgery she really had done was the chin augmentation. She has flattening on the anterior head of the condyles bilaterally and some anterior beaking. There is some sclerosis on the head of the condyle, being much worse on the left side as compared to the right side. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Difficult to evaluate the turbinates on this view.
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some sclerosis and anterior beaking present. Decreased vertical and posterior joint space indicative of probably anteriorly displaced discs. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has definite osteoarthritic changes associated with it. Some anterior beaking is present. Decreased posterior joint space, although the vertical it appears that it might be just slightly increased but could be just the level of the cuts on this side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Opening shows fairly good translation in both joints, but the right side translates quite a bit further than the left side does.

Waters view shows the vertical asymmetry with the right side of the mandible and transverse maxillary occlusal plane being lower vertically than the left side. She has huge frontal sinuses with the left side being larger than the right side. 

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class II relationship, although the occlusion is Class I. Evidence of the genioplasty is evident. She has a significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with the distance at the soft palate being about 3 mm (normal 11mm) and at the base of the tongue being approximately 5 mm (normal 11 mm). The vertical discrepancy between the inferior border of the mandible is readily appreciated as well with the angle on the right side being about 6 mm lower than the left side. Anteriorly, the body area adjacent to the posterior aspect of the genioplasty is about 4 mm longer vertically than the left side.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction on the left side and with reduction on the right side and with significant deformation of the left disc and to a lesser degree the right disc
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of 3 mm (normal 11 mm)
High occlusal plane angle of 16 degrees (normal 8 degrees)
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Severe snoring
Sleep apnea symptoms

Recommended Treatment

Sleep study

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 

Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward and to allow a little bit better Class I alignment

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to decrease the occlusal plane angle and advance the incisors forward 2 to 3 mm
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

I did discuss with Darlene the fact that she has fairly progressive degenerative changes of arthritis and articular disc dislocation with significant deformation, particularly on the left side, to the point that the discs are approaching questionable salvageability, particularly on the left. At this time, I feel we still may be able to salvage the discs, and that would be my first recommended treatment for the joints. If, however, there is a significant delay in treatment, then perhaps in the future total joint prostheses may be warranted. If the disc repositioning procedures are performed, and because of the amount of degeneration already present they do not hold up well, total joint prostheses may also be indicated. Darlene does understand this. 

Other Systems

Darlene has some problems with the bones in her neck and possibly in her back as well. Right wrist bothers her, and on her right foot, her fourth and fifth toes are bothersome. She has only had about one urinary tract infection she knows of, but she does have polyuria and nocturia x 2. She has had fertility problems when off birth control methods from about the age of 38 onward but never became pregnant. She had one miscarriage during her first marriage and has no children of her own but is raising two stepchildren. She has had significant problems with ovarian cysts and polyps. She has been diagnosed with fibroid tumors of the uterus. She has had an abnormal Pap smear in the past but did not require treatment for it. She used to have some significant problems with vaginal yeast infections, particularly when she was having the ovarian cyst and polyp problems, but this is not much of a problem for her currently. She has no sinus problems, ear problems, periodontal problems, or eye problems. She has no history of smoking. She does have some problems with frequent colds and viruses particularly under high stress. She has had bronchitis x 2 and pneumonia (walking variety) x 1 about 20 years ago. No GI problems and no known STDs. She does have some chronic fatigue problems. She has had some major exposure to birds particularly since she has been married. She was around a McCaw bird that one of her friends had prior to her most recent marriage probably for a few years. The bird was given away. However, for the past 10 years in her new marriages, she has lived on a farm, and for the first five years or so, they had approximately 30,000 chickens on the property, and she would help feed the babies and help take care of them. Currently they have about 30 to 50 guineas, 20 to 30 ducks, and she does have a pet rooster. She also has had some rabbits. During the past 10 years, she has had about 9 cats, but most of them have been neutered. Some of them did catch birds. She has had 2 dogs during the past 10 years. On their farm, they have had up to 100 cows but no longer raise cows. She is around 2 to 3 horses, and they usually have had two or three sheep at a time. The only implants that she has in her body are the stainless steel wires that are currently in her chin. She does have a history of brain tumors on her mother’s side with two sisters that died of brain tumors and then one uncle who has had lung cancer and colon cancer but has survived both. She has another uncle that did die of some form of cancer.