LARRY REIDER									07-02-03

Larry was referred by Dr. Carlos Quiroz, Vosgos, #125-302, Lomas de Chapuctepec, Mexico City  11000, Mexico.

Patient History

Larry was born with a cleft lip and palate and has had six surgeries to repair his lip, palate, and also has a pharyngeal flap. He has had two knee operations and has had an appendectomy. He previously has had hepatitis A. Larry was born with a unilateral right cleft lip and and palate. He had his multiple repairs and had a prosthesis made for the maxilla to replace the missing teeth and establish an occlusion in 1985 by Dr. Ken Rudd, who is now retired. Larry has been up to San Antonio recently and has made about eight trips there in hopes of having a new prosthesis constructed, but the new prosthesis that was made for him did not work and did not function properly. He has the current prosthesis that he has had since 1985 that works very well for him. He is concerned since Dr. Rudd has retired if something happens to this prosthesis, will he be able to get another one made. The last attempt to make a new one done in San Antonio did not work. He has no trouble eating and chewing. He is pleased with his speech. He does have a complaint that he does snore when he sleeps. By history, Larry states that he has had a pharyngeal flap procedure performed. With the newest prosthesis that he had made, he could not even chew a piece of pancake. With his original prosthesis, he can eat pretty much want he wants including carrots, etc. Larry has no concerns about his appearance at all and is very pleased with those factors.

Clinical Examination

Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Tooth-to-lip relationship is -2 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline. Has an elongated columella in the frontal view. 

In profile view, he has some significant retrusion of the maxilla by probably 6 mm or so. Chin is retruded about 15 to 20 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short and virtually nonexistent.

Intraorally, Larry has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. He has adequate attached gingiva. Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.

In the upper arch, he is missing all four incisors, left first bicuspid, and all four third molars. He has crowns on the mandibular left first and second molar, right cuspid and first and second molars, and partial crowns on the maxillary right bicuspids and first molar. Has partial crowns on the left second bicuspid, first molar. He has a prosthesis replacing the four incisors. He has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship and hits on his back teeth and has a little bit of an anterior open bite problem and almost an end-on incisor relationship. 

His TMJs function smoothly. He has no history of headaches or TMJ problems. 

Examining the prosthesis, it is an overlay denture made out of metal. Obviously has acrylic facing and acrylic teeth on it. It has metal occlusal surfaces on the posterior teeth. Anteriorly, he has an oronasal fistula that measures probably about 4 or 5 mm in diameter and in length. He has some alveolar atrophy in that area and probably lack of bone. Oropharynx looks clear. He has a pharyngeal flap back there, but it is extremely narrow. He has a good nasal airway. Pharyngeal flap may not be too effectual in its design function.

Intranasally, he has some constricture of the luminal valve on the right side. Turbinates look moderate in size. A little deviation of the septum but does not appear to be creating any airway problems intranasally. Left side of the nose is shorter vertically than the left side, so the right side is a little bit vertically shorter than the left side. Apparently by history, Larry states that his cleft lip was repaired by a hand surgeon. The hand surgeon saw the premaxilla and just cut it out and discarded it. That is probably the reason for the significant AP deficiency of the maxilla. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of the four maxillary incisors and left first bicuspid. All four third molars are missing. There is a root canal in the mandibular left first molar. Does not appear to be any significant bone in the anterior maxillary area. Sinuses appear clear. Septum is deviated off toward the left side, and turbinates are of moderate size.

Waters view shows the sinuses are relatively clear but may be just a little bit increased cloudiness on the left side. Septum is deviated off to the left side superiorly and to the right side inferiorly. Left turbinate appears quite large. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have reasonably good morphology. Could be a little bit of slight sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space appears a little bit narrow. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology with a moderate steepness to the articular eminence. Joint space may be a little bit narrow in some areas. He has really long styloid processes bilaterally. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. The right styloid is quite elongated and prominent. He has a calcified node in the right side of his neck. This calcified node has been present for about 20 years, and he says that the doctors are very much aware of it. 

On the cephalometric radiograph, the styloid process on the right side goes almost all the way down to the hyoid bone. Oropharyngeal airway actually looks surprisingly good with an airway dimension of about 11 mm. At the soft palate level, the AP dimension is about 8 mm. 
 
Basic Diagnoses

Repaired unilateral right cleft lip and palpate
Severe AP maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary excess posteriorly
Severe vertical maxillary deficiency
Mandibular AP deficiency (but not recommended for treatment)
Missing maxillary four incisors, left first bicuspid, and all four third molars
Severe Class III occlusal relationship
Hypernasal speech
Inefficient pharyngeal flap
Nasal deformity
Oronasal fistula
Absence of alveolar bone, anterior maxilla
Overlay denture that has functioned very well
Larry does have several treatment options:

Recommended Treatment

Maintain current functioning prosthesis versus having a new one made so that he has a backup

Surgery
Close oronasal fistula
Bone graft to anterior maxilla
Placement of osseointegrated implants

Placement of new prosthetic device
