SHARON REID									8/25/05

Sharon is 59 years old.  She has had previous surgery that includes:

Correction of deviated nasal septum.
Thyroid surgery.
Gallbladder surgery.
Hysterectomy.
Basal cell surgery.
Previous jaw surgery.

She does have a low blood pressure that runs about 100/68.  Otherwise, she is in pretty good health.  She takes the following medications:

Synthroid 0.1 mg.
Gynodiol 0.1 mg
Lipitor 10 mg.

She does have seasonal allergies.  She is not aware of any food allergies.  She does not tolerate codeine well.  Sharon has had previous jaw surgery and it was performed by Dr. Doug Sinn in 1986.  The surgery that Sharon had at that time, they apparently took out 4 first bicuspid teeth.  She did have orthodontic appliances on when the surgery was done.  She wore the braces for about 2 years.  Apparently, the upper front teeth were moved backwards and on the lower jaw she at least had a chin procedure done.  Apparently, she had to go back and have some touch up work on her chin by Dr. Sinn and he may have reshaped the chin bone a little bit because it was too pointed and he put some hydroxyapatite in.  However, this impinged upon her mental nerves and caused her some significant pain and numbness.  The second surgical procedure by Dr. Sinn was probably done in 1987.  She then went and saw Dr. Bruce Epker who did some repeat surgery and apparently put some synthetic implants along the lateral side of the mandible on both sides.  Dr. Epker apparently performed the surgery sometime in the early to mid 90s.  He also removed some of the HA granules that Dr. Sinn had previously placed.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Residual numbness and discomfort on the left lower lip and chin area.
Her tongue feels too big for her mouth.
She constantly bites her tongue and it gets swollen.
Her jaw is sore and it is quite sore to the touch along the back part of the lower jaw line.
She wakes up unable to catch her breath (this seems to have developed since her surgery.)
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Difficulty breathing through her nose particularly on the left side (Dr. Sinn apparently corrected her deviated septum.)
Sleep disorder with difficulties sleeping.
Moderate to severe daytime tiredness.
 Difficulties swallowing.
 Feeling of choking at times.
 Extreme mouth dryness particularly in the morning when she wakes up.


SHARON REID				8/25/05				Page 2


Sharon has had extreme mouth dryness particularly in the morning when she wakes up.

Sharon has had longstanding TMJ problems but does not recall when they started nor the etiology.  She feels fairly confident that the joints problems were present well before she had all of her jaw surgeries and orthodontics performed.  Her joints were not addressed at all back at that time.  Sharon does have a history of hypoglycemia.  She believes that she sometimes clenches and grinds her teeth at night.  She gets occasional earaches that are a sharp piercing kid of pain.  Occasional tinnitus occurs but no vertigo or hearing loss.  She gets headaches about 2 times a month and they average about a level of 4, probably occurring more in the temple areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 8, jaw function and diet at 5, disability at 7.  She has some residual dysesthesia in the mandibular left chin area.

In frontal view, Sharon has reasonably good symmetry from the left to right side.  Upper lip length is about 28 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1.  Nasal tip is deviated off to the left side probably about 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is shifted off to the right side probably 1 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is off to the right 1 to 2 mm.  The chin is off to the right side probably about 3 to 4 mm.  If Sharon shifts her lower jaw 2 mm to the left, it does improve her facial symmetry.  The fact that she shifts about 3 mm to the left, it does make a nice improvement in the facial symmetry.  In the profile view, Sharon has an elongated upper lip.  The maxilla is probably retruded by about 6 mm and chin is retruded by probably about 20 mm.  Chin-neck line is extremely short and chin-neck angle is not present.  Intraorally, Sharon is missing lower first bicuspids.  The lower left cuspids tip significantly lingually.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  She may have had subapical osteotomies to move the anterior 6 teeth posteriorly as the cuspids both are tipped lingual to the labial aspect of the bicuspids.  In the upper arch, she had first bicuspids extracted as well.  She has an end-on Class II occlusal relationship being probably about 3 mm Class II.  She has about a 3 mm deep bite relationship.  She has a slight reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch.  Oropharynx appears clear.  The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are all relatively normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates are fairly significantly enlarged with some significant constriction of the functional airway.  Sometimes she will get a sharp pain and sometimes it appears to be in her jaw and at other times in her throat.  When she gets a real sharp pain she has to manipulate her jaw to get rid of it.  To palpation, she has high moderate pain in the masseter muscles, medial pterygoids, right styloid area and milder tenderness over the temporalis TMJs and the left styloid area.  Incisal opening is 48 mm maximum but about 40 without significant discomfort.  Excursive movement to the right 9 mm, to the left 10 mm.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is canted with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars and all 4 first bicuspids.  She has root canals on the maxillary left lateral incisor and cuspid and mandibular left cuspid.  Cannot see the joints and cannot evaluate the sinuses.  
SHARON REID				8/25/05				Page 3


Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  Significant deviation in the nasal septum.  Turbinates actually do not appear to be too large.  The sinuses appear relatively equal but there appears to be some thickening of the lining particularly on the lateral aspect of the sinus with the right side being a little bit greater than the left side. 

Tomogram quality is not too great but there appears to be arthritic changes in the TMJ with decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows arthritis in the TMJ with decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is restricted translation.  The condyle has come down towards the posterior aspect of the articular eminence.  The condyles appear quite flattened and appear to have lost vertical dimension.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Sharon has significant retrusion of the maxilla and severe retrusion of the mandible.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  She has about a 2 to 3 mm overjet relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway is significantly constricted with an airway dimension of about 4 mm at the base of the tongue and 5 mm at the soft palatal level.  The tongue fills the majority of the oral cavity but there is some space remaining between the palate and the tongue.

BASIC DIAGNOSES 
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis. 
Severe AP maxillary hypoplasia. 
Severe posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Severe AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Sleep apnea. 
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
 Sleep disorder.
 Class II end-on occlusion.
 High occlusal plane angle of 29 degrees (normal 8 degrees.)
 Previously placed bilateral mandibular body and ramus alloplastic implants. 
 Severe lingual inclination of the maxillary incisors.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.

CAT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ concepts protocol.)
SHARON REID				8/25/05				Page 4


Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.  
Bilateral coronoidectomties.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Remove previously placed alloplastic implants to mandible and stabilizing screws.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to reduce chin prominence.
      4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 