NANCY REILLY									11-25-02

Patient History

Nancy is a former patient. I previously did surgery on January 13, 1986, and the following procedures were performed:

Left TMJ meniscectomy and dermal graft
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies for advancement
Chin augmentation with Proplast implant

She gets some right earache problems, no tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing problems. Other joints that bother her include her right hand and thumb area, where she has some arthritis, and also she has bursitis in her hips. In the past, she has had a laminectomy on her back but no problems with that. She does have some food and environmental allergy problems. Cheap earrings tend to cause her ears to get infected. She is predominantly on a soft diet. She is aware of daytime clenching and possibly nighttime clenching as well. She rates her headaches at a level of 5 that occur predominantly in the frontal and temporal areas. She gets her headaches about every three days. She gets pain in the right TMJ area at about a level of 8, and overall pain on an average day would be about 8. Jaw function, diet, and disability register at 5. 

Current Medications

She currently takes the following:
Estrotest
A cream called C-Peroxicam/Dexamet/Eutetic
Recently completed a Medrol Dosepak
Celebrex occasionally
Advil occasionally

Clinical Evaluation

Nancy has good facial symmetry and balance. She is missing maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids. Has a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship with about a 4 to 5-mm overbite relationship.

To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area including directly over her joints. Maximal incisal opening is 47 mm, and opening without significant discomfort 37 mm, excursive movement to the right 3 mm, and to the left 5 mm. 

Joints seem to function relatively smoothly at this time.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows evidence of previous surgery with three bone screws in each ramus area bilaterally and also screws in the chin area. Sinuses appear clear. Turbinate on the left side appears large compared to the right side. Condyles both appear a little bit arthritic with the left one looking worse than the right side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a good skeletal Class I position and good position of the chin implant. Oropharyngeal airway appears slightly decreased. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some anterior beaking. Joint space appears decreased in vertical height although fairly symmetric throughout the joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears very narrow anteroposteriorly and significantly posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Anterior joint space is significantly increased. May be some anterior beaking, although the anteroposterior dimension of the condyle is quite narrow. 

On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints with the left side being slightly more restricted than the right side. 

Other Systems

Nancy has problems with her hands, fingers, and hips. In the past, she would get an occasional bladder infection, but more recently she had a bladder infection in the summer of 2002 and also in the September and October time frame. Has nocturia x 1 and sometimes has difficulties emptying her bladder. She had a total hysterectomy in 1984 secondary to ovarian cysts and fibroid tumors. She has one son, age 36, and has had no miscarriages and apparently had no fertility problems. Nancy gets an occasional vaginal yeast infection. She has a history of sties and occasional conjunctivitis kind of symptoms. She occasionally will get some burning, itching, and dryness of her eyes that she thinks may be related to allergies. She has chronic sinus problems. She does not smoke. She gets right earaches. She used to get bronchitis fairly often but has not had it in recent years. No known STDs. She does have some chronic fatigue problems. She had a parakeet for a few years as a child. She thinks that maybe her brother stepped on it that caused its demise. She has had cats most of her life, and some did eat birds. She has had dogs most of her life and also feels that some of them may have gotten birds, and one in particular which is a birddog. No significant exposure to hoofed animals. The only implants present are in the jaws with the bone screws and the P/T chin implant.

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ arthritis with the presence of a dermal skin graft replacing the disc that was placed in 1986
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
Headaches
Moderate to severe TMJ pain
Daytime and nighttime clenching
Recommended Treatment

Consider splint therapy, physical therapy, etc., to try to elimination inflammatory process

Consider medications to help decrease the inflammatory process

If #1 and #2 fail, then consider the following surgical options:

Treatment option #1
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament with Mitek anchor and discoplasty
Right mandibular ramus osteotomy with bone screw stabilization

Treatment option #2
Diskectomy
Reconstruction of disc with sternoclavicular disc graft
Right mandibular ramus osteotomy with bone screw stabilization

Treatment option #3
Left TMJ condylectomy, meniscectomy, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis
Fat graft to right TMJ

Nancy’s recent problems began in September of 2002 of unknown etiology but occurred following her teeth cleaning episode. 