CAROLYN RICKETT								08-20-02

Carolyn is 61 years old and referred by Dr. Larry Weprin.

Patient History

Carolyn has a history of high blood pressure, diabetes, sleep apnea, Sjogren’s syndrome, and Crohn’s disease. She has had two bowel resections, a hernia repair, and a breast mass removed that was benign. She smokes two packs of cigarettes per day and has done this for the past year. She does have a previous history of smoking but had quit for about 15 years. She has rosacea. She has been hospitalized twice in the past for hepatitis. She does have a history of anemia. Other joints that bother her include her neck, back, shoulders, elbows, wrists, hands, fingers, right hip, and knees. She has a problem with the right Achilles tendon as well. She gets significant pain behind her ears and below her ears. She had a ganglion removed from her right wrist that she said was about the size of a ping-pong ball. It was removed about six weeks ago and has already started to redevelop again.

Current Medications

Prevacid 60 mg
Celebrex 400 mg
Salagen 10 mg
Verapamil 360 mg
Diovan 320 mg
Atenolol 100 mg
Prempro 2.5 mg 
Elavil 20 mg 
Insulin 60 units
Lantis 30 units 
Sleep aids

SHE IS ALLERGIC TO CODEINE AND DEMEROL.

Primary Concerns

Primary concerns that Carolyn has from our standpoint is Dr. Eden in Fort Worth did a sleep study on Carolyn 8 to 10 years ago and showed she had 11 arousals per hour at that time. A more recent study a few months ago showed that she had about 12 arousals per hour. She is tired all the time. She cannot sleep well at night. Has difficulties getting into REM sleep. She is tired all the time during the day and has to take naps during the day. If she lies down on her side or on her back, she starts coughing that she feels or has been told may be due to postnasal drainage. She has significant problems sleeping. Dr. Lehman in Fort Worth first identified sleep apnea for Carolyn; that was about 8 to 10 years ago. He referred Carolyn to Dr. Eden, who confirmed it with the sleep studies. He also did the most recent study a couple of months ago. She has previously been on the CPAP machine. It did not work well for her, and she had extreme difficulties tolerating the device. She could not sleep in the device either. She has had four positioning bite plates, which also she couldn’t tolerate or were ineffective, and she ended up biting through them. She apparently has restless leg syndrome as well in addition to other myogenic abnormal twitching and muscle dysfunction when trying to sleep. The Elavil helps control these factors to some extent. It is not uncommon for her to have episodes where she will wake up in the middle of the night gasping for air and not knowing if she is dreaming or if it is real. She gets this total body “jump” occurrence where her muscles contract, and it wakes her up at night. These episodes occur frequently at night when she is sleeping but also occur during the day as well. It happens more frequently during the day actually than it does at night.

About a year ago, a crown came loose on the maxillary left central incisor. We went to her dentist to have that worked on. Apparently some root of that tooth was taken out and some stitches put in, and then she had some significant bleeding problems afterwards with apparent coagulation kind of problems. This is when her diabetes was identified. She subsequently has had a three-unit bridge placed in the upper anterior arch to replace the missing maxillary left central incisor.

Clinical Evaluation

Upper lip length is 24 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about –1 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline and chin. Nasal tip is deviated a little bit off towards the right side probably about 2 to 3 mm.

In profile view, Carolyn demonstrates some significant AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 6 mm. Mandible is AP deficiency by approximately 10 mm. 

Intraorally, she is missing mandibular right first molar with significant lingual inclination of the second and third molars. Spacing between lower cuspid/first bicuspid. On the right side, she is missing first molar with significant lingual inclination of the second and third molars, and she has a crown replacing a bicuspid, so she actually has three bicuspid crowns on the left side. In the upper arch, she has a lot of dental work as well and is missing the right second and third molar, and as previously mentioned, she is missing the maxillary left central incisor replaced by a pontic, and she is missing the second bicuspid and all molars on the left side. She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship and about a millimeter overbite relationship. Intraorally, it appears that Carolyn has a moderately large tongue for the size of the oral cavity. Oropharyngeal area looks quite normal. Uvula may be a little bit large. Posterior faucial pillars are somewhat posteriorly positioned and are transversely narrow, which may be contributory to her sleep apnea problems.

Intranasally, the turbinates are not actually that large. The right is a little bit larger than the left one but appears to be a good airway. The main factor intranasally that seems to be causing a problem is significant constricture of her luminal valves. This occurs bilaterally. Holding those valves open with a nasal septum significantly improved her abilities to breathe through her nose. There was actually just one area palpable that had discomfort in the temporalis area and just superior and slightly anterior to the ear, probably in the path of the temporal vessels. 
To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles in the area of the arteries. She has some mild tenderness over the left TMJ and right medial pterygoid area and moderate discomfort over the styloid areas.

Incisal opening is about 41 mm. Excursive movements are about 6 mm in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses look relatively clear. Left turbinate looks larger than the right turbinate. Joints look reasonable. Missing mandibular right first molar with severe medial inclination of the second and third molars. Missing mandibular left first molar, but the second cuspid is in the first molar position unless there is a hemi-section done on that first molar tooth, which is a possibility. That tooth root has a root canal in it. She has a three-unit bridge on that side replacing the second bicuspid position. In the upper arch, she is missing the right first, second, and third molars, and she has a cantilever pontic of the size of about a bicuspid in the first molar position. Two crowns on the bicuspids support it. She has root canals on both first and second bicuspids and on the right lateral incisor as well. There is a three-unit bridge replacing the absent maxillary left central incisor. On the left side, second bicuspid and all three molars are missing. She has a lot of condensing osteitis around the mandibular left second and third molar roots.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. She has multiple loculations throughout the sinuses to a much greater extent that normal. Frontal sinuses are huge and go from lateral orbital rim almost to the other lateral orbital rim. Nasal airway looks as though it is passable. Septum has a slight deviation in it.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology, a little bit of flattening on the superior head. Slightly decreased posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Slightly increased anterior joint space but not too significant. Disc may be in just a slight anterior position. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little flattening on the anterior head. Appears to be decreased posterior joint space. Moderately steep articular eminence and a slightly increased anterior joint space. There is a decreased joint space superiorly.

On opening, there appears to be fairly good translation of both condyles. Right condyle is a little harder to see as compared to the left one.

Cephalometrically, she appears that she may have some AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency. Upper lip is quite thin measuring less than 9 mm in thickness. Oropharyngeal airway measured at the soft palate of the posterior pharyngeal wall is about less than 4 mm. From the base of the tongue, the posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 7 mm. 


Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency.
Mandibular AP deficiency.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Severe sleep apnea syndrome.
Restless leg syndrome.
Crohn’s disease.
Sjogren’s syndrome.
Diabetes.
High blood pressure.
Rule out TMJ pathology.
Missing maxillary right first, second, and third molars, left central incisor, second bicuspid, first, second, and third molars, missing mandibular right first molar, left second bicuspid.
Hyperplastic soft palate and uvula.
Major constricture of bilateral nasal luminal valves.
Nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended Treatment

MRIs of bilateral TMJs

Surgery, Stage I
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning with Mitek Anchors
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty with modified lateral inversion flaps.
Bilateral reconstruction of nasal luminal valves with soft tissue grafts and placement of nasal stents.

Surgery, Stage II
Bone grafts to maxillary sinuses.
Osseointegrated implants.
Dental reconstruction.