LORINDA REZAC									03/24/2008

Lorinda is 41 years.  Referred by Dr. Louvida Guttman, 8400 Constitution NE, Albuquerque,  NM, and also Dr. Dan Clifford   Lorinda is in fairly good health.  She has some problems with asthma and anxiety.  She takes the following medications:
Albuterol.
Celexa 20 mg q.d. 
Wellbutrin 150 mg q.d.
Acyclovir 800 mg q.d.
Claritin 10 mg q.d.
Guaifenesin 400 mg.

She has had adverse reactions to codeine, Percocet, and sulfa.  
Lorinda’s problems began in about December 2000 of unknown etiology.  She was at a Christmas party and talking a lot that evening and then that night woke up with pain.  After that, she would get severely dizzy and that initial dizziness lasted about 5 weeks.  She had physical therapy from March through May 2005 without much relief.  She repeated the physical therapy from March 2007 to June 2007.  She had orthodontics from November 2007 to October 2007.  From May 2007 through October 2007 she had cortisone injections x30.  In October 2007, she had a splint made by Dr. Dan Clifford and Dr. Paul Clifford.  
Lorinda gets headaches at about a level of 7 in the frontal, temporal, posterior head and on top of the head with most commonly occurring in the back of the head.  She has significant TMJ pain at a level of 7 with the left side slightly greater than the right side.  Average daily pain is at about a level of 5.  Jaw function is 1, diet at 5, disability at 8.  She gets moderate earaches, moderate tinnitus, and frequent vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She has had allergic reactions to codeine, Percocet, and sulfa.  She may have had multiple neck injuries as she has been in four MVA accidents with the last one in 1997.  
CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Lorinda has fairly good facial symmetry.  The left-sided jaw may be slightly longer than the right side.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 2.5 mm.  Maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are pretty much on the facial midline.  Chin may be just slightly to the right maybe 1 or 2 mm, but not significant.  In profile view, she has some slight AP deficiency in the mandible of probably maybe 6 mm or so.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well defined.  If she postures her mandible forward a little bit, it seems to improve facial balance in the chin neck area.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars.  She has a crown on the mandibular left first molar.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  She has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a Class I cuspid molar relationship bilaterally.  The left side of the maxilla and mandible may be inferiorly positioned maybe 1 mm to 1.5 mm.  As I was using a tongue blade across her occlusal plane and she was biting into it, it creating pain and discomfort up through her nose.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the masseters, styloid areas, and right shoulder, and she has severe pain over the TMJs bilaterally.   On opening, the joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  On excursions though, she had consistent pop in the right jaw joint.  The relatively joint manipulations that we did, did create pain in the back of her head area forward.  Maximal incisal opening is 47 mm, but with comfort 30 mm.  Excursion movements were 9 mm in each direction.  The uvula is mildly elongated, but soft palate is normal in length and fascial pillars are relatively normal.  Intranasally, turbinates are mild to moderate in size.  She has probably a moderate nasal airway obstruction.  The columella is wide, the nostrils are narrow, and the luminal valves are little bit constricted.  She does snore mildly at night as she tends to breathe predominantly through her mouth at night when she is sleeping.  She has mild snoring and moderate daytime somnolence.  Lorinda did not see any differences in her headache and TMJ pain levels wearing Dr. Clifford’s splints.
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch and 2 x 2 retainer in the upper aches.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Left condyle appears a little bit flattened on top.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow and not very long.  Joint space could be slightly diminished.
Right TMJ tomogram is a little bit harder to evaluate.  There appears to be more constricted joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles.  The left condyle appears larger than the right condyle. 
Waters view shows that the nasal septum is a little bit wavy.  Turbinates appear moderate in size and sinuses appear clear.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that maxilla and mandible are slightly retruded.  She has a decreased oropharyngeal airway with AP dimension of only about 5 mm at the most at the soft palate level and about 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  Occlusal plane angle is moderately enlarged. 
The basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs that are medially displaced.  
AP mandibular deficiency.  
AP maxillary deficiency and vertical posterior deficiency. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
Wide columella and narrow nostrils. 
Constricture of the luminal valves. 
Difficulties breathing through the nose.  
Snoring and daytime somnolence. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible about 6 to 7 mm.  
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction, down grafting it about 4 mm posteriorly. 
Reconstruct nasal columella.
Consider reconstructing the luminal valves.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 