NEAL RIDER										07-12-02

Neal is 40 years old. Neal was referred by Dr. Cliff Alexander.

Patient History

Neal is in good health with no major medical problems. 

Patient Concerns

Neal’s primary concerns are as follows:

Lower jaw is receded.
Teeth and jaws do not align properly and don’t function well.

Neal doesn’t report any TMJ-associated symptoms and reports no sleep apnea symptoms either.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Neal has good left-to-right facial symmetric. Upper lip length is 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 0. Maxillary dental midline and mandibular dental midline may be just a little bit off to the right. Mandibular dental midline and chin, however, are pretty much aligned to each other.

In profile view, Neal appears to have really good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose. Mandible appears retruded. Chin-neckline is not well-defined. A lot of fullness in the submental area. As he postures his mandible forward to an edge-on incisor relationship, it does improve the chin-neckline, although there is still no definition of the chin-neck angle, but the overall profile is significantly improved. He may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency up at the superior aspect of the upper lip by maybe 2 to 3 mm. Chin is probably 10 to 12 mm AP-deficient.

Intraorally, Neal has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. He a slightly accentuated curved of occlusion in the lower arch with the lower anterior six teeth being elevated 2 to 3 mm greater than the posterior teeth. May have an ankylosed mandibular right first molar or at least it is submerged but very well could be ankylosed.

In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Arch appears somewhat constricted transversely as does the lower arch. Has probably 9 to 10 mm of vertical overbite relationship. Has a Class II end-on occlusion being a little bit worse on the right side as compared to the left side. 

Intranasally, he has bilateral septal spurs extending laterally in each side of the nostril. On the right side, the turbinate is relatively small, and the airway is still fairly reasonable. On the left side, the turbinate is moderately enlarged and does not appear to have as good an airway. 

Intraorally, oropharynx appears clear. He does have a hypertrophied uvula with a long, almost stringy sort of extension coming down from the tip of it. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Radiographic evaluation shows the absence of all four third molars. Mandibular right first molar is significantly submerged and difficult to tell if there is an ankylosis problem or just a trapped tooth. Most likely ankylosis. May have a mucous retention cyst in the right maxillary sinus. Can’t see the nasal airway very clearly. Condyles appear quite large. Accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch, is obvious as is the reversed curve in the upper arch. 

Waters view shows fairly good opacity of the sinuses. Nasal airway on the left side appears more obstructed as compared to the right side. Facial symmetry appears reasonably good.

Right TMJ tomogram shows good joint morphology with good shape of the condyle and fossa with moderate steepness of the articular eminence. Joint space is good. Styloid processes are quite thick and somewhat elongated. 

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows good anatomy, good joint space, and moderate steepness of the articular eminence. Styloid process likewise is a little bit enlarged. 

Opening shows good translation of both joints.

Cephalometrically, he has a skeletal Class II and occlusal Class II relationship with an anterior deep-bite. Oropharyngeal airway looks relatively good with 10 mm of airway space at the base of the soft palate and 14 mm at the base of the tongue. Neal has a tooth-size discrepancy in the anterior six teeth of about 2 mm. He also has about 0.5 mm tooth-size discrepancy in the bicuspid area with each bicuspid. 

Basic Diagnoses

Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion, being worse on the right side as compared to the left side.
Severe anterior deep-bite of about 9 mm.
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch.
Mild crowding, upper anterior arch.
Significantly accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch.
Submerged and probably ankylosed mandibular right first molar.
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm in the anterior six teeth and 0.5 mm associated with each of the lower bicuspids.
Septal spurs.
Moderately enlarged turbinate on the left side.
Partial left-sided nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth-size problem and help minimize forward flaring of the incisors. Strip lower bicuspids removing 0.5 mm of tooth structure from each tooth. Maximize posterior anchorage so as to minimize flaring forward of the lower anterior teeth with the leveling process. Leave the mandibular right first molar out of the arch wire.
Consider using a bite plate that fits on the upper teeth and is flat plane occluding on the lower incisors and second molars to help with leveling of the lower arch.

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward slightly, downgraft it posteriorly, and expand.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Nasoseptoplasty to remove septal spurs.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion