RANDY REYNOLDS								03/26/2008

Randy is 54 years old.  Referred by Dr. Sanjay Reddi, 2453 E. 11th Street, Odessa, TX 79761.  Randy has high blood pressure.  He takes the following medications:
Lisinopril/HCTZ 20/12.5 x2.
Nifedical XL 60 mg x2.

Randy has only been aware of having a problem with his jaw during the last 2 to 3 years and only began paying much attention to it during the past year.  The etiology is unknown.  Primary concerns are as follows:

Lower jaw shifting off towards the right side.
Crossbite has developed. 
Teeth do not fit together very well.
Pain in the left jaw joint.

Randy has no problems with headaches, but he does get pain in the left TMJ at about a level of 7, average daily pain can reach a level of 7.  Jaw function is at 4, diet at 0, disability at 2.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  His left knee will bother him occasionally, but otherwise his joints are in good condition.  He is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time and sometimes during the day as well.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  The upper lip length is about 26 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about minus 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 3.5 mm to the right, and chin is about 8 to 9 mm to the right.  The left side of the face is somewhat elongated, probably about 4 to 5 mm.  In profile view, Randy has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Randy has all of his lower teeth back to the second molars.  A lot of wear is present from his bruxing.  He has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he is missing the maxillary right second bicuspid replaced with a bridge.  He may be missing a bicuspid on the opposite side as well.  He has basically a Class I cuspid on the right side and a full Class III cuspid on the left side.  He has a total buccal crossbite on the right side and a non-buccal relationship on the left side.  He has about 0.5 mm of anterior open bite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  The uvula is moderately elongated.  Intranasally, he appears to have a good airway, although the septum seems to be deviated a little bit off towards the right side with a spur off to the left side at the base of the nose.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.   He does have moderate snoring, but is not aware of having any nasal airway obstruction.  He has no sleep apnea issues.  Maximal opening is 60 mm, but it deviates off towards to the left side probably about 4 mm or so.  Excursion movement to the right was 2 mm, to the left about 6 mm.  The right TMJ functions smoothly.  Left TMJ has some fine crepitus noises.  No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. 






Based on clinical and radiographic analyses, Randy’s diagnoses are as follows:

Left mandibular condylar osteochondroma.
Left temporal bone probable osteochondroma, involving predominately the glenoid fossa area.
Class III occlusion on left side.
Mandible deviated to the right side 3.5 mm at the incisors, with the chin 8 to 9 mm to the right.
Cross bite on the right side.
Crepitus noises in left TMJ with function.
Left TMJ pain.
History of clenching and bruxism.	


Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Resection and removal of left mandibular condylar osteochondroma. 
Resection and removal of left temporal osteochondroma. 
Reconstruct left TMJ with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Fat graft to left TMJ area (harvest from abdomen).
Right mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy.
Application of arch bars.
