ANYA RICHT									10/12/05
Date of Birth:  2/13/1997

Anya is 8 years old and is referred by Dr. William Allen, 1500 Oglethorp Ave., Athens, GA, 30606.  Anya has had multiple reconstructive surgeries around the head and face area primarily.  Dr. Fernando Berstein at Scottish-Rite Hospital in Atlanta has done most of the work.  Anya has had a fat graft to her right cheek and facial area.  She has had some reconstructive work done on the nose.  The last surgery apparently was to try and open up the nostril on the right side.  A stent was placed in the nose but apparently came out in a week or two afterwards so that nostril is closed off again.  Anya is originally from the Ukraine.  It is thought that some of her problems could be related to the fallout from Chernobyl.  Other thoughts are that Anya's problems could be related to trauma the mother may have sustained while Anya was still in the womb.  

In the frontal view, Anya has some significant asymmetry.  Pupillary plane is fairly level.  The lateral cant on the right side is inferiorly positioned probably 2 to 3 mm.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is -5 mm.  The nasal tip is between 10 to 12 mm off towards the right side.  Maxillary dental midline is actually pretty much on the facial midline.  Chin is about 17 mm off towards the right side.  Lower dental midline is actually fairly close to being on line with the chin.  Mandibular dental midline is only about 2 to 3 mm off to the left of the facial midline.  Transversely, the right side of the maxilla is probably 5 mm higher than the left side.  Her ear on the right is a little bit deformed compared to the ear on the left side.  The mother reports that occasionally Anya will get a foul smell from materials that exude from the ear.  Actually nothing comes out it is just there is an usual order that occurs.  In profile, Anya may have just a little bit of AP deficiency in the maxilla probably 3 to 5 mm.  The chin may be 5 to 8 mm AP deficient.  Intraorally, she has her permanent 4 incisors but has primary teeth in the C, D and E position.  In the upper arch, she has her 4 permanent incisors in C, D, and E in both upper quadrants.  She has severe lingual inclination of the lower posterior teeth.  She has an anterior crossbite.  She has a full Class III cuspid relationship on the left side and Class I on the right side.  She has about a 3 mm reverse deep bite.  She has marked crowding in the lower anterior arch and in the upper anterior arch.  She has a severe yaw in both maxillary and mandibular arch with the right side being rotated about 15 mm to the left creating significant and severe arch asymmetry.  Oropharynx tissues appear healthy.  The uvula is relatively normal in size.  The soft palate may be moderately long in length.  Faucial pillars are somewhat constricted primarily on the right side likely due to the severe medial positioning of the ramus of the mandible.  The palpebral fissure on the right side is 5 mm shorter in transverse dimension as compared to the left side.  Examination of the nose shows that she does have an opening in the left nostril but it is fairly significantly constricted particularly at the luminal valve area.  Also, the nostril is short.  The nasal examination shows that the left nostril is open and patent but the nostril is small particularly in vertical dimension and also somewhat in transverse dimension.  Luminal valve is somewhat constricted.  The right nostril is almost totally obliterated although there is very minimal passageway.  Anya is predominately a mouth breather.  The nose is severely constricted and very difficult to evaluate.  The turbinates are in acceptable position.
ANYA RICHT				10/12/05				Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows presence of all the developing teeth.  In the upper right quadrant, however, the bicuspids and cuspids may be overlapping or there could be one missing tooth there.  The 6-year molars are present in all 4 quadrants with the right maxillary quadrant coming a little bit slower than the rest.  The sinuses appear reasonably clear.  The right temporomandibular joint and condyle are severely hypoplastic.  This is probably a major contributing factor to the facial asymmetry.  The left side looks more normal.

Waters view shows severe nasal asymmetry with the nasal bone shifted probably 5 to 6 mm to the right of the facial midline.  A little bit of orbital dystopia is present with the orbital being lower by a couple of mm on the right side.  The left turbinate appears enlarged.  The septum actually appears reasonably straight in the bony area.  The right turbinate is moderately enlarged and with a narrow airway.  Severe yaw in the posterior maxilla and mandible with there being probably at least 10 mm yaw on this radiograph although there is some rotation.  The left inferior border of the mandible appears to be inferiorly positioned compared to the left side.  

Right TMJ tomogram actually shows a joint that has reasonable morphology.  A little bit of deformation especially with the condylar head.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is some joint space around the condyle.  The condyle appears better formed than initially thought from the Panorex.  The condylar head and neck are short compared to the opposite side.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that seems to have fairly good morphology.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space is present around it but difficult to determine the space size.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles with there actually being a little bit greater translation on the right side as compared to the left side but both condyles come down at least beneath the articular eminence.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Anya has a Class III occlusion but a Class II skeletal relationship.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  Maxilla and mandible appear to be retruded.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is only about 3 mm but the base of the tongue is closer to 8 mm.  The tongue seems to have good space between the soft and hard palate in the tongue.  She has AP microgenia compared to the AP position in the incisors.  Soft tissue thickness is fairly significant with the upper lip thickness being almost 15 mm and the chin area being almost 17 mm.  She has a torticollis band that extends from just beneath the inferior border of the mandible down her neck towards her shoulder joint.  There is a fairly ______ band right posterior to the posterior border of the mandible.

BASIS DIAGNOSES
Large soft tissue mass, right cheek, measuring probably 3 cm x 4 cm.
Left mandibular hypoplasia.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Vertical maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.


ANYA RICHT				10/12/05				Page 3


Transverse asymmetry with the right side being 4 to 5 mm higher than the left side.
Class III occlusion on the left side, Class I on the right side.
Anterior crossbite with a reverse deep bite of 2 to 3 mm.
Crowding of lower anterior arch.
Crowding of maxillary arch.
Mixed dentition.
Complete obliteration of right nostril.
Severely hypoplastic left nostril.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Predominately a mouth breather. 
High occlusal plane.
Snoring.
Extensive soft tissue deformity in right side of the face.
Nose shifted off to the right side 10 to 12 mm, chin shifted off the right side 15 to 17 mm.
Right-sided torticollis.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Placement of orthodontic appliances on as many teeth as possible.
Surgery Stage 1.
Removal of large fibrous mass of left cheek.
Excision of torticollis.
Reconstruct nostrils
3.   Surgery Stage 2.
	a.   Bilateral mandibular ramus and osteotomies with bone plate stabilization, HA                           grafting 
            b.   Placement of stabilizing splint. 
4.   Orthodontics Stage 1
a.   Selective decrease in splint size to allow selective eruption of the maxillary and          mandibular teeth to help level the occlusal plane. 
Presurgery Orthodontics Stage 2.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery Stage 3.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible and correct facial asymmetry. 
Multiple osteotomies to expand it and correct the AP and vertical deficiencies.
Rhinoplasty to straighten the nose and reconstruct the nostrils. (Could consider doing this at an earlier stage.)
Turbinectomies if indicated. 
Nasoseptoplasty if indicated.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Surgery stage 4.
 Soft tissue procedures to enhance facial balance and esthetics.  