LEANNE RICHMAN								07-08-02

Leanne is 22 years old and referred by Dr. David Brown.

Patient History

She had her adenoids removed at the age of 3, tubes in her ears at the age of 3, and had her wisdom teeth removed at the age of 16. Leanne smokes one-half pack to one pack of cigarettes per day and has done this for about five years. She has some sinus problems and also a history of asthma. She apparently has a small stomach ulcer and does have acid reflux as well. 

She had braces by Dr. Michael Reznik from fifth grade through seventh grade. 

Leanne’s problems began around eighth grade or maybe around the time that her third molars were removed. She had orthodontic treatment from fifth grade through seventh grade. Her jaw joints started popping shortly after the braces were removed in the eighth grade; therefore, the third molars may have just exacerbated the problem. She had locking problems in college. Two years ago, she developed significant pain and headaches. In January of 2001, she was placed on splint therapy, but this actually increased her pain levels. She has had some physical therapy in reference to jaw exercises. She tends to wake up with jaw pain and headaches in the mornings. She is not aware of nocturnal clenching and bruxism, however. She gets earaches that occur about every two days that feel like ear infections. She has tinnitus and vertigo daily. Other joints that bother her include her wrists, knees, and ankles. SHE HAS NO KNOWN ALLERGIES. She gets headaches predominantly on the left side in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. They are continuous and can escalate to a level of 10. No particular pain problems on the right side. She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 8, being worse on the left side as compared to the right side, overall pain at 8, jaw function and diet at 7, disability at 6.

Current Medications

Flovent 2 puffs two times a day.
Serevent 2 puffs two times a day.
Nasonex 2 puffs two times a day.
Lorcet and Fioricet as needed for pain.

SHE HAS HAD A REACTION TO CLARITIN-D AND TO VICOPROFEN.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, she has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline is about a millimeter off to the right. Mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin midline.

In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose, although the upper lip and maxilla may be a little bit retruded by maybe 2 to 3 mm. Chin is retruded approximately 12 to 15 mm. She has a head postured forward neck position. 
A little bit of fullness in the submental area. Chin-neckline actually doesn’t look too bad. As she pushes her mandibular forward probably about 8 to 10 mm, it does improve her overall facial balance.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has a 3x3 retainer in the lower anterior arch. A little malrotation of the lower left central incisor. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva, although it is quite thin in many areas. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Trying to place her in centric relation creates significant pain for her in her left jaw joint. She is fairly close to Class I cuspid relationship on the right side but has a Class II end-on relationship on the left side. Upper lateral incisors particularly on the left side appear a little bit smaller than the right. She has been receiving some chiropractic treatment. Incisal opening without significant pain 15 mm; maximal incisal opening where she felt restriction was 21 mm. Excursive movement to the right was 10 mm and to the left 7 mm. On excursive movements, she does have definite popping in the left joint. Oropharyx appears clear. Tonsils are present. The turbinates are somewhat enlarged, particularly on the left side. There appears to be a patent nasal airway. Nasal septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses are relatively clear. Turbinates are enlarged, and septum appears to be a little bit off to the left side. Right turbinate actually looks larger than the left turbinate. Condyle does appear a little bit flattened anteriorly. Lower incisors appear to be flared forward quite a bit.

Waters view shows that the nasal septum at least in the bony section appears to be deviated a little bit off to the right side. Turbinates are both enlarged with the left side showing more obstruction than the right. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Left ethmoid sinuses may be a little bit cloudy compared to the right side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that may have some anterior beaking and a little bit of flattening on the head of the condyle and perhaps a slight osteophyte coming off the superior aspect. Joint space actually looks pretty good, but it could be that the mandible is postured forward slightly on this side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space is fairly well balanced.

Right TMJ tomogram shows significant flattening of the anterior head of the condyle and some anterior beaking present. Joint space looks fairly well balanced. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Could be some degenerative changes within the right fossa.

On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints. Left condyle actually looks a little more healthy than the right condyle, but both appear somewhat abnormal. 

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class II relationship with overangulation of the lower incisors. She has a decreased oropharyngeal airway with a space from the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall of only about 3.5 mm. From base of the tongue, the posterior pharyngeal wall measures less than 6 mm, and down at the epiglottis, measures only about 3 mm. Turbinates extend quite a ways up approximately 1 cm posterior to the posterior aspect of the palate. Soft palate appears quite long. She does have some snoring difficulties. She also has daytime somnolence. Leanne states that her jaws quit popping approximately four years ago.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reductions (just stopped popping approximately four years ago).
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Slight AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion, being worse on the left side as compared to the right side.
High occlusal plane angulation.
Overangulation of lower incisors.
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of about 2 mm.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Daytime somnolence.
Snoring.
Sleep apnea symptoms.
History of anemia.
Earaches.
Tinnitus.
Vertigo.

Recommended Treatment

Consider possible sleep study to determine the severity of sleep apnea symptoms

Workup and medical management for possible anemia

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. Remove lower 3x3 retainer. Strip lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors versus placement of sternoclavicular disc grafts versus total joint prostheses (total joint prostheses would only be indicated if surgery is delayed for an extended time).
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance and downgraft the posterior aspect.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

It is quite probable that her asthma and sleep apnea symptoms would be significantly helped with the proposed surgery with possible elimination of both of those conditions if they are related to the nasal and oropharyngeal airway obstruction.