B115
B115 is 39 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX.
By history, B115 had good jaw shape and function. She had orthodontics around 30 years ago from about the age of 11 to 13. At the completion of orthodontics, she had good profile and good occlusion. Over the ensuing years, her lower jaw slowly became more retruded. They do not feel that the jaw problem has gotten significantly worse over the past 11 years. B115 currently takes Plaquenil 200 mg q.d. and fluoxetine 20 mg q.d.

B115 gets headaches about once a week in the left temporal, left orbital and frontal area at about a level of 10, but they do not last very long. She rates her TMJ pain at 1, average daily pain at 0; jaw function, diet, and disability at 8. She has no problems with earaches and gets occasional tinnitus and vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her knees and right elbow. She does have osteoporosis, arthritis, and scoliosis. B115 has had no other treatment for her condition.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Upper lip length is about 26 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm. The maxillary midline is off to the right side probably at least 3 mm. The nasal dorsum is deviated off to the right side about 3 mm. The mandibular dental midline is about 5 mm off towards the right side and chin is probably 8 to 10 mm off to the right side. She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1 to 2 mm lower than the right side. In profile, she has elongation of the lower third of the face. The maxilla may be retruded about 2 to 3 mm. Chin is retruded about 25 mm. She has a severe head postured forward neck position. B115 has maybe some mild snoring, but claims no daytime somnolence normal sleep apnea symptoms. She feels that she breaths through her nose when she sleeps. She sleeps about 9-10 hours per night. She has had 4 bicuspids extracted for previous orthodontics. She has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. She has probably about a 3-4 mm anterior open bite. She has a full Class II occlusal relationship and she has a 12-mm overjet. Due to the limited opening, I could not evaluate the uvula, soft palate, fascial pillars or tonsils. Intranasally, she was difficult to evaluate, but her septum is deviated off towards the left side. Turbinates are had to evaluate, but appear to be moderately enlarged. She does have lip incompetence of about 16 mm. To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Incisal opening appears to be about 23 mm. Excursion movement to the right may be 1.5 mm and I really could not detect any movement towards the left side.

The orthodontist that B115 will likely use is Dr. XXXX.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of a bicuspid in all four quadrants and all four third molars. She has severe resorption of the condyles and the left condyle is postured forward in the fossa. The eminences are very flat. She has prominent styloid processes. Turbinates appear significantly enlarged. Coronal view shows that the nasal septum is deviated severely off towards the left side with a large spur that touches almost against the lateral nasal wall. Inferior turbinates are quite large and fill most of the nasal cavity. Sinuses appear clear. Axial view shows that the turbinates are quite large and fill most of the nasal cavity. The sinuses are clear. Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show severe resorption of the condyles. The condyle is postured forward almost on the articular eminence and the articular eminence has undergone severe resorption as well. Right TMJ sagittal view shows that there may still be some condylar structure in the fossa. There is severe arthritis and resorption present. The articular eminence is flat. The condyle may be functioning about 4 or 5 mm anterior in the fossa. Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is very small mediolaterally. It is fairly well centered in the fossa, but extremely small in size. Lateral aspect of the fossa is fairly flat. Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is very narrow mediolaterally with a lot of degenerative changes associated with it. It positioned a little bit more towards the lateral aspect of the joint. There is a large lip extending out laterally from the fossa area. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has severe retrusion of the mandible and lingual inclination of the lower incisors and upper incisors. The oropharyngeal airway is quite constricted with the airway being only about 2-3 mm at the soft palate level, and, at the base of the tongue, it appears to be about 1 mm. She has a severe Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship. She does have a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 1.5 mm.

Basic diagnoses for B115 would be as follows:
Bilateral mandibular condylar severe resorption as well as resorption of the articular eminences compatible with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Severe AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP, posterior, and transverse hypoplasia.
Class II occlusion. A 3-mm anterior open bite.
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.
Moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch.
Mild crowding of the upper anterior arch. Both maxillary and mandibular arches are very narrow transversely.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Deviated nasal septum. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 1-3 mm (normal 11 mm).
Decreased nasal airway.
Headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1.5 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size problem and to help keep from flaring the lower incisors too far forward. Try to lightly over time expand the mandibular arch. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
Surgery. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses, advancing pogonion approximately 30 mm. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and expand it. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen or buttock). Bilateral coronoidotomies versus coronoidectomies.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Nasal septoplasty.
External rhinoplasty.
4. Post Surgical Orthodontics

B115 MRI
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation:
The fossa has an unusual shape and lateral rim of the fossa curves almost straight vertically downward about 4 mm. There is some tissue in the joint space.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows essentially absence of the articular eminence. Condyle is postured way forward in the fossa and there is severe resorptive changes in the condylar head. The head that is left is sclerotic. The condyle postured forward probably almost 8-10 mm. There appears to be some degenerative disc tissue still present between the condyle and the fossa. The second condyle prominence is further medial, and there is very limited translation on opening. Right TMJ sagittal view shows the absence of an articular eminence. There is significant destruction of the condylar head. The condyle is postured forward in the fossa, but not as far as on the opposite side of only about maybe 4 or 5 mm. In fact, it may be part of the condyle that may be actually in the fossa towards the lateral aspect of the joint. In some areas, it appears that there is almost bone-on-bone contact and there may be some heterotopic bone that has grown down around the front of the condyle. IMPRESSION:

Left TMJ severe condylar resorption with bifid condyle and with the condyle postured significantly forward in the fossa approximately 8 to 10 mm with resorption of the articular eminence. Right TMJ severe arthritis with significant resorption of the condyle with loss of the articular eminence, but heterotopic bone grown vertically in front of the condyle with possible ankylosis.
Changes appear compatible with JRA or RA.

