PETER RILEY										     02-14-05

Pete is 48 years old and referred by Dr. Moody and Dr. Cliff Alexander, 5500 Preston Road, #360
Dallas, TX  75205.  

Patient History

The medication he takes is lithium. The only previous surgeries are for cataracts and for some toe surgery. 

Pete’s problems began about 10 years ago of unknown etiology. He has never been aware of having clicking or popping in his jaw joints. He had orthodontics from the age of 12 to 13 for about 18 months. He has had no other treatment. 

He has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. He has some hearing loss. Other joints that bother him include his neck at approximately C5-C6 where there is a degenerative disc. Also, he has some problems with his hands, fingers, hips, and his big toes. Has no allergies that he is aware of. He gets headaches predominantly in the afternoon at about a level of 4, and they occur in the frontal and temporal areas but are a little bit more intense on the right side than the left side. Rates his TMJ pain at 0, average facial pain around the head and neck area at 4, jaw function at 2, diet at 2, and disability at 5. Pete does not complain of having difficulties with sleep apnea symptoms and has no daytime somnolence. Pete drinks about five to six Diet Cokes per day and drinks a lot of water during the day. He likes chocolate.

Current Medications

Lithium
Aleve

Patient Concerns

Bite is off
The bite may be getting worse
If he holds the lower jaw forward, it is more comfortable
Headaches 
Chews gum at a rate of two packs per day, and this helps relieve some of the jaw tension
Daytime clenching that is relieved by the gum chewing
Snores when lying on the back
Probable mouth breather when sleeping
Some nasal airway obstruction

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Pete has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Has brachiocephalic facial morphology. Upper lip length is about 27 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -2. Maxillary dental midline is about a millimeter off to the left. Mandibular dental midline is maybe about a millimeter off to the right. 

In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is probably a couple of millimeters posterior to subnasale. Maxilla is probably retruded at the incisal edge by probably about 3 mm or so. Chin is retruded by probably about 10 mm. Chin-neckline is short, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. 

Intraorally, Pete has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present. Has some diasthemas between the lower anterior teeth particularly on the left side between the central lateral, lateral cuspid with at least a millimeter between each of those teeth. In the upper arch, Pete has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Upper lateral incisors appear quite small. Has a reverse curve of Wilson in the upper arch. Has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship by about 4 or 5 mm. Has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm. Appears to have a reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch. 

Intraorally, oropharynx appears relatively clear. Uvula is significantly enlarged. Soft palate may be slightly elongated but not too bad. Faucial pillars appear constricted. Tonsils are present and mildly enlarged. Posterior faucial pillars are posteriorly positioned in the soft palate. 

Pete does have a wide columella and very narrow nostrils. As he breathes in, he gets collapse of the lower lateral cartilages which shuts down the nasal airway. Holding the nostrils open with a speculum significantly improved his ability to breathe through his nose. Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderately enlarged and appeared a little bit inflamed. Septum appeared reasonably straight. 

Maximal incisal opening is 54 mm. Excursive movements to the right were about 9 mm and to the left about 8 mm. Pete had no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. Joints seemed to function relatively smoothly. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. A little cloudiness in the left sinus compared to the right sinus. Condyles appear a little bit arthritic particularly on the right side. The rest of the teeth are present. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are all pretty clear. Appears to be passable airway bilaterally, although the turbinates are moderately enlarged, and the airway is fairly narrow. Septum appears reasonably straight in the bony area. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears flattened on top. However, there appears to be good joint space superiorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. A little bit of anterior beaking is present. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows better anatomy than the right side. Condyle appears a little bit sclerotic on top but fairly good form. A little bit of anterior beaking but not too significantly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space looks good. 

On opening, there is good translation of both left and right sides with the condyles coming anterior to the articular eminences. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a slight skeletal Class II jaw relationship. Upper incisors are somewhat vertical in orientation, and the occlusion appears Class II. Has a good oropharyngeal airway. Has a neck postured forward head position that is fairly significant. Actually feels better when he can “float” the lower jaw where he keeps it open and perhaps slightly postured forward. This seems to help take some of the relief off of his jaws and helps reduce the headache situation. 

We had attempted to get an MRI on Peter today, but he was unable to tolerate it. Even with Valium, he could not tolerate it because of his problems with claustrophobia. 

Basic Diagnoses

TMJ arthritis, right side worse than the left side
AP mandibular deficiency
Slight AP maxillary deficiency
Vertical maxillary deficiency
Class II end-on occlusion 
Vertical inclination of maxillary incisors
Overangulation of lower incisors
Diasthemas, lower anterior arch
Anterior deep bite of 4 mm
Slight reverse curve of occlusion, upper arch
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4.5 mm
Mal-rotated mandibular bicuspids
Muscles of mastication dystonia
Wide columella and extremely narrow nostrils
Nasal airway obstruction
Mouth breather
Clenching

Recommended Treatment

Eliminate caffeinated beverages and carbonated beverages as well as chocolate from the diet (Pete currently drinks five to six Diet Cokes per day)

Consider open MRI to rule out TMJ problems 

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up spaces to equal at least 1 mm around each of the upper lateral incisors to help compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies if they are required 
Align and level mandibular arch. Close the spacing in the left anterior arch and strip lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure and completely close the spacing. This will help correct for the tooth-size discrepancy and help decrease the over-angulated lower incisors

Surgery
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to downgraft and advance the maxilla
Reconstruct columella and nostrils

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Restorative dentistry to build up maxillary lateral incisors by bonding veneers, etc.