MICHELLE RIGGS									03/21/2008

Michelle is 12 years and 9 months of age.  Referred by Dr. George Adams.  She is in good health with no major medical problems.  She has no TMJ symptoms, no headaches, no earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo.  
CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Michelle has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 3.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 3 mm off towards the left side.  Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much aligned with each other.  In profile view, she has fairly good vertical balance which is just slightly long.  Upper lip may be retruded a couple of millimeters.  Chin may be retruded about 4 to 5 mm.  Intraorally, Michelle has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars erupted in.  She has some crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Good attached gingiva is present.  The bicuspids and molars are tipped significantly lingually on the left side.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  Cuspids are partially blocked out of the arch.  She has a slight Class III occlusal relationship on the right side with the molar being probably 3 mm Class III.  On the left side, she is closer to being a Class I relationship.  She has an anterior overbite of about 2 mm.  She has a tendency towards a crossbite on the left side, and, if the lower teeth would be in a proper position over her basal bone, she would be in a complete crossbite on the side.  Transversely, she is fairly level, but the right cuspid is up 1 or 2 mm compared to the left one, but the first bicuspid is about 1 mm lower on the right side as compared to the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy.  Fascial pillars are moderately constricted and tonsils are moderate in size.  To palpation, Michelle has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  Incisal opening is 63 mm.  Excursion movement to the right is 11 mm, to the left 10 mm.  Dental model analysis shows that she has a Bolton’s difference of 1 mm.  Lower posterior teeth on the left side are tipped lingually.  Mild crowding of the lower anterior arch and moderate crowding of her anterior arch.  She has a slight accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch and a reversed curve of Spee in the upper arch.
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four developing unerupted third molars.  Maxillary cuspids are unerupted.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  Right mandibular condylar head and neck is elongated compared to the left side.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit small in anteroposterior dimension.  There appears to be decreased posterior and superior joint space.  Articular eminence is relatively normal in inclination.   
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space.  Her articular eminence is relatively normal in inclination.  There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  
Waters view shows that sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates appear enlarged particularly in the right side.  Bony septum appears relatively straight.  Frontal sinuses have not developed.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Michelle has perhaps a slight Class II skeletal relationship.  Upper incisors may be slightly over angulated.  She has a moderately high occlusal angle plane on the lower arch.  She has an anterior open bite.  Oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal.  
The basic diagnoses for Michelle would be as follows:
Right TMJ condylar hyperplasia.  
Vertical maxillary excess.  
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Deviated mandibular prognathism off to the left side. 
Class III end-on occlusion on the right side and a Class I occlusion on the left side.  
Crossbite tendency on the left side.
Anterior open bite.
Mandibular dental midline and chin shifted 3 mm to the left of the maxillary and facial midlines. 
Impacted third molars x4.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Wide columella and narrow nostrils.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Monitor facial growth over the next 2 years.
Closely monitor TMJs for the potential for developing arthritis and a displaced disc on the left TMJ (normal side) from overloading of that joint from right condylar hyperplasia.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to upright the left molars and bicuspids over basal bone by tipping them buccally. Consider slenderizing the lower anterior teeth and removing about 1 mm of tooth structure to correct for a slight tooth size discrepancy and to keep from flaring the lower incisors too far forward.  
Surgery. 
Right TMJ high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors, if disc becomes displaced as a result of the asymmetric jaw growth.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back onto the 
facial midline. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand, level, and maximize the occlusal fit.  
Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
Reconstruction of the columella.
Removal of impacted third molars x4.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 