JORDAN RIEK									4/5/05

Jordan is 18 years old referred by Dr. Cliff Alexander.  He had previous surgery of broken finger.  Otherwise, he is in good health.  He plays football and Lacross for Highland Park.

PRIMARY CONCERNS: 
His bite is changing.
Teeth do not fit together.

He had previous orthodontics in 1999 or 2000, approximately when he was in the 6th to 8th grades and had a good result.  He still wears his retainers.  His teeth remains nice and straight.  He has noticed a change in his bite during the past year.  He takes no medications.  No problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo.  No other joint problems.  Not aware of clenching or bruxism.  No problems with headaches, TMJ pain or pain around the head and neck area. 

In frontal view, Jordan has good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline shifted about 2 mm to the right.  Chin is about 5 mm to the right.  In profile view, Jordan has good facial balance vertically and anteroposteriorly.  Jordan has all of his lower teeth back to the second molars.  He has slight curve of occlusion of the lower arch.  He appears to have adequately attached gingiva although it is quite thin over the central incisors.  Teeth appear to be nicely aligned and level.  In the upper arch, Jordan has all of his teeth back to the second molars.  Slight increase in curve of Wilson present.  It is basically a Class I cuspid with just a slight Class II tendency on the right side.  On the left side, he is end-on Class III by probably 4 mm.  He is developing an end-on incisor relationship.  He has about less than 1/2 mm of vertical overbite.  He has a tendency towards crossbite on the right side, but the left side is okay.  A little bit of crossbite tendency anteriorly.  He has developed some inclination of the posterior teeth on the right side.  He has some increased curve of Wilson on the right side and it has much good extent than the left side.  Curve of Wilson also is greater on the maxillary right side as compared to the left side.  There is no tenderness to palpation in the head and neck area.  Joints function relatively smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 54 mm.  Excursion movement to the right about 7 mm, to the left 8 mm.  Intranasally, Jordan has moderately enlarged turbinates.  He has a fairly large septal spur off the left side of the nose.  Airway still may be adequate.  Oral septum may be deviated just slightly towards the left side.  

On photographs from August 9, 2004, it appears there may be just a little bit worse Class III on the left side and even the right side appears that he has slightly worse Class III tendency.  Slight tip in the occlusal plain with the left side being about 1 mm lower than the right side.  Oropharynx appears relatively clear though he appears to have evidence of a bifid uvula.  The uvula appears quite enlarged.  The soft palate, however, looks relatively normal length and fascial pillars appear relatively normal.  Jordan gives no history of snoring.
JORDAN RIEK				4/5/05					Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows presence of all teeth except third molars are absent.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The left condyle appears larger and longer in length as compared to the right side.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with relatively normal morphology and the joint space appears good.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  It is partially slightly forward in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  One other view, though not quite as clear, radiographically appears that the condyles are a little bit better positioned within the joint.  I believe there is a rotational factor associated with the condyle.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles with the condyles coming well out beyond the articular eminence.  

Waters view shows that the turbinate is enlarged.  He does have septal spur off the left side of the septum.  The turbinate on the right side looks quite large and the airway appears to be somewhat blocked.  The sinuses, however, all appear clear. The maxilla and mandible can be seen with the left side appearing a little bit longer vertically as compared to the right side.  

Cephalometric radiograph shows that Jordan has a slight Class III skeletal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway appears very good.  Not too much discrepancy in the inferior border of the mandible relative to vertical relationship.  There are changes in the jaw line related to horizontal growth factor.  Jordan does have a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm primarily due to small upper lateral incisors. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Left TMJ, hyperplasia.
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Class III end-on occlusion on the left side, Class I on the right with some anterior joint incisor relationship.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Place appliances on maxillary and mandibular arches.

Surgery.
Left mandibular TMJ high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning with ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate mandible back on the facial midline.  

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

