ERIN ROBBINS									10/04/2007

Erin is 42 years old.  Erin is essentially a self-referral through her husband.  She has had previous jaw and orthognathic surgery as well as shoulder.  She had a septoplasty.  She also has had her tonsils out.  She also has had knee surgery on the right knee.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Pain around the jaws particularly on the left side.
Difficulties eating and chewing. 
Sleep apnea.
Chronic fatigue.

Erin's history includes that at the age of 4 she fell 14 feet and struck her face and had multiple facial fractures requiring her jaws to be wired together.  She had orthodontics from about the age of 12 to 14 then she had it again at the age of 19.  In 1983, Dr. Pete Walters performed surgery including TMJ surgery as well as maxillary and mandibular surgery.  The surgery lasted 14 hours.  She had orthodontics again at the age of 32 to improve her bite.

She currently gets earaches, left side worse than the right side and she has tinnitus on the left side worse than right side.  She experiences vertigo particularly when walking down stairs although she has been tested and the doctors tell her that she does not have vertigo.  She may have some hearing loss but again she has been told that the testing shows that her hearing is fairly normal.  The only other joints to cause her any problems include her shoulders.  

She has been diagnosed with having obstructive sleep apnea.  She is aware of clenching her teeth at night and during the day.  She rates her average TMJ pain at about 3, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 7, diet at 7 and disability at 6.  Oropharyngeal tissues as best as I can see look fairly healthy.  The uvula is relatively mildly elongated and the soft palate maybe moderately elongated.  The faucial pillars are moderately constricted.  Turbinates are normal to moderate enlargement with the left one being a little bit larger than the right one.  The septum is reasonably straight or at least susceptible.  She appears to have adequate nasal airway bilaterally.  An interesting phenomenon that Erin has is when she gets pain her ear turns red on the lower two-thirds of the ear.  She went to see an ENT doctor and they were unable to come up with any specific cause of that. 

In frontal view, Erin has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is probably about –2 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much along the facial midline.  In profile view, Erin has some significant AP maxillary deficiency probably about a good 6 mm probably at the incisor level.  Mandible is retruded probably about 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is moderately well defined.  Upper lip supralabrale is probably about 3 to 4 mm posterior to subnasale.  She has high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  Intraorally, Erin is missing lower first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars present.  Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.  Transverse width of the arch may be slightly narrow.  She has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, likewise she is missing the upper first bicuspids.  She has a slightly reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch.  
ERIN ROBBINS				10/04/2007				Page 2

It is basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has a deep bite of about 3 to 4 mm.  To palpation, Erin has some moderate discomfort over the left masseter and mild to low moderate over the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, left styloid area and left SCM.  Maximal incisal opening is 37 mm but that creates significant pain on the left side.  She can open about 28 mm without significant pain.  Excursive movement to the right was less than 1 mm, left 7 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars and all 4 first bicuspids.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  There are wires in the maxilla in the 4 areas from the previous surgery.  There are some pins in the symphysis area from previous genioplasty. There are also some pins in the ramus area, one on each side down towards the angle area.  

Left TMJ shows that there is some heterotopic bone enlargement of the condyle.  The condyle is severely deformed.  The right side of the condyle appears smaller in size as though it has undergone some osseous changes and degenerative change.

Waters view shows that she has wires in the maxilla.  Sinus appears relatively clear.  There is a little bit of cloudiness in the left side and there appears to be an image that appears to be some fatty tissue or a little mucocele on that side.  Ethmoid and frontal sinuses appears relatively clear.  The nasal airway appears good.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is severely deformed.  It is larger than the size of the fossa.  Articular eminence is short in vertical length.  Joint space is essentially compromised.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is significantly malformed but appears to have a superior extension off it with some anterior beaking present.  Difficult to identify any joint space.  There is radiopaque aspect of the condyle although down below the top of the condyle.  The condyle is narrow anteroposteriorly.  On opening, there is no translation of the left TMJ and there is some mild to moderate translation on the right side with it coming down along the posterior slope of the articular eminence. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Erin has an AP deficiency of both the maxilla and mandible.  She has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm at the base of the tongue and at the soft palate level. 