TODD ROBICHAUX								     02-17-05

Todd is 39 years old and referred by Dr. Cliff Alexander, 5500 Preston Road, #360, Dallas, TX  75205.
 
Patient History

He had a tonsillectomy performed in 1973, a septoplasty in 1984, and a hernia repair in 1998. Todd reports that he has a moderate to severe snoring problem. He breathes through his mouth most of the time when sleeping. He is not aware of having sleep apnea per se. He has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo and no hearing loss. He has been told that he has some bone spurs in his neck. He has some seasonal allergies and also has an unfavorable reaction to IODINE. Not aware of any jewelry hypersensitivities. He is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day. He gets headaches two or three times a week at about a level of 3 in the frontal and temporal areas. He attributes these in some part to the stress from his kids. He rates his TMJ pain at 3, overall average daily pain and discomfort at 3, jaw function at 3, diet at 2, and disability at 1. 

Patient Concerns

Teeth don’t fit together
Headaches 
Jaw joint pain
Muscle pain
Clenching
Difficulties breathing through the nose
Mouth breather
Snoring

Current Medications

Paxil 20 mg q.d.
Lipitor 10 mg q.d.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Todd has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -1 mm. Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm to the right as is the chin. 

In profile view, Todd has prominence to the nasal dorsum. Has an acute nasolabial angle. Upper lip supranasal is posterior to subnasale by probably a couple of millimeters. Maxilla is probably about 3 or 4 mm AP deficient. Chin is probably 10 to 12 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is short, but the chin-neck angle is well-defined. 

Intraorally, Todd has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present. In the lower arch, the left cuspid may be about a millimeter posterior to the right cuspid. In the upper arch, Todd has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Todd has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by probably 2 mm and on the left side by probably 3 to 4 mm. He has an anterior crossbite and right posterior crossbite. He has a 0 overbite relationship. As Todd shifts his mandible toward the left side, it does improve his facial symmetry. Upper arch appears a little bit more symmetry anteroposteriorly. Todd has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left cuspid being about 2 mm higher than the right cuspid. Likewise, in the lower arch, the left cuspid is 2 mm higher than the right cuspid. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. Uvula is significantly elongated and probably contributing to the snoring process. Soft palate may be mildly elongated but not too significantly. Faucial pillars appear to have relatively normal transverse width. 

Todd has a fairly large perforation in the septum toward the anterior part of the septum in the cartilage area that probably measures at least a centimeter in height and about the same in anteroposterior dimension. This apparently was the result of the septoplasty that he had earlier. Intranasally, the turbinates appear relatively moderate in size, and it appears that there is a passable airway as best can be seen by direct visualization. Opening up the right nostril with a speculum, Todd could breathe much easier through that side. He had less improvement with opening of the left luminal valve.

On opening, Todd has an audible and palpable click on the left side at about 25 mm of opening and at about 15 mm of closing. On the right side, he has a much later opening click at 40 to 45 mm and closing click at probably around 30 mm. He has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. Maximal incisal opening is about 60 mm. He could open up 40 without too much pain or discomfort. Excursive movements to the right are about 10 mm and to the left 8 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Sinuses look reasonably clear. Appears that he has a passable airway. Condyles may appear a little bit arthritic. He has appliances on all of his teeth except for the maxillary second molars.

Left TMJ tomograms show a condyle with fairly good morphology. A little sclerosis perhaps on the top. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. May be slightly increased joint space anteriorly but decreased joint space superiorly and posteriorly.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears slightly larger than the opposite side. A little bit of sclerosis on the head possibly. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. Styloid process is a little bit more readily seen on the left side, but is not too long. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. May be a little bit of septal spurring back in the bony area. Left nostril appears blocked up for a good part. On the right side, there appears to be some airway but not normal. Waters view shows that there is some vertical asymmetry in the mandibular inferior border. Upper incisors are slightly overangulated. Has a skeletal Class III jaw relationship. He has a class III end-on occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway is fairly constricted with an airway of less than 4 mm at the soft palate level and barely 4 mm at the base of the tongue. Upper incisors are overangulated. Vertical discrepancy at the occlusal plane level by probably at least a couple of millimeters in the cuspid area and slightly greater posteriorly. There is a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1.5 mm by measurement, but could actually be slightly higher than that. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation 
AP maxillary deficiency and transverse asymmetry
Vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency 
Class III end-on occlusion being about 2 mm Class III on the right side and 3 to 4 mm Class III on the left side
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm shorter vertically than the right side
Anterior and right-sided crossbite
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway
Severe snoring
Sleep apnea symptoms 
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1.5 to 2 mm
Slight overangulation of maxillary incisors and mandibular incisors

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to level and align the maxillary arch. Tip upper lateral incisors mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. On the left side, those roots currently are fairly close together
Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure and retract

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible, shift it around to the facial midline, and transversely level it
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it, downgraft it, expand it, and upright the incisors

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 