NANCY ROBERTS									10-04-04

Nancy is 52 years old and referred by Robert L Coles, DMD, 15-B Winchester Court, Mauldin, SC  29662 (phone 864-297-3601, fax 864-297-7997). The orthodontist that we will need to send a letter to is D.T. Fulmer, DMD, 105-D E. Butler Ave., Mauldin, SC  29662-2103 (phone 864-297-1367).

Patient History

Nancy’s problems began when she was 18 years old, a freshman in college, in 02/1971 when she had a skiing accident and may have severely injured her vertebrae in the neck and back. She reports that she had hundreds of microfractures through her vertebrae from that accident. She said she lost 3 inches in height. She had surgeries and then was in traction for two years. She developed severe headaches. She has had a lot of treatment basically dental and physical therapy and chiropractic kind of treatments. She did go into severe depression and was hospitalized for that specific problem. In 1983, her jaws locked. In 09/1984, she underwent a right TMJ arthroplasty and partial meniscectomy. In 10/1986, she had the same procedure performed on the left side. She has seen numerous doctors. She also has seen two neurologists, and both them said that her problems were mental. She went to see Dr. Mark Piper, and apparently Dr. Piper proposed fat grafts to the joints and referred to it as stem cell grafting which also included orthodontics and unloading the joints for nine months then slowing getting the teeth and jaws back together. She was told at her earlier surgery that her right jaw joint was fused shut which would have been back in 09/1984. Besides the jaw joint problems, headaches, etc., the only other major medical problem that she has is the hypothyroidism. 

She takes Synthroid 0.2 mg q.d. She also takes multivitamins, extra vitamin B complex, and vitamin E. She takes ibuprofen occasionally for pain. She takes no other mediations. 

She rarely gets earaches, has no tinnitus, and no vertigo. She does have some hearing loss where speech and so forth from others sounds muffled. Right side is worse than the left side. She has allergies to ANTIHISTAMINES, CODEINE, AND MUSCLE RELAXERS. Probable lactose intolerance. She cannot wear cheap earrings and has to have gold earrings. Her jaw is constantly moving. She is not particularly aware of any clenching or bruxism. She says she has no comfortable position to get her teeth together. She does chew on one side or the other side when she eats. She gets headaches at about a level of 8 throughout the head area, but they can escalate to 10. She can have some loss of vision when she hits the 10 level. TMJ pain is probably somewhere around 8 and her overall pain around the head and neck area on an average day is 8. She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 7, and disability at 7.

About eight years ago, Nancy got bitten by a cat in the left small finger and penetrated into the joint. She got a massive infection of that joint afterward. She had to have surgery on the finger and also was on IV antibiotics for six weeks and then on p.o. antibiotics up to about nine months afterwards. She says that since that time she has never felt the same. Her husband is a veterinarian, and she has worked for him all these years and just stepped away from working there within the past month. They work predominantly on cats and dogs. Growing up, she was around a lot of seagulls just from where she grew up. Nancy does state that at one point they had placed her on a low dose of Valium, but she just couldn’t wake up after taking it. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is probably about -3. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandible and chin are shifted off to the left side by about 4 or 5 mm. 

In profile view, she has reasonable balance. Lower jaw may be back about 4 or 5 mm. She has ______ Class II occlusal relationship on the right side and almost full Class II on the left side. She is constantly moving her jaws when she tries to bite together. Has about a 4 or 5-mm overjet. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 3 to 4 mm to the left. Could not see the oropharynx nor the uvula nor the soft palate nor the faucial pillars. In conscious attempt for Nancy to open her jaws or close her jaws, she goes into myotonic kind of movements, severe repetitive muscle spasm kind of movements. Her speech does get affected. She says particularly in the afternoons it sometimes becomes more difficult for her to talk. However, it seems that when she is more relaxed and not as consciously aware of requiring jaw movements that the muscle spasms and hyperfunction appear to subside. She does have some constricture of her nostrils and luminal valves. The turbinates appear relatively normal. Septum appears relatively normal. She does get some thick drainage at times from her nose. She does have moderate to severe daytime somnolence. She says her husband snores a lot, and this keeps her awake at night, and she is a very light sleeper. If she can sleep by herself with the window open, she sleeps much better. Swimming does help her pain quite a bit.

To palpation, she has high moderate to low severe pain over the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, posterior neck, and moderate pain over the medial pterygoids, styloid areas, SCMs, and shoulder areas. Difficult to determine the maximum opening. As she tries to open, her jaws just start to pulsate significantly with muscle spasms. She did get up at one point to probably about 25 but only momentarily. Also very difficult to determine excursive movements. As best I could tell, she could shift to the right maybe about 6 mm and to the left maybe 3 to 4 mm. She also has severe hiccup problems. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Right TMJ tomogram shows that the joint appears quite arthritic. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little flattened anteriorly. Appears to be significantly decreased joint space vertically and particularly anteriorly but with a little bit better joint space posteriorly. Appears to be some anterior beaking present. Hockey stick shape to the condylar head. May be some unevenness on the head of the condyle on the anterior aspect. Some sclerosis is present there as well. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II relationship and Class II occlusal relationship. Mildly decreased oropharyngeal airway. She has an overjet of probably about 4 mm. Upper lip is long in length, and she has about a -2 to -3 tooth-to-lip relationship. 

Panorex evaluation shows that she has all of her teeth except for her third molars. She has crowns on the maxillary and mandibular left first and second bicuspids. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Right TMJ appears quite flat on the top of the condylar head. On the left side, the anatomy looks a little bit better but difficult to tell from this view. I am unable to manipulate Nancy’s jaw into a centric relation. Manipulation of the jaw or her conscious effort to bite down or even conscious effort to try to relax sets off clonic episodes of the muscles. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and displacement and severe degeneration of the articular discs
AP mandibular hypoplasia
Severe TMJ pain
Severe headaches
Severe myofascial pain
End-on Class II cuspid relation on the right side and a full Class II cuspid relationship on the left side
Masticatory dysfunction
Daytime somnolence
Sleep disorder
Severe muscular dyskinesia 

Recommended Treatment

Medications
Klonopin 0.5 mg, disp. 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x 3
Ultram 50 mg, disp. 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.6h. p.r.n. pain, refill x 4

IV sedation versus general anesthetic to obtain impression of the maxillary and mandibular arch to prepare dental models if necessary

CT scan of jaws and TMJs

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch 

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen or buttock)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

I did give Nancy an order for Chlamydia antibody titers to include trachomatis, pneumoniae, and psittaci and also for Mycoplasma antibody titers for genitalium, pneumoniae, and fermentans. 