SARA RIPPEE										05-19-04

Sara is 20 years old and referred by Ashley Klingenpeel, 2618 Marymount, Enid, OK  73703. 

Patient History

The only surgery Sara has had is she had her wisdom teeth removed. Sara is in good health with no major medical problems. Sara’s problems may have begun as early as the age of 10 to 11 when her mother noticed that she was changing her posture. Sara didn’t really become aware of having significant joint or headache problems until she was about 12 or 13. The etiology is unknown. She has had ongoing chiropractic treatment for 8 or 9 years. She had orthodontics from the ages of 14 to 17 to help her problems, but it was non-beneficial. She has had probably at least five splints. She has been through pain management and has had multiple injections into her muscles, and, in fact, one doctor injected local anesthetic and glucosamine into the muscles in her back and shoulders. She also went to a pain management doctor, who did steroid injections as well. Fortunately, the injections were not done into her joints. She also has had dental equilibration. The only medication she currently takes is Advil and Tylenol for her headaches. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, but does get vertigo with her bad headaches. No hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her shoulders, right worse than her left, she has scoliosis, and her hips and knees also give her some problems, worse on the right side as compared to the left side. However, daily she does run on a treadmill, does an ellipitical machine, stationary bike, as well as lifting weights. She thinks she may have injured her right shoulder some with her weightlifting. She has continuous headaches and on an average day they will get up to a level of 6 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. At their worst they get to 8 or 9. Probably at least twice a week she does get more severe headaches. She rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 1, diet at 4, and disability at 5. Sara feels that the teeth on the left and right side do come together at about the same time.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, she has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 3 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all fairly well-aligned to the facial midline. 

In profile view, the mandible is a little bit retruded. Chin-neckline is not really well-defined. Vertical facial dimensions are good. She may be retruded probably about 8 mm. 

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth are fairly well-aligned with just a little bit of crowding in the lower anterior arch. She appears to have good attached gingiva.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has just a slight Class II occlusal tendency and an overjet of about 1 to 2 mm. She has about a 1-mm overbite relationship. Oropharyngeal airway looks good. She has her tonsils present. She has bilaterally a small separated little tonsil nodule above the main part of the tonsil in between the faucial pillars. This is present bilaterally. Nasally, she has a relatively wide columella, and nostrils may be just slightly constricted but not too bad. Turbinates are of a moderate size and appears to have a good airway. Sara believes that she breathes through her nose when she sleeps. Sara does have difficulties standing for any length of time. She gets a lot of pain through her neck and shoulders when she does any kind of activity that does require her to stand for a prolonged time period. In addition, she is apparently developing a posture where she has a head postured forward neck position. She has clicking in both of her joints on wide opening at about 35 mm and a closing click at about 25 to 30 mm. The click is audible particularly on the right side. Sara tends to have a little crepitation in the opening movements as well. To palpation, she has mild tenderness over the temporalis muscle, styloid areas, and moderate pain over the TMJs. Interestingly, to palpation, she has an osseous bump behind the left ear that is fairly large and prominent. She has the same bone formation on the right side, although it is not as large as the left side. She has been aware of that being present for probably at least a couple of years. It does feel firm and hard.  She is not aware of it increasing in size now, but for a while she felt that it did get larger. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear sort of equal in density. Don’t look really clear, but difficult to evaluate. Nasal airway also looks like the left side may be a little bit more blocked than the right side. All four third molars are absent, and the rest of the teeth are present. She has a 3x3 retainer present. TMJs demonstrate significant arthritic changes associated with them with the left side appearing worse than the right side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little depression in the middle of it. The anterior aspect is flattened. A little anterior beaking is present. A little osteophyte appears to be projecting superiorly from the posterior superior aspect of the condyle. Articular eminence is fairly steep and moderately long in vertical length. Appears to be a decreased joint space superiorly. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit better morphology than the opposite side. Appears to be a small osteophyte sticking off the posterior head. Joint space is a little bit more balanced on this side, and the bone changes do not appear quite as significant as the opposite side. 

On opening, there is good translation of the condyles bilaterally. The osseous bone bump is evident on the left side, and it just appears to be some excessive calcification. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear in the maxillary, ethmoids, and frontal sinuses. Turbinates appear moderate in size, and there appears to be adequate airway. Jaws appear to be reasonably symmetrical.

Cephalometrically, she may have just a slight Class II skeletal relationship. May have a slightly increased occlusal plane angle. Slight Class II occlusion. Probably no more than a millimeter of vertical overbite relationship, and she has an overjet of 1 to 2 mm. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm at the soft palate level and about the same at the base of the tongue.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with late reduction and significant deformation of the articular disc 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia
Slight Class II end-on occlusion 

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Apply appliances to upper arch
Apply appliances to mandibular arch

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to correct the occlusion

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
