ELIZABETH RITTER		    					08/04/2011

Liz is 21 years old.  Referred by Dr. Larry Pribyl.  Liz believes that her problems began when she was about 10 years old when she developed headaches.  This was in about 2000.  She did not begin developing TMJ pain until she was 18 years old.  She has had previous orthodontics from 2000 to 2004 and apparently had a good occlusal result at that time.  Following development of her TMJ issues, she began splint therapy in October 2008.  She has had a total of 6 appliances, five for the mandible and one for the maxilla.  She also has had some extensive physical therapy including TENS, ultrasound, etc.  She has had what sounds like steroid injections bilaterally to the temporalis muscles through an intraoral approach.

Liz rates her headaches at a level of 5 throughout the headache and she gets these 5 times per week.  She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 3 with her current mandibular appliance in place, but without the appliance her TMJ pain will register at 9.  With the appliance in, her average daily pain is at about a level of 2.  She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 4, disability at 4.  She gets occasional earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo.  She has no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her knees and sometimes her hips.  She has been diagnosed with acid reflux syndrome and also social anxiety disorder.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day.  She currently takes the following medications:

Effexor XR 150 mg tablets q.d.
BuSpar 22.5 mg tablets 2 tablets per day.
Prilosec 20 mg q.d.

Primary concerns that Liz has are as follows:

Jaw pain.
Headaches.
Difficulties eating and chewing food.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Liz has good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 4 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is 1 mm off to the right side and chin is probably about 3 mm off to the right side.  In profile, the maxilla may be back about 3 to 4 mm and chin back about 10 mm.  The chin neckline is a little bit short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars in both the maxillary and mandibular arches.  She does have a crown on the maxillary second bicuspid which is a primary tooth and there apparently was no permanent successor.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  She has some thin but adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  She has a attached labial frenulum.  She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by probably about 2 mm and slight Class III on the left side of probably about 3 mm.  She has an open bite of about 2 mm.  In centric relation, she occludes only on the mandibular left second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal with just a slight elongation of the uvula.  The turbinates are relatively normal in size and the septum is reasonably straight.  There does not appear to be any significant nasal airway obstruction.  There is about 11 mm of lip incompetence.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters, retromandibular area, and milder tenderness over the SCMs, posterior neck and shoulders.  She has high moderate low severe pain over the right TMJ.  The incisal opening is 46 mm, opening without pain 21 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 7 mm and to the left 6 mm.  

Dental model analysis shows that the maxillary left second molar has hypererupted somewhat.  The distal part of the mandibular left second molar is elevated.  There does not appear to be a significant tooth size discrepancy.  In maximizing the occlusion, it fits together fairly well except for the second molars on the left side hit prematurely and cause an open bite from about the first bicuspid through the first molar.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  There is a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is reasonably straight.  The turbinates have a moderate enlargement, but there appears to be reasonable airway.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is reasonably straight.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged, but there appears to be an adequate airway.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears longer vertically than the opposite side.  There is some flattening in the anterior head.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  There is decreased vertical posterior joint spaces.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears more arthritic with some anterior beaking present and decreased vertical joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width and the condyle is larger than the opposite side.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 3 mm.  The joint space is decreased more at the lateral aspect of the joint than superiorly.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit more arthritic.  There is maybe sclerosis and perhaps some erosion in the head of the condyle.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves about 3 to 4 mm down overlapping the condyle.  There is some significant flattening of the lateral aspect of the condyle.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there are two occlusal plane levels and two levels of the inferior border of the mandible.  The cant in the occlusal plane measures about 3 to 4 mm in the first molar area in the maxilla and in the mandible it is slightly greater than that.  The inferior borders of the mandible are even as well with the left side extending below the right side by about 4 mm.  There is an anterior open bite present.  There is still some adenoid tissues left.  The turbinates extend just beyond the posterior border of the hard palate.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6.5 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  She has some fine crepitus in the right TMJ, but the left side seems to function relatively smoothly.  

Basic diagnoses for Liz would be as follows:

Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction with significant degenerative changes.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and transverse asymmetry.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia but anterior vertical hyperplasia and transverse asymmetry.
Slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side, slight Class III cuspid relationship on the left side.  
Occluding only on the left second molars.
Open bite extending including the left first molars through the right second molars. 
Slight hypereruption of maxillary left second molar and mandibular left second molar.
TMJ pain.
Nocturnal and daytime clenching.
Possible mild left mandibular condylar hyperplasia.

Treatment options would include the following:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Try to intrude the left second molar 1 mm.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 			removing 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to achieve a better vertical over 			bite.  Try to vertically intrude the distal aspect of the mandibular left 			second molar.
2.	Surgery Option 1.
	a.	Reposition right articular disc with Mitek anchor.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maximize the occlusal fit.
3.	Surgery Option 2.
	a.	Right TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
	b.	Right TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).
	c.	Left mandibular ramus sagittal osteotomy. 
4.	Surgery Option 3:  Either of the first two options to adjust the joint and mandible 	but add maxillary osteotomies to advance it, reposition the anterior aspect 	upwards, and level transversely.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine and retain the occlusion. 
Further review of Liz’ MRI indicates that the disc is in very poor condition and non-salvageable and she would achieve a much better result with a right side total joint prosthesis.  