KIMBERLY ROBERTS							06/09/2011

Kimberly is 51 years old, birth date 05/09/1960.  Referred by Dr. Larry Pribyl, 4801 S. Cliff Drive #212, Independence, MO 64055, telephone #816-795-1000.  

Primary concerns Kimberly has include the following:

Severe pain with the TMJs and jaws.
Requiring a significant amount of medication to control her pain.
Sleep apnea.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Daily headaches.
Earaches, tinnitus and vertigo.

Kim’s problems began when she was about 14 years old when she had developed clicking and popping in her jaw joints of unknown etiology.  She became somewhat symptomatic while in college, particularly with the development of headaches.  With the birth of her second child, she had some increased pain factors as well.  She did have orthodontics from 1986 to 1989 and I believe she may have been treated without extraction.  In November 1986, she had a mandibular advancement.  Four years later, it was noted that the jaw was significantly shifted from its original postsurgical position and she had significant increased pain.  She has worn splints 24/7 almost since 1992 and has had four major splints made.  She has trigger point injections and she also had alpha stimulation.  She has also had physical therapy primarily after the jaw surgery and biofeedback.  

She currently takes the following medications:  

Tegretol ER 100 mg in the morning and 300 mg in the afternoon.
Celebrex 200 mg q.d.
Triamterene which is her diuretic pill.
Nexium 40 mg q.d.
Mirapex 0.5 mg 2 in the afternoon and 1 to 2 at bedtime.
Atenolol 50 mg.
Amitriptyline 500 mg q.h.s.
Simvastatin.
Soma compound b.i.d. 
Vicodin 5/500 mg one tablet q.d.

Other joints that bother her include her hands, knees, and left hip.  She does not believe she has any problems with jewelry and actually is a jewelry designer and works with cheap jewelry and more expensive kind of jewelry and is not aware of having any problems.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing at nighttime or during the day.  

She gets headaches about a level of 5 in the frontal, temporal and top of the head area at about a level of 5 and these occur daily.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 4, diet at 4, disability at 7.  She has numbness to the lower lip and chin area from her previous surgery.  She apparently had bilateral sagittal split osteotomies to advance the mandible and a chin augmentation.  

In frontal view, Kim has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 4 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the right and chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile, Kim has at least 6 mm AP deficiency.  The chin is probably 10 mm AP deficient, but the chin button is quite prominent and likely due to a previous genioplasty procedure that she had done.  There is no definite chin neck angle.  Intraorally, she has a partial denture placed in the right bicuspids and molars and left second molars.  She has buildups of the left bicuspids and molars on the left side.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has buildups on the right posterior teeth as well as on the left side.  She has crowns on the mandibular left cuspid through first molar and in the upper arch she has crowns on the anterior six teeth and the right first molar.  She is basically somewhat Class III cuspid relationship.  She has about a 0.5 mm vertical over bite.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.  To palpation, she has high moderate to lower severe pain over the temporalis, masseters, right TMJ, right styloid area, moderate pain over the left masseter, left TMJ, left styloid area, and milder tenderness over the medial pterygoids, SCMs and shoulders.  On opening, she has some crepitus in the left joint, but the right side seems to function reasonably smoothly.  The maximal incisal opening is 35 mm, but 21 mm without significant discomfort.  The excursion movements were only about 1 mm in each direction.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  She is predominantly a nasal breather daytime and nighttime.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of maxillary third molars, mandibular right bicuspids and molars, and mandibular left second and third molars.  She has a screw in the mid symphysis area to support the genioplasty procedure.  She has root canals on the mandibular left cuspid, first bicuspid, mandibular right cuspid.  She has crowns on the anterior maxillary six teeth, maxillary right first molar, and mandibular left cuspid, bicuspids, and first molars.  The turbinates appear moderate in size and sinuses appear relatively clear with a relatively straight nasal septum.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear with maybe some slight thickening of the mucosa in the left maxillary sinus on the floor and along the lateral aspect of the sinus wall.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  The turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  

Axial view shows there is some slight increased thickness of the sinus mucosa in both sinuses.  The septum is reasonably straight.  The turbinates have a relatively normal size.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant condylar resorption with severe arthritis, significant anterior beaking, some sclerosis on the head of the condyle and decreased lateral joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant condylar resorption with severe arthritis, significant anterior beaking, some sclerosis on the head of the condyle and decreased lateral joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows significant arthritis with evidence of significant resorption of the condylar head.  The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat and the joint space is decreased vertically particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows severe arthritis and less condylar volume.  There is decreased lateral joint space and there is adequate vertical joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric analysis shows a retruded maxilla and mandible and has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  The chin is significantly over advanced and the mandibular height is shorter than normal.  Oropharyngeal airway measures less than 3 mm at the base of the soft palate and oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm.  She has significant buildup of acrylic between the maxillary and mandibular teeth.  Her upper crown lengths are 12 mm.  

Kim has been diagnosed with trigeminal neuralgia about 2 years ago.

Basic diagnoses for Kim would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with articular discs dislocation that are severely degenerated and deformed as well as a reactive tissue within the joints.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Missing mandibular right bicuspids and molars, mandibular left second and third molars, and maxillary third molars. 
Buildups of the crowns of the posterior teeth to assimilate occlusion.
Partial denture to replace the missing mandibular right bicuspids and molars as well as the left second molar.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Sleep apnea (the patient being placed on CPAP machine).
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
Anesthesia to lower lip and chin from previous mandibular ramus osteotomies and genioplasty procedure.  
Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Test for hypersensitivities to materials that are used in the TMJ Concepts total 	joint prostheses.  
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses.
	b.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction.
	c.	Anterior mandibular ostectomy to decrease chin prominence.
	d.	Application of arch bars and skeletal stabilizing devices.
4.	Dental reconstruction.
5.	Restorative dentistry that could include dental implants for the right mandibular 	arch and the prosthetic reconstruction. 


