LESTER RIVERA									03/15/2010

Lester is 40 years old.  Lester is 5 feet 11 inches and weighs 250 pounds.  His primary concerns are sleep apnea.  He is currently on a CPAP machine at 11 cm of pressure.  Lester takes no medications.  Lester has some food allergies to yeast, chicken, and milk and also he has allergies to pollen and mold.  Lester has had his situation since childhood.  He had nasal surgery to include turbinectomies in 2002 to prepare him for a CPAP machine which he also received in 2003.  He currently takes no medications.  He is aware of clenching and bruxing at night, but not during the day.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  He has no problems with TMJ pain, headaches, or myofascial pain.  He rates his jaw function at 0, diet at 3, disability at 0.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Lester has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 0.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much aligned with each other.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded probably about 3-4 mm and the chin is retruded about 15 mm.  There is no chin neckline or angle.  He has significant fullness in the submental area.  Intraorally, Lester has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present.  He has a crown on the mandibular left first molar.  He has moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch.  The transverse width of the lower arch is constricted.  He has crenations on the lateral aspect of his tongue.  In the upper arch, he is missing the maxillary right first molar, but has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars present.  His maxillary arch is also transversely narrow.  He has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues looks reasonably healthy, but uvula is moderately enlarged, the soft palate may be mild to moderately elongated, and the fascial pillars are constricted moderately.  Intranasally, the turbinates have been significantly reduced.  The septum has some slight deviations to it, but it does not appear to be too significant.  He may have some minimal to mild nasal airway obstruction.  He does have moderate snoring, moderate daytime somnolence, and severe sleep apnea.  He does breathe through his mouth some at night.  He is on a CPAP with 11 cm of pressure.  Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm.  The excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the maxillary right first molar.  

Coronal view shows that he has a large mucocele in the maxillary right sinus and may also have a smaller one in the left sinus.  The inferior turbinates are relatively small.  The middle turbinates are fairly large.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show good vertical joint space, but decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal tomograms show good vertical joint space, but decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm.  

Left TMJ sagittal views show a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking, but appears to have good joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Right TMJ sagittal views show a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking, but appears to have good joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Lester has a skeletal and occlusal Class I relationship.  The tongue fills a good portion of the oral cavity.  The soft palate is hyperplastic.  He has less than 2 mm of airway space at the base of the soft palate in the posterior pharyngeal well.  The base of the tongue has probably about 7 mm of airway space.  

Basic diagnoses for Lester would be as follows:

Severe sleep apnea.
Maxillary and mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Hypertrophied soft palate and uvula.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with airway dimension at the soft palate level 1-2 mm and at the base of the tongue of 8 mm.
Right maxillary sinus mucocele.
High occlusal plane angle.
Missing maxillary right first molar.
Mandibular posterior teeth tipped significantly lingually (Lester has no concerns about this at this time and is concerned mainly about correcting the sleep apnea).

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Surgery:
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise	 		direction. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction approximately 12 mm.
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP).
Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.
Remove mucocele right maxillary sinus.

