LAURA ROBERTSON 								10/12/05

Laura is 23 years old, referred by Dr. Linda Crawford, 8215 Westchester Dr., Ste. 221, Dallas, TX 75225.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS
Unithroid 50 mcg per day.
Cytomel 5 mcg per day.
Mircette (BCP.)
Advair 1 puff twice a day. 

She has had a reaction to tetracycline in the form of hives.

Laura has included a nice outline for her treatment to date.  She had braces from the age of 11 to 13 and upper cuspids exposed surgically and pulled into place.  At age 14 she wore braces for 6 months to correct "flaring" and overjet of the upper arch.  At the age of 16 to 17, she developed TMJ popping and clicking.  Her jaw would lock shut every morning.  She needed to massage the joints for 10 minutes before she would eat breakfast.  She would have soreness in her jaws for several days if she ate something chewy.  At the age of 21-22, the braces were put back on by an orthodontist in Houston to try and correct an upper left cuspid, height and flaring of the upper arch.  From August of 2004 to the present, she has been seeing Dr. Linda Crawford.  She has had all 4 first bicuspids extracted to correct the flaring, deep bite, overjet and the overall profile.  With the current mechanics, apparently Dr. Crawford feels that Laura is developing more of an overjet problem.  There is apparently some rapid degeneration occurring in the TMJs with resorption of the condyles.  Laura has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She has an allergic response to tetracycline.  She does know if she has any problems with jewelry.  She states she does have osteopenia.  She does sometimes wake up with her teeth clenched together but she does not think she does it all the time.  She has no problems with headaches.  No specific TMJ pain.  She rates her average daily pain at about a level of 2.  Jaw function 4, diet at 2, disability at 1.  

In frontal view, Laura has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper-tooth-to lip relationship is 2 mm.  Maxillary midline is just 1/2 mm off to the right side.  Chin is pretty much on the facial midline.  Lower dental midline may be about 1 mm off to the right side.  In profile view, she has an obtuse nasolabial angle.  Laura has probably about 4 or 5 mm of AP deficiency in the maxilla.  The chin is about 12 to 15 mm AP deficient.  Chin-neckline is very short but chin-neck angle is actually fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Laura is missing upper and lower first bicuspids.  Spaces are almost completely closed now.  There is a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally being about 2 mm Class II.  She has about a 2.5 mm overbite relationship in the front.  Laura has had her tonsils removed.  The soft palate looks a little bit long and hangs low posteriorly.  The uvula is relatively normal in length.  Faucial pillars are fairly constricted transversely.  Nasal airway looks good with the septum reasonably strait and turbinates are moderate in size but there appears to be good airway.  They seem a little bit inflamed but not too significant.  She reports no history of snoring or sleep apnea.  

LAURA ROBERTSON 			10/12/2005				Page 2

She does get tired in the afternoon but relates that to her medications, in specific, the Cytomel as it wears off in the afternoon.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the TMJs and fairly minimal tenderness over the masseters, styloid areas and right medial pterygoid.  In function, she does have a pop that occurs somewhere between 20 to 30 mm of opening on the left side and maybe a closing click occasionally at 15.  

The right side seems to function relatively smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is about 42 mm, about 30 mm without much discomfort.  Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars and all 4 first bicuspids.  Mostly all the spacing has been closed in the extraction areas.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  The nasal airway looks reasonable.  She has severe arthritis in both TMJs.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite arthritic.  There appears to be some bone destruction on the anterior aspect.  There is decreased joint space superiorly although the posterior space looks reasonable.  Articular eminence is moderately steep but steeper towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  Parts of the condyle appears as though there are lytic lesions present.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears quite small in size vertically as well as anteroposteriorly.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Decreased joint space superiorly.  Posterior joint space actually looks fairly good.  Quite a bit of arthritic changes in this joint.  On opening, there is fairly good translation in both joints.  On the open view, even the right condyle appears as though the condyle is quite small vertically as well as anteroposteriorly.  

Waters view shows that the septum is slightly deviated in the bony aspect.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  The left turbinates appears to be a little bit more obstructed than the right side, although clinically she shows no signs of this.  The sinuses appear clear.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Laura has some AP maxillary deficiency, posterior vertical maxillary deficiency, AP mandibular deficiency, high occlusal plane angle.  The oropharyngeal airway is surprisingly good with an AP dimension at the soft palate level of about 5 to 6 mm and at the base of the tongue about 8 mm although there may be some lingual tonsils present.  If that is the case, then the airway is closer to about 3 mm.  Occlusion is Class II as well as I see a skeletal Class II.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption with disc dislocations and probably nonsalvageable disc on the right side but possibly salvageable disc on the left side.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
High occlusal plane angle.
LAURA ROBERTSON 			10/12/2005				Page 3


Class II end-on occlusion.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
TMJ pain.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
MRIs of bilateral TMJs. 
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.
Treatment option 1.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Surgical option 2.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
