MARIO ROCHA									08/18/2008

Mario is 48 years old referred by Richard L. Ingraham, DDS,  5525 S. Staples, Corpus Christi, Texas 78411.  Mario's primary concerns are:

To get his teeth fixed up. 
TMJ problems particularly in the right side.
Right side headaches.
Grinding of the teeth.  

Mario believes his jaw joint problems began when he was about 10 years of age in about 1970 of unknown etiology.  He takes Excedrin and Tylenol for headache problems.  He gets occasional earaches, occasional tinnitus, occasional vertigo.  Other joints that bother him include his fingers and perhaps his back.  He is aware of bruxism at nighttime.  He gets headaches at about a level of 2 in the right temporal area predominantly.  He rates his TMJ pain at 1, average daily pain at 1, jaw function, diet and disability at 0.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Mario has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -1 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted to the right about 2 mm and appears to be just slightly to the right of the chin.  In profile, Mario has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  The chin appears to be retruded about 15 to 18 mm.  There is no chin neckline or angle.  He has significant fullness in the submental area.  Intraorally, he is missing the mandibular left first molar, mandibular right first molar, and perhaps the second molar with the with the third molar drifted forward.  He has moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch and some hyper-eruption of the left lateral incisor and central incisor.  He has good attached gingiva around the lower anteriors.  In the upper arch, he is missing the left second bicuspid, but appears to have the rest of his teeth.   He has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side being about 5 mm Class II, whereas on the left side he is pretty much Class I.  He has an anterior deep bite of about 6 mm.  Mario appears to have some nasal airway obstruction.  The turbinates are moderate in size.  The septum deviates off towards the right side at least anteriorly.  There may be some constricture of the luminal valves.  To palpation, Mario has not tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening and closing, he may have just a slight glitch in the right TMJ, but the left one seems to function reasonably smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 52 mm.  Excursion movements are about 7 mm in each direction.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary right third molar, mandibular left second bicuspid, mandibular left first molar, and mandibular first and second molars with the third molar drifted forward into the second molar position.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  There appears to be a lot of flattening on the left condyle.  
Waters view shows that the bony septum appears wide.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  It appears there may be a little bit more obstruction in the nose on the right side as compared to the left side.  Cannot see the anterior aspect of the cartilaginous septum.  Sinuses look reasonably clear, although the right maxillary sinus appears a little bit more fuzzy than the left one. 

It is difficult to evaluate the left side TMJ films, but there appears to be decreased joint space.  
Right TMJ tomogram also is hard to assess the condition of the TMJ.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles, but a little bit greater translation on the right side as compared to the right side.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Mario has a high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway measurement is about 6 mm.  Occlusal plane is moderately steep. In the assessment, the nasal tip is off to the right side 4 to 5 mm.  The maxillary midline is off to the right at least 1 mm and the mandibular midline off to the right 3 mm and chin off to the right about 2 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Mario would be as follows:    

Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia.  
AP microgenia.  
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.
High occlusal plane angle. 
Class II occlusion on the right side, Class I cuspid relationship on the left side.  
Severe snoring. 
Sleep apnea symptoms. 
External nasal deformity.  
Significant lower arch asymmetry with the right mandibular cuspid 3 mm posterior to the left cuspid. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Maintain the spacing the right second bicuspid area.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid root distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Retract the left bicuspids and cuspids approximately 2 to 3 mm to improve the lower arch symmetry.  This would decrease the first molar extraction space and this needs to be reduced to the size of a bicuspid space.  Maintain the spacing on the right side. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1 mm of tooth structure to correct for small tooth size discrepancy.
Surgery.
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to achieve a good functional occlusal relationship.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
Rhinoplasty to remove the dorsal hump and shift the nose to the left onto the facial midline.
Considering removing maxillary left third and four molars, but likely retain the mandibular left third molar.
3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
 Restorative dentistry. 
Consider osteointegrated implants in the left first molar area (however, only the size of a bicuspid) and in the left molar area as well as possible placement of an implant in the left maxillary second bicuspid area, space permitting.  If the space is not large enough, I can remove it at the time of the surgery.  
Crowns to replace missing teeth.
