RODNEY RITTER									02/13/2008

Rodney is 69 years old.  He is referred by Dr. Kenyon Fort, 7135 Martin Luther King, Clearwater, Florida.  The primary concerns that Rodney has is that he has pain in his lower left lip that is debilitating.  By history, Rodney had lower dental implants placed on 10/23/2007.  This was done apparently through a Dr. Michael Tasdra’s office, but apparently the actual surgery was done by a female doctor in the military who did the surgery and then left town.  Rodney has severe pain in the lower left lip that gives a fiery numb sort of sensation for him.  His problems began three months ago on 10/23/2007 when he had four mandibular implants placed.  Shortly after the surgery, the posterior implant on the left side came out, but he was left with the significant pain problems.  The operation to place the four implants took about 4 hours.  Apparently, after the surgery, Rodney had a lot swelling and a pulling effect on the left side of his mouth and cheek area.  Within a week after the surgery is when Rodney began developing his pain problems.  He does get some occasional swelling in his lip.  He has not noted any significant change in the sensations since that first week after the surgery.  The pain and burning fiery sensation has remained constant.  

NEUROLOGICAL TESTING:  On 2-point discrimination, he was able to distinguish a 9-mm 2-point discrimination on the left side, but it was extremely hypersensitive.  On the right side, he really could not detect 1 or 2 points.  Using the von Frey hairs, he had a sensation at 3.61 in all four quadrants of the lips, but the left lower was significantly more sensitive and hyperreactive.  To brushstroke, he had a little bit of difficulties identifying the direction on the left side, but did get most of the right.  The brushstroke did create quite a bit of sensitivity to that area, much more so than the normal side on the right where he had normal readings.  To sharp stimulus, the right side was normal, but the left side was extremely hypersensitive.  With cold stimulation, right side was normal, but the left lower lip was significantly hypersensitive with a sharper cold feeling.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of seven implants in the maxillary arch with connecting superstructures.  In the lower arch, there are three implants with two on the right side and one on the left side.  The fourth implant that was placed on the left side was lost prematurely.  Waters view shows that the left maxillary sinus appears to be full of material.  In the lower arch, the anterior implants appear to be placed in the parasymphysis area and the right posterior implant is close to the mental foramen area.  Left TMJ tomogram shows that he has some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle somewhat flattened anteriorly.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  There is moderately good translation of both condyles.  Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows there appears to be adequate airway.  Three implants are seen in the mandible and, of course, the implants that are seen in the maxilla as well.

The basic diagnoses for Rodney would be as follows:

1.  	Left inferior alveolar nerve traumatic neuroma.
2.	Painful dysesthesia to left lower lip and chin.



Recommended treatment would be as follows:

	1.  	Exploration of left inferior alveolar nerve.
	2.	Resecting neuroma and nerve repair.

I discussed with Rodney and his 97-year-old mother that I do not know how effective the surgery will be.  It is probably the best option we have to try to diminish his pain problems.  He may not get full sensation return.  He may continue to have significant pain problems.  His age is a major factor and they understand this.  They have been told also by their neurologist that this could be a major problem.  I believe the injury may be at the area where the mental nerve comes out of the mandible as he does not appear to have any symptoms in his gingival area and it seems to be confined mainly to the lip.  This will make the repair much harder and they do understand this.  They understand that we may not get any improvement at all for him and there may be no improvement in his situation.  They understand this.  He says that he is tired and exhausted all day.  He has problems with dizziness now.  These factors are probably related to the medications that he is taking.  He and his mother will strongly consider the surgical options that they have.