WILLIAM RICHARD ROGERS							02/01/2008

Richard is 33 years old.  He had an open Nissen procedure in 1993, an AV node ablation in 1991, nasoseptoplasty in 1996, and tonsillectomy at the same time.  Richard’s problems began when he was 18 years of age where it would start to click periodically.  For about the last two years, it has clicked constantly when he opens and closes his jaws and it is predominantly on the right side.  The past year he has worn occlusal splints, but this has not corrected the problem.  Richard takes the following medications:

	1.	Paxil 20 mg daily.
	2. 	Tylenol p.r.n. 
	3.  	Aleve p.r.n.

He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus nor vertigo.  He gets headaches only about once a month, so the headaches really are not an issue for him.  He rates his TMJ pain at 6, average daily discomfort at 5, jaw function at 5, diet at 4, disability at 2.  Primary concerns Richard has include the following:

	1. 	Clicking and popping particularly in the right joint.  
	2.  	TMJ pain.
3.  	Soreness through the muscles particularly on the right side of the face including the masseter muscle up through the temporalis muscle. 
4.  	Difficulties eating and chewing.
5.  	Difficulties breathing through the nose.  

Richard is aware of clenching and bruxism at night.  He also does it some during the day. He has broken a few splints because of that situation.  In frontal view, Richard has good facial symmetry and balance. In profile view, he has good facial balance vertically and anteroposteriorly.  Intraorally, Richard has all of his lower teeth back to the second molars.  He has some mandibular tori on the inside of his lower jaw.  In the upper jaw, he has all of his teeth back to the second molars.  He has basically Class I cuspid-molar relationship bilaterally and about 1 mm vertical overbite.  Richard has had all of his wisdom teeth previously removed.  On  palpation, he has some mild tenderness over right TMJ, but nowhere else on the head and neck area.  On opening, he has an extremely loud audible pop.  It occurs at about 25-30 mm of opening with closing pop at about 5 mm.  The pop can easily be heard in the room or even in an adjacent room. Maxillary movement is about 55 mm, excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  As he shifts the mandible towards the left side, he has an audible pop in the right TMJ.  Oropharyngeal exam shows that the tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasal exam show that the turbinates appear relatively normal in size, but the septum is deviated severely off towards the left side obliterating the left side of the nose.  He has very minimal air passage through the left side of his nose. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of  all fourth and third molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  I cannot really evaluate the joints.  Right TMJ tomogram shows condyles posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, both condyles translate normally.  Waters views show that the septum is deviated significantly off towards the left side causing significant obliteration there.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows good Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway is well within normal limits.  

The patient’s diagnoses would be as follows:

	1.	Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
	2.  	Relative mandibular hyperplasia.
	3.	Right-sided facial pain.
4.  	Severely deviated nasal septum off to the left side causing left nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

	1. 	Surgery.
a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to maintain a good Class I      occlusion.
	     	c.  Nasal septoplasty (by Dr. Larry Weprin).
		d.  Application of arch bars to maxillary and mandibular teeth.
	2.	Removal of arch bars 2-4 weeks post surgery.