BRENNA ROONEY									08-30-02

Brenna is 34 years old and referred by Dr. Edward Mosby, 2301 Holmes/Truman Medical Center, Kansas City, MO  64108.

Patient History

Problems that she has had are irritable bowel syndrome and sinus infection problems. The only surgery she has had is removal of her wisdom teeth.

Other than joint problems, she is healthy.

Brenna’s TMJ problems began probably in her early teens. It wasn’t, however, until she was about 17 that she began developing symptoms. At the age of 18, she was treated for TMJ problems with a splint, which she wore for about one year. She went off to college, and the splint the discontinued from ’87 until about ’98. In ’98, her jaw began to lock in an open position. She was placed back into splints for a while. In January of 2000, orthodontics was initiated, and orthodontics was completed in May of ’02 when the appliances were removed. 

She gets earaches occasionally, tinnitus at night, and daily vertigo. She does have a lot of problems with motion sickness. Other joints that bother her include her neck, left knee, and her right ankle is weak. 

From an allergy standpoint, she gets an occasional seasonal-type problem but nothing really significant. Silver earrings tend to bother her some. She doesn’t appear to have any problems wearing cheap jewelry. She does have nocturnal bruxism. She has more recently begun developing pain or a pulling sensation in the submental area probably associated with the geniohyoid musculature. She drinks one cup of coffee or tea per day, and she does like her sweets but doesn’t overdue it as too much sugar does give her a stomachache. She gets headaches a couple of times a month, and they usually occur in the higher temporal areas and on the top of her head. Her TMJ pain averages about a level of 3, but it can easily escalate to a 10. Her average overall pain on a daily basis is about 2. She rates her jaw function at 8, diet at 9, without her splint, and at 5 with her splint. Disability is at a level of 2.

Patient Concerns

Primary concerns that Brenna has at this time include the following:

She only bites on two teeth, and all other teeth do not meet.
Extreme difficulties eating and chewing.
Jaw joint pain.
Headaches.
Daily dizzy spells.
Ringing in her ears at night particularly.
Occasional earaches.
Nighttime bruxism.
Lower jaw is retruded.

Current Medications

The only medication she currently uses is a topical antibiotic for acne. She has just recently finished a 10-day regimen of prednisone.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Brenna has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm, and tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are fairly well aligned with each other as is the chin on the facial midline.

In profile view, she has some slight elongation of the lower third of the face. Chin-neckline may be just a little bit shorter, though. Chin-neck angle is fairly well defined, but there is some fullness in the submental area. She does have some lip incompetence, probably about 5 mm. There could be some slight AP deficiency of the maxilla but not too significant. Chin is probably about 6 to 8 mm AP deficient.

Intraorally, Brenna has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Some lack of attached gingiva around the lower left central incisor but otherwise appears to have adequate attached gingiva, although it is quite thin, particularly around the cuspids. Some root exposure around the lower incisors probably due to perhaps some extrusion. 

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. In more centric relation, the mandible is shifted off to the left side about 3 mm. In the best centric relation we can achieve, she is Class II end-on on the left side and maybe just slightly Class III on the right side. Anterior open bite is almost 5 mm. When she bites together, only the second molars on the right side touch with all other teeth being out of occlusion. 

Oropharynx appears clear. Tonsils are moderately large but non-inflamed. Posterior faucial pillars are posteriorly positioned and the oropharynx a little bit narrow transversely. She does have daytime tiredness, although she is not aware of having any snoring problems or breathing problems at night. Turbinates are fairly large in size, but it appears that there may be adequate airway around them. She is aware that during the day she breathes predominantly through her mouth more so than her nose. At night, she is not sure if she breathes through her mouth or her nose. She thinks that maybe she does tend to breathe more through her mouth at night when she sleeps as well.

Incisal opening is maximally is 31 mm, and she can open about 26 without much discomfort. Excursive movements are about 5 mm in each direction. To palpation, she has some moderate tenderness over the masseters, TMJs, and mild tenderness over the styloid area.


Transversely, the mandible on the right side appears to be a little bit higher than on the left side, but maxillary arch appears relatively flat compared to the eyes and to the ears. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but all other teeth are present. Maxillary incisor roots are very short, particularly the central incisors, but has been significant root resorption. Sinuses appear clear. Difficult to evaluate nasal airway. Condyles show significant arthritic and resorptive changes present. No other particular pathology noted.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that there is severe condylar resorption in the right joint with major loss of vertical height of that condyle. Articular eminence is quite flat. Significantly increased posterior joint space. May be some degenerative changes in the fossa as well. The joint space is quite constricted between the condyle and the articular eminence. The articular eminence appears exceptionally flat as though a resorptive process has occurred there as well. 

Left TMJ tomogram is not quite as clear but shows similar changes that the condyle has undergone significant resorption. Articular eminence is quite flat, and the condyle is positioned quite anteriorly within the fossa.

On opening, there is restricted translation of both joints. 

Waters view shows the sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear quite large, and the airway appears to be somewhat compromised. 

Cephalometrically, there is a vertical discrepancy from one side to the opposite side. Turbinates are quite prominent and extend beyond the hard palate. She has an anterior open bite and a skeletal Class II jaw relationship. Oropharyngeal airway, however, looks quite normal in size. Although there are vertical differences on the ceph, this does not correlate to the clinical impression where the transverse symmetry appears reasonably good.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ reactive arthritis with severe condylar resorption.
Mandibular AP deficiency.
Anterior open bite (5 mm).
Class II end-on occlusion.
Severe root resorption of the maxillary incisors.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Occludes only on the right second molars with all other teeth being out of occlusion.
Earaches.
Tinnitus.
Vertigo.
Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Place appliances on maxillary and mandibular teeth back through the second molars.

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomy, debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen).

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion