DANIELLE ROE									10-07-02

Danielle is 14 years old and referred by Dr. Devek Frech, 3621 Maplewood, Wichita Falls, TX  76308

Patient History

Danielle’s problems began probably about two or three years ago as her mandible started to grow and shift off towards the right side. Her TMJ symptoms began about one year ago after she got her braces on. She began developing popping in the right TMJ. She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or headaches but does rate her TMJ pain at a level of 3 and overall pain would be at a level of 3, jaw function at 4, diet at 0, and disability at 0. Her ortho began in June of 2001. She has no other joint problems, no allergy problems, and no difficulties wearing jewelry.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 6 mm. Maxillary dental midline is probably about 1.5 mm off to the left. Mandibular dental midline is about 1.5 mm off to the right. Actually, she shifts her mandible to the left to line up the midlines, and the maxillary midline is maybe only about 0.5 mm to 1 mm off to the left. Therefore, mandibular dental midline is about 2.5 mm off to the right.

In profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency. AP position of the chin is actually fairly good. Chin-neckline is a little bit long but not too significantly. Chin-neck angle is fairly well defined. Chin-neck distance is about 55 mm. She has a C-shaped curve with the upper lip. Nasal dorsum may be just slightly prominent. Upper lip is back probably about 4 mm.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molar present. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. Transversely, the left cuspid is about 1 mm to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Left cuspid may be about 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid. In centric relation, she has an end-on incisor relationship but a crossbite anteriorly on the right side and posteriorly on the right side. Left side has just a slight buccal crossbite tendency. She has a slight Class III cuspid relationship by about 2 mm on the right side and 5 mm on the left side. Transversely, the right teeth appear to be about 1 mm lower than the left side. 

Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side. Turbinates are moderately large at least anteriorly and posteriorly can’t visualize well. 

Oropharynx is relatively clear. Right tonsil is enlarged compared to the left side but no inflammation noted around them. Maximal incisal opening is about 45 mm. Excursive movement to the right is only about 3 mm and to the left 4 to 5 mm. 

No pain to palpation around the head and neck area. On opening, she has a very prominent click in the right joint at 20 mm of opening and reciprocal click at 5 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars that are unerupted. All other teeth are in place. Upper laterals seem to have a little bit shorter roots but not too bad. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates look quite large. Left condylar head and neck are longer than the right side. 

Left TMJ closed tomograms are a little bit out of focus but as best can tell, the condyles are in reasonable shape, although there does appear to be slightly decreased posterior joint space.

Right TMJ tomogram also is a little bit out of focus, but the condyle appears to have reasonably good shape to it and is a little bit posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

On opening, there is good translation of both joints.

Waters view shows that the turbinates are quite large, particularly on the right side, and not much evidence of a good airway. Bony septum appears relatively straight. Sinuses appear clear. Asymmetry of the mandible is noted.

Cephalometrically, she has a large radiopaque area at the posterior choana area and could possibly be related to enlargement of the turbinate in that area. It sits right over the posterior nasal spine area. She has a high occlusal plane angle. She has anterior vertical maxillary excess. She has an obtuse gonial angle. Oropharyngeal airway looks good, although the airway at the base of the tongue measures about 7 mm. At the base of the soft palate, it measures about 10 mm. She has lip incompetence. She has no significant tooth-size discrepancy.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia (left side greater than the right side).
Right TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Deviate mandibular prognathism.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Class III occlusion, being worse on the left side as compared to the right side.
Anterior and right posterior crossbite.
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Slightly deviated nasal septum.
Nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJ
Presurgical orthodontics
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. If possible, try to narrow maxillary arch approximately 3 mm from cuspid to cuspid and molar to molar in a transverse direction. Try to tip maxillary lateral incisor roots mesially to help create a little bit more room for interdental osteotomies.

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back on the facial midline, correct AP discrepancies, and maximize the occlusal fit.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward, move it superiorly, and correct any transverse problems that may be present.
Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
Surgical removal of maxillary and mandibular third molars.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion