ANTONIO (TONY) RODRIGUEZ							10-22-04

Tony is 12 years old and referred by Dr. Fernando Sosa, McPherson St., Loredo, Texas.

Patient History

When Tony was about a week old, he developed a staph infection in the right jaw area and apparently ended up with an ankylosis. It was noted about six months later that his face was becoming asymmetric with subsequent growth with the right side not developing as well as the left side. He had a CAT scan, and it showed that he had an ankylosis on the right side. Dr. Steven Buckley in San Antonio performed surgery on Tony when he was 4 years old. They apparently did a resection of part of the lower jaw on the right side and then took two rib grafts to reconstruct it. Then on the right side of Tony’s jaw, he started to grow outward on the right side and may have gotten some elongated as well. This was at the age of 9. At the age of 9, reconstruction was attempted on the right joint. Apparently they did quite extensive work, and, in fact, they dissected out the entire facial nerve and all five branches before they went into the joint area. They used pig cartilage to try to prevent the ankylosis. However, within a few months, he was re-ankylosed again with decreased opening. He does have some loss of facial nerve function at this time with inability to elevate the right eyebrow. His smile is a little asymmetric, but most of that has recovered. He apparently doesn’t have any significant fifth cranial nerve deficit. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Tony has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Has asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 5 to 6 mm. Nasal tip is deviated just a little bit to the right side probably about 2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 4 mm off to the right side, and chin is probably about 8 to 10 mm off to the right side. In the chin area on the right side, the parasymphysis area is probably 3 or 4 mm higher than the left side and back at the angle area is probably 10 to 12 mm higher than the left side. 

Transversely, there is more fullness on the right side of the face than the left side by probably 4 to 6 mm. 

In profile view, he actually has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Could be just slightly AP deficient by maybe a couple of millimeters. Chin is AP deficiency by probably about 15 mm. 

Intraorally, appears to have most of his teeth back through the first molars erupted in. Has really small upper lateral incisors with the right one being smaller than the left side but likely has a tooth-size discrepancy. Has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship by probably 6 mm on the right side and on the left side has a Class III cuspid relationship by probably about 3 to 4 mm. Has about a 3-mm anterior deep bite relationship. Tendency toward buccal crossbite on the left side and is okay on the right side, but his lower teeth are significantly tipped in. Significant transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being about 4 or 5 mm elevated compared to the left side. Maximal incisal opening is about 2 mm. Excursive movement to the right may be 2 mm and to the left 0. Turbinates are moderately hyperplastic. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Tony is developing all of his teeth back through the second molars. Has developing third molars. The second molars are unerupted at this time, but he has developing third molars in the lower arch and difficult to tell if there are any in the upper arch just yet. Appears to have a couple of screws free floating down in the soft tissues below the right angle area. Left joint is a little hard to see but looks reasonably normal on that side. On the right side, he has a huge mass of ankylosis that extends back onto the mastoid area. On this radiograph, the extent of ankylosis measures about 37 mm in anteroposterior width. There is a little bit of a coronoid process but not much. Left side appears somewhat cloudy compared to the right side. Turbinates appear a little bit enlarged particularly on the left side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit flattened anteriorly and appears to be decreased anterior joint space. Increased posterior joint space by probably a couple of millimeters, so the condyle was actually sitting forward in the fossa. 

Right TMJ shows a mass of bony ankylosis that includes the mastoid on forward on this radiograph. The transverse dimension of the ankylosis is probably about 35 mm. Essentially no fossa area present. The mass of heterotopic bone present measures about 38 x 30 mm. Again, two screws are seen free floating below the inferior border of the mandible. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the inferior border of the mandible on the right side is probably 7 to 8 mm higher than the left side at the posterior aspect and in the first molar area is about 10 or 11 mm difference. Has two occlusal plane levels and has a moderately high occlusal plane angle. Lower anterior teeth are over-angulated. Has a decreased oropharyngeal airway of about 4 mm at the base of the tongue and probably 5 to 6 mm at the soft palate level. 

Basic Diagnoses

Right TMJ severe, massive heterotopic bone formation and ankylosis
Severe jaw and masticatory dysfunction
Significant facial asymmetry
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 4 to 5 mm higher than the left side
Class II occlusion on the right side and Class III end-on occlusion on the left side
Incisal opening less than 2 mm
Severe jaw and masticatory dysfunction
Buccal crossbite tendency on the left side
Hypo-eruption of teeth in the maxilla and mandible on the right side 
Small maxillary lateral incisors creating a probable tooth-size discrepancy 
Overangulation of lower incisors
Lingual inclination of right posterior teeth

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Place appliances in the upper arch
Place appliances in the lower arch as best as possible. Will have to use bonded brackets

Surgery, Stage I
Right TMJ removal of large heterotopic bone mass (35 x 25 x 20 mm) and extensive debridement
Advancement and reconstruction of the right TMJ area and mandible with a TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis including creating an open bite on the right side of probably 6 to 8 mm
Fat graft to right TMJ (harvested from buttock)
Orthodontics, Stage I
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch. Extrude teeth on the right side to help level the occlusion and re-establish improved facial symmetry
Finish and retain

Orthodontics, Stage II
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch 

Surgery, Stage II (at age 17 to 18 if necessary)
Maxillary osteotomies to transversely level and expand the maxilla if necessary
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance and counterclockwise rotate the mandible and establish good occlusion 
Removal of impacted third molars
Any other auxillary procedures that may be necessary at that time

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 


