ANTONIA ROGERS									10/5/05

Antonia is 46 years old, referred by Dr. Rick Rogers, 2100 Old Farm Dr., Suite 1-F, Fredrick, MD, 21702.  Phone:  301-663-1700.  The only previous surgery she has had is a scope on her right knee.  The only joints that really bother her are her knees and she does need a scope on her left knee but has not had that yet. 

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Ibuprofen 800 mg p.r.n. intense pain.
Skelaxin 800 mg p.r.n. with intense pain.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Jaw joint pain.
Significant difficulties eating and chewing.
Significant difficulties with limited jaw opening.
Effects on speech affecting her abilities to teach (Antonia is a teacher of pre-K children.)
As she opens, occasionally it will sort of grab her and keep her from opening very wide and shift the lower jaw off toward the left side. 

Antonia's problems began when she was about 23 years old when she had her wisdom teeth removed.  She had clicking and popping in the jaws at that time but it really did not cause any significant problems for her.  She took a turn for the worse in about March of 2005 when she developed a closed lock situation and significant increase in pain problems.  She states that she has played volleyball all of her life and has received some blows to the face that she feels probably did not help her situation.  Since March of 2005, she started out with an upper splint but this did not seem to help her and she could not get comfortable with it.  She then had a lower splint made and this has helped her.  She is currently seeing Dr. Tom McDougal, 106 N. Cottonwood, Richardson, TX 75080, work phone:  972-231-5376, home phone:  972-231-6074,    who is managing her splint work.  

Antonia is aware of clenching.  She states her pain is worse in the mornings, gets better during the day and then gets worse again in the evening after she has been talking all day.  She wakes up with the pain and she contributes this to clenching at night.  She does not have any problems with headaches.  She gets pain in the TMJ on an average day at about a level of 6 with the right side being worse than the left side.  On her worst days, it gets up to a 9 to 10 rating.  Her average daily facial pain is at 5.  She rates her jaw function and diet at 8, disability at 4.

In frontal view, Antonia has fairly good facial symmetry and balance.  Perhaps some minor increased vertical height on the right side compared to the left side that may be 2 to 3 mm.  In profile, she has good facial balance.  Slightly high mandibular plane angle facial morphology.  Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids, taken out for previous orthodontic treatment.  She has adequate attached gingiva.  The lower incisors appear to be tipped laterally somewhat related to the extraction of the lower first bicuspids.  In the upper arch, she is also missing first bicuspids and has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.   


ANTONIA ROGERS				10/5/05				Page 2


She has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2.5 mm.  She does have some abrasions on her teeth particularly the lower cuspids.  Intraorally, the oropharynx appears clear and tissues look healthy.  She does have a scar band across the soft palate indicative of a UPPP procedure.  In discussing this with Antonia, she states that she had that performed when she was 3 years old.  The soft palate is functionally reasonably well for her.  Intranasally, she has a septal spur off the left side and moderately enlarged turbinate on the left side.  The right side turbinate is not quite as large relative to the width of the nasal cavity.  She may have some slight airway obstruction on the left side but she reports no problems with snoring or sleep apnea.  Columella is moderately wide and nostrils may be slightly narrow.  To palpation, Antonia has high moderate pain over the masseter muscles and mild pain over the right TMJ but no other pain to palpation around the head and neck area.  In jaw function, there is crepitation in both the left and right TMJs.  Maximal incisal opening is 27 mm but there it is very painful, but she could open to 25 mm without much discomfort.  Excursive movement to the right is about 2.5 mm and to the left momentarily she can get to about 2 mm but the excursive movements are very painful for her.  She does have a significant cant in the occlusal plane where the left side is about 3 mm higher than the right side.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm, upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline and perhaps 1/2 mm to the left.  Mandibular dental midline is 1 mm to the left and chin is probably about 2 to 3 mm to the left.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the absence of a bicuspid in each quadrant probably the first bicuspids but difficult to tell because of root angulation.  Sinuses are relatively clear.  She appears to have a septal spur on either side of her nasal septum and turbinates are moderately large with the right one actually appearing larger as compared to the left one which is not exactly what we saw clinically.  She has severe arthritis in both of her TMJs.  

Waters view shows that the bony septum at least looks reasonably straight.  The bony spurs seen anteriorly on the left side are in the cartilage.  In the waters view the left turbinate actually looks larger than the right turbinate.  It appears that there is something in the right sinus that could be some kind of fungal mass perhaps.  The other sinuses appear relatively clear.  Antonia does give a history of working a lot out in her garden so it possibly could be a fungal mass.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows some flattening in the posterior head and the superior head of the condyle.  The top of the condyle does appear arthritic.  Although it is not real clear, it appears that the fossa may be somewhat arthritic as well.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

The left TMJ tomogram shows decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.  The condyle appears fairly arthritic.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is severe restriction of translatory movements.  
ANTONIA ROGERS				10/5/05				Page 3


Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the soft palate appears somewhat short obviously due to the previous UPPP procedure.  Oropharyngeal airway appears adequate.  She has basically a skeletal Class I relationship as well as a Class I occlusal relationship.  A little bit of difference in vertical height at the inferior border of the mandible and also a little bit at the occlusal plane was well.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction, severe deformation and adhesions with probable perforations to the bilaminar tissues.
Bilateral TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Severe masticatory dysfunction.
Bilateral closed lock.
Transfer facial asymmetry with the left side of the maxilla and mandible to occlusal plane being 3 mm higher than the right side (the patient voiced no interest in having this corrected at our appointment of 10/5/05.)
Earaches. 
Probable fungal mass in right maxillary sinus.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Place appliances on maxillary arch. 
Place appliances on mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, meniscectomies, joint debridement and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Place maxillary mandibular arch bars if patient elects not to have orthodontic appliances placed. 
Debride right maxillary sinus via Caldwell-Luc to remove mass from sinus.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
