B117
B117 is 29 years old and basically a self-referral. B117's TMJ problems began probably when she was around 14 years of age. She had orthodontics from the age of 11 or 12 to the age of 14. When she was in braces, she did not have an anterior open bite, but it began to develop after that. She began developing symptoms such as headaches, TMJ pain, etc., when she was about 16 years old. She was placed in splint therapy from ages 18 to 19, but could not keep the appliance in her mouth. She has been through speech therapy and swallowing therapy to try to help control tongue posture.

B117 gets daily headaches at about a level of 8 that occur in the temporal, posterior head, and across the top of the head. Her TMJ pain is a level of 7, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 3, diet at 2, and disability at 4. She gets occasional earaches, no tinnitus, and occasional vertigo but no hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She does have IBS, anxiety, migraines, and insomnia. She takes the following medications:

Lexapro 10 mg q.d.
Claritin 10 mg q.a.m.
OCP.
Benadryl 25 mg q.h.s.
Melatonin 3 mg q.h.s.
Advil 200 mg 2 tablets once or twice a day. Minocin 50 mg q.d.

B117 frequently wakes up with headaches and she is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time and she also will find that she clenches some during the day.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 on the left and 2 on the right. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right side. The nasal tip is about 2-3 mm off to the left side. The chin may be just slightly to the right side as well. B117 has some slight increased prominence on the left side of her face by about 2-3 mm compared to the right side back in the cheek area. In profile, the maxilla appears to be retruded about 2 mm and the chin appears to be retruded by about 10 mm. The chin neckline is short, but the chin neckline is reasonably well defined. Intraorally, B117 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. She has thin tissues around the lower central incisors. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. The second molars appear to be elevated compared to the rest of the teeth. She has just a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side and Class I on the left side. She has an anterior open bite of about 3 mm. B117 has a slight yaw in the maxillary and mandibular arch with the posterior aspects being rotated about 2 mm off to the left side. There is some minor orbital dystopia with the right eye being about 1-2 mm higher than the left eye. There is a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1 mm to 1.5 mm higher than the right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. Intranasally, the septum may be deviated a little bit off towards the right side, but anteriorly it is rotated to the left. The left inferior turbinate appears moderately enlarged and the right side appears a little bit more normal. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the right masseter and milder pain over the temporalis muscles. On opening, she has some audible clicking and popping at about 35-40 mm of opening and closing at the same position, but also crepitus in the joints. The maximal incisal opening is 43 mm, excursion movement to the right 8 mm, to the left 5 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all the rest of the teeth are present. Sinuses look reasonably clear.
Coronal view shows that she has an extremely large left turbinate that appears to block most of the nasal airway. The sinuses appear clear. The right turbinate is moderate in size. The bony septum is reasonably straight.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. The left turbinate is quite large and seems to obliterate most of the nasal airway. The right turbinate appears more normal in size. The cartilaginous septum of the nose deviates fairly significantly off towards the left side.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has significant arthritis present. There is anterior beaking. There is some sclerosis on top of the condyle and there appears to be significant loss of condylar volume in a vertical direction. The articular eminence has a relatively mild inclination. There is some sclerosis down within the head of the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that is quite arthritic and appears to have lost significant vertical volume. There is some anterior beaking present. The joint space is a little bit wider on this side than it is on the opposite side. The articular eminence has a relatively soft slope to it.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that appears to have lost vertical volume, but still has reasonably good mediolateral width. The joint space is extremely narrow vertically and at the lateral aspect of the joint. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal tomogram shows a condyle that is quite arthritic. There is loss of joint space particularly towards the medial side of the joint. It appears that there may be some erosion on the lateral aspect of the condylar head with some loss of the cortical bone there. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm. The joint space is just slightly greater than the opposite side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B117 has a fairly good oropharyngeal airway. She has a high occlusal plane angle and retruded mandible and anterior open bite. The maxillary may be just slightly AP deficient as well. B117 has an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and a reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch. She has rocker-shaped form to the curve of Spee in the upper arch. She has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 0.5 mm. B117 appears to occlude primarily on her molars with the rest of her teeth essentially being out of occlusion. She has a slightly increased curve of Wilson in the mandibular left posterior arch.

Basic diagnoses for B117 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction and non-salvageable (probable ACIR).
Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Anterior open bite.
Accentuated curve of Spee with a rocker bottom shape to the dental arches.
Slightly reversed curve of Spee in the lower arch. TMJ pain. Headaches.
Myofascial pain. Posterior yaw with the posterior maxilla and mandible rotated off towards the left side 2-3 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch in two occlusal plane levels. Try to extrude the maxillary cuspid at least 1 mm and place a vertical step between the cuspid and lateral incisor to align the four incisors at an elevated plane level. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Place brackets on the second molars, but do not engage the second molars in the arch wire at this time. b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2. CT scan of jaw and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and create a good functional bite relationship.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B117 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is arthritic and appears small in size. There appears to be discal tissue medially displaced and anteriorly displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is small in size. The lateral rim is fairly flat. There appears to be discal tissue medially and anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. There is significant anterior beaking present. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint there is significant flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. More medially, there is decreased vertical joint space and sclerosis of the condylar head. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting almost beneath the articular eminence. The articular eminence is of moderate inclination. The disc appears to be significantly deformed and degenerated. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space, but not too significant. On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condylar head, but the articular eminence remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have significant arthritis with an anterior osteophyte and beak extending off the front of the condyle. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. The condyle appears to have undergone some resorption. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint, there appears to be increased joint space full of dense tissue. The disc is anteriorly displaced sitting beneath the articular eminence and severely deformed and degenerated. On opening, there is moderately good translation and the disc may partially reduced but is significantly degenerated.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction and with significant deformation.
Right TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with perhaps partial reduction but with significant degenerative and deforming changes.
The patient is a probable candidate for bilateral total joint prostheses.

