GUILHERME RODRIQUES								09/15/2006

Guilherme is 17 years old.  The primary concerns that he has are that he has only 2 permanent teeth that have erupted in and that his jaws do not align properly.  Guilherme has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain or symptoms.  

In frontal view, he has fairly good facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 to 4 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline and may be just slightly to the right 1 mm.  Chin is pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, he has good facial symmetry and balance in vertical and AP dimension.  He has an overlay denture in the upper arch that extends back to the first molars.  In the lower arch he has permanent first molars.  He has 2 primary central incisors.  There appears to be 2 lateral incisors with large diastemas between the anterior 4 teeth, primary first molar on the left side and on the right side primary second molar and probably first molar.  With his overlay denture in place his occlusion is reasonable with the remaining lower teeth that he has.  With the overlay denture out, he had an end-on incisor relationship and actually almost an anterior crossbite.  Also, he has transverse maxillary deficiency bilaterally.  He appears to occlude perhaps on the right primary second molars and on the right maxillary central and lower lateral incisors.  All other teeth appear to be out of occlusion.  Intranasally, he has little bit of septal spurring off to both sides of the nose with the right side having a little bit larger deflection and spurring.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence in the lower arch of second and third molars bilaterally.  The permanent first molars and permanent right first bicuspid are present.  He has retained primary teeth including the right A, B and E and left A, B and D.  In the upper arch he has retained permanent central incisors and first molars with his primary teeth on the right side to include, C, D and E and on the left side B, C, D and E.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Condyles look symmetric.  Left turbinate appears somewhat enlarged.  

Waters view shows that there is some septal spurring off to both sides with actually the left side looking like it has much large spurring particularly in the bony septal area.  Turbinates are a little hard to identify.  It appears that the left side may be a little bit enlarged.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

The left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good shape with what appears to be reasonable joint space and a moderately steep articular eminence.  

Right TMJ appears relatively similar.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints.  

Cephalometric evaluation shows the maxilla and mandible may be reasonably aligned to each other.  There may be a slight Class III skeletal relationship.  Tonsils appear to be fairly large.  They seem to fill up a good part of the oropharynx.  I may suggest that they be removed.  I believe they are posteriorly displacing the soft palate. 


GUILHERME RODRIQUES			09/15/2006				Page 2


BASIC DIAGNOSES:  
AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Slight vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP macrogenia.
Class III end-on occlusion.
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.
Partial anadontia with maxillary permanent teeth to include central incisors and first molars and mandibular permanent teeth to include mandibular first molars and right first bicuspid.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Surgery.
Maxillary advancement and expansion as well as slight down graft.
Consider extracting all primary teeth.
Consider dental implants to the maxilla and mandible.  
AP reduction genioplasty. 
     2.   Restorative dentistry to reconstruct dental arches.

Treatment option 2.
1.   Stage 1 Surgery
a.	Maxillary advancement and expansion as well as slight down graft.
AP reduction genioplasty. 
Stage 2 Surgery   
Reconstruct the arches with dental implants and grafting if necessary. 
Restorative dentistry.  
