LISA ROCKWELL									11-25-02

Lisa is 42 years old and referred by Dr. Al Bishop, 3001 Brown Trail, Ste. 101, Bedford, TX  76021.

Patient History

Previous surgery she has had includes deviated septal surgery and secondary nasal surgery to file down some bones, and these were done in 1979 and 1981. She had three D&C surgeries between 1987 and 2001, and in June of 2002, she had another D&C. She has a Mediterranean anemia problem that gets worse when she is pregnant but is stable now. She has had adverse reactions to PENICILLIN, DILAUDID, and SECONAL. 

Lisa’s problems began about a year ago of unknown etiology. She describes her sensations more as a sloshy kind of sound in the left jaw area. She began orthodontic treatment on August 1, 2002. She takes no medications. No earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. Lisa does have seven children, and her 2-1/2-year-old daughter gives her a pretty rough time right now, causing a lot of stress. She doesn’t have any problems with headaches. She rates TMJ pain and discomfort on the left side at a level of 6, overall pain and discomfort at 4, jaw function at 6, diet at 5, and disability at 2. She is not sure if she clenches her teeth at night, but she generally wakes up with her jaws feeling stiff in the mornings, which could be indicative of nocturnal clenching.

Patient Concerns

Primary concerns that Lisa has include the following:
Pain and discomfort in the left side of the face, jaw, and joint area
Difficulties eating and chewing secondary to pain and discomfort on the left side
Difficulties opening her mouth wide enough sometimes to even get food in
Concerns about progression of her left-sided jaw problems

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Lisa has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry, particularly in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 4 mm. Maxillary dental midline may be about a millimeter off to the left side. Mandibular dental midline is about a millimeter off to the left as well. Chin is a little bit off to the left maybe a couple of millimeters.

In profile view, Lisa has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Chin may be a little bit retruded by no more than about 5 mm. Lower third face appears slightly long. She has some lip incompetence of probably about 6 mm.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars in position. She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch. Some asymmetry in the lower arch with the left cuspid being a couple of millimeters higher than the right cuspid. Appears also higher than the first bicuspid.
In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. Left cuspid is about a millimeter posterior to the right cuspid in the upper arch, and in the lower arch, the left cuspid is about 3 mm posterior to the right cuspid. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side by a couple of millimeters and a little bit Class II on the right side as well. Transversely, the maxilla appears fairly level. In the lower arch, the left cuspid is about a good 
2 mm higher than the right cuspid. Oropharynx appears clear. Tonsils are present, but they appear un-inflamed and relatively small in size. Intranasally, everything looks pretty much normal. She does have some constricture of her luminal valves. Opening up the left side helped her breathe a little bit better. Opening up the right side didn’t seem to make as much difference. She does have an anterior overbite of about 5 mm. 

To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Maximal incisal opening is 36 mm but only 30 mm without discomfort. Excursive movements are 10 mm in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Significant periodontal loss of bone around the lower anterior teeth. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Left condyle appears somewhat arthritic, and the vertical height of the mandible on the left side appears short compared to the right side. Right side anatomy looks a little bit better.

Cephalometrically, she appears to have a slight skeletal Class II jaw relationship. She has an anterior deep-bite relationship and some vertical asymmetry in the anterior part of the mandible. Maxilla looks fairly good anteroposteriorly as does the mandible for the most part. 

Waters view shows the sinuses are clear. Some deviation of the septal factors are present. Mandible appears shorter on the left side as compared to the right side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be degenerative. May be some osteophytic extensions off posteriorly and also anterosuperiorly. Decreased joint space vertically and posteriorly as well as anteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep with a significant hockey stick shape curvature to the condylar head. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some sclerosis and flattening of the anterior head of the condyle, and joint space is fairly well balanced but may be slightly decreased as well. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Translation is moderate with slightly greater translation available on the left side as compared to the right side.

Basic Diagnosis

1.	Bilateral temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
arthritis and articular disc dislocation				
2.	Mandibular hyperplasia					
3.	TMJ pain						

Recommended Treatment

The surgical procedures necessary to correct these problems are as follows:

1.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament				repair with Mitek anchors		
2.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw 
	stabilization		
