LIDRIA ROMERO									07-21-03

Liddy is 22 years old and referred by Drs. David and Michael Adame, 206 W. Mahl, Edinburg, TX  78539.

Patient Concerns

Shooting pains through the ears
Pain in the jaw joints
Pain in the jaw muscles
Headaches 
Lower jaw becoming more retruded and bite changing
Popping in the jaw joint
Noise in the ear when opening the jaws
Difficulties eating and chewing
Tiredness in the jaws if chewing for any significant length of time
Cannot sustain opening of the jaw without causing significant pain and discomfort

Patient History
She has been evaluated by an ENT doctor, who feels that there are no problems with the sinuses, ears, and nasal areas and that it is related to the jaw joints. Liddy does have a history of getting anterior dislocation of the condyles. She had a little bit of difficulty during the MRI holding her mouth open and feels she couldn’t sustain the opening or achieve the opening that she normally can. She has had problems in the past with open lock situation that used to occur more frequently than it does now. 

Liddy’s problems began when she was about 14 years of age. She had orthodontics for about two years beginning in the fourth grade and then the second stage was done at age 14 for about two years. She has been about six or seven years out of ortho. She was having some TMJ problems and symptoms when she started her second round of orthodontics and they thought that might help her.

She gets headaches about two times a week, and usually they are in the mornings in the temporal area at about a level of 5. She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 3, diet at 6, and disability at 5. She gets fairly significant earaches that come and go, and they can last her about five minutes. They occur about once every two weeks. She does get tinnitus about three times a week, and it is usually there when she wakes up in the morning. She has no problems with vertigo or hearing loss. She has had physical therapy for the TMJ condition. She also has had massages to help with the situation. She has some problems with the vertebrae in her neck and her back to some extent. She has some problems with her knees, but she is a runner. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night and sometimes during the day. 

Current Medications

Motrin for headaches 
Allegra for her sinuses

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, she has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 3 mm. Nasal tip is off to the right side about 2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is off to the right 1 mm as is the mandibular dental midline. Chin may be about 3 to 4 mm off to the right side. 
In profile view, she has fairly good vertical facial balance. Upper lip may be just slightly retruded by maybe 2 to 3 mm. Chin is retruded by about 15 to 18 mm. Chin-neckline is short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. 

Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids and maxillary first bicuspids. Some very mild crowding, lower anterior arch. She has good attached gingiva around the anterior teeth. In centric relation, she has a slight Class II end-on occlusion being about 2 mm Class II. She has an overjet of about 2 mm. Midlines remain fairly well aligned in centric relation. Transversely, the right cuspid is actually 1 mm to 1.5 mm lower than the left cuspid. In the lower arch, the right cuspid may be down about 1 mm compared to the left side. In the lower arch, the right cuspid is about 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid, but the upper arch seems fairly symmetrical. She has a 2-mm overbite relationship.

Intranasally, she appears to have a good airway. Turbinates are just moderately enlarged. Septum may have some slight deviation but not significant. She has significantly hypertrophied tonsils. She gets sore throats fairly frequently and wakes up with them a lot. 

To palpation, she has moderate tenderness over the temporalis, masseters, styloid areas, SCMs, shoulders, and high moderate tenderness of the TMJs. She has mild tenderness over the medial pterygoids and posterior neck area. 

On opening and closing, she had an occasional click in the joints but not consistent enough to determine the level of opening and closing clicks. Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm but only to about 18 mm where she felt comfortable. Excursive movements are about 8 mm in each direction. Liddy has to be very careful on yawning because she can dislocate her condyles.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. Sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear just moderate in size. Condyles appear somewhat flattened anteriorly particularly on the right side. I see no other pathology. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows that the mandible is postured forward in the fossa. Some anterior beaking is present. Appears to be loss of vertical height of the condyle. Distance from sigmoid notch to the top of the condyle appears quite short. Articular eminence is fairly steep. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears quite wide anteroposteriorly. Decreased anterior joint space. Degenerative changes present on the condylar head. Translation is good in both joints. 

In the open views, the flattening of the right condylar head anterior anterior beaking is quite evident. 

Cephalometrically, she has a Class II skeletal relationship. Tonsils are fairly large, but oropharyngeal airway also looks very good. Appears to have a high occlusal plane and a skeletal Class II and occlusal Class II relationship. She has a moderate-sized adenoid mass in the nasopharynx area. 

Liddy had a TMJ workup by Dr. Donald C. Asbjornson on 05/01/95, and this showed she had some soreness in the left masseter muscle and a little bit of an earache problem but no TMJ symptoms. Photographs from 03/30/92 show that she had the same basic facial morphology that she current does. Had some significant crowding problems, thus, the reason for the extractions. There are even earlier photographs from 05/21/91 and from 06/05/90 that show that she has been maintaining the same profile. The earliest x-rays are from 12/06/89 that again show that she has maintained the same basic profile. Earlier Panorexes from 04/08/92 and 05/12/93 show the condyles appear pretty good. In one of the views, 05/12/93, it appears that she may have been getting some condylar changes at that time but difficult to say. An x-ray from 09/03/93 shows that she definitely has some flattening of the right condyle, although the left one still looks pretty good. Cephalometrically, she may have had a  little bit of Class II change but not too significant. Her adenoid tissue used to be really huge, but part of the adenoid tissue has already undergone atrophy, although there is still some present, which is unusual at this age. 

I gave Liddy three names of orthodontists in Indianapolis. They are Dr. Ronald Hathaway, Indiana University Department of Orthodontics, 1121 W.  Michigan, Indianapolis, IN  46202; Dr. William Hohlt, 7750 Madison Ave., Indianapolis, IN  46227; and Dr. John T. Krull, 8140 Knue Road, #115, Indianapolis, IN  46250.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption with displaced nonreducing discs
AP mandibular deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Slight AP maxillary deficiency
Class II end-on occlusion
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Earaches 
Tinnitus 
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism
Missing all four first bicuspids and third molars removed for previous orthodontic reasons

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch 

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and downgraft the posterior aspect
Consider small augmentation genioplasty

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

I gave Liddy a prescription for Klonopin 0.5 mg, disp. 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x 3.
