KAREN ROGERS									04-21-03

Karen is 35 years old and referred by Dr. Richard Roblee, 1915 Green Acres Road, Fayetteville, AR  72703.

Patient History

Karen has had bilateral inguinal hernias repaired in the past. Karen is in good health except for her jaw problems. 

She is allergic to LATEX and ERYTHROMYCIN. BENADRYL causes Karen to itch.

Karen has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her left wrist, right hip, and her knees. She gets pain that goes down from her neck and shoulder down into her left arm and into the third and fourth fingers. This is more common when she is not wearing her splint. She is very much aware of nocturnal clenching and bruxism. She says sometimes she does it during the day, but she can usually catch herself and stop doing that. 

Her TMJ problems may have begun during her teenage years. She can remember waking up at night with her jaws being locked. This at times was during her orthodontics, which she had from the ages of about 11 to 14. She had four bicuspids extracted. She did have some significant pain and discomfort with the braces. From 1991 through 1994, she was working on her Masters Degree and this created a lot of stress and headaches.  She has had some physical therapy but not very much. She gets headaches two to four times per month now that occur predominantly in the temporal and posterior head area at about a level of 6. The headaches occur predominantly in the temporal and posterior head area. She had a lot of headaches prior to initiation of her splint therapy, which was begun about five years ago. She used to get tunnel vision with her severe headaches but doesn’t have much problem with that anymore. She rates her TMJ pain at 2, overall pain at 6, jaw function at 6, diet at 7, and disability at 3. 

Patient Concerns

Neck and shoulder pain
Face is changing where it is becoming asymmetric
Difficulties eating and chewing
Lower jaw appears to be becoming more retruded 
Teeth are not fitting together at all like they used to
Headaches 
Snoring
Daytime tiredness
Jaw joint pain
Jaw pain

Current Medications

Celebrex 200 mg p.r.n. 
Allegra 180 mg p.r.n.
Lo-Ovral 28
Multivitamins 
B complex

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Karen has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Lower third appears to have some asymmetry associated with it. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about a millimeter off to the right. Chin is also off to the right 1 to 2 mm. 

In profile view, Karen has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably 2 to 3 mm. Chin is retruded about 15 to 18 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short, and chin-neck angle is not well defined at all. 
Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids. Even with that, she has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch with the cuspids somewhat blocked out of the arch. She has had previous gingival grafting in the lower anterior arch.

In the upper arch, she is also missing the first bicuspids. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship, being a little bit worse on the left side as compared to the right side, with the left side being probably 4 to 5 mm Class II and the right side being probably about 2 to 3 mm Class II. The right cuspid is about 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. In the upper arch, the right cuspid is about a millimeter posterior to the left cuspid. The right cuspid is about a millimeter higher than the left cuspid, and the lower right cuspid is 1.5 to 2 mm higher than the left cuspid. Oropharynx appears relatively clear. Faucial pillars are narrow posteriorly. Uvula is relatively normal in size. Tonsils are present but appear non-inflamed.

Turbinates are moderately enlarged with the left one being much larger than the right one. She notes a little bit of difference today that she can breathe a little bit easier through the right side as compared to the left side. This apparently waxes and wanes some. She has about 1 mm of overbite relationship and probably 3 mm overjet. She has some mild tenderness over the masseters, SCMs, and left TMJ area. On function, joints sound a little bit rough. There was an occasional click in the left side at about 15 mm of opening and then a reciprocal closing click, although based on the MRI, this may not be related to the disc. Maximal incisal opening is about 41 mm but without significant discomfort only about 30 mm, excursive movement to the right 8 mm and to the left 8 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. She has malrotation of the lower cuspids. Sinuses look relatively clear, although there may be a little bit of additional cloudiness in the right one compared to the left one. Right turbinate appears quite large. Evidence of significant osteoarthritic changes on the condyles bilaterally. Vertical height of the mandibular ramus, the condyle appears short. Root canal and crown on the mandibular left second molar.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. Left sinus is much larger than the right sinus. Turbinates seem to obliterate most of the nasal airway in this view. Seems to be vertical shortening of the mandible on the right side compared to the left side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows significant osteoarthritic changes with evidence of previous condylar resorption. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is relatively flat. Some anterior beaking present on the condyle. Minimal spacing available in the joint. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone some significant arthritic changes. There is significant anterior beaking present. Decreased superior and anterior joint space greater than usual.

Open views show fairly good translation in the left joint and just moderate translation in the right joint with failure to translate onto the articular eminence. 

Cephalometrically, Karen has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is about 5 mm. She has a mildly elevated occlusal plane angle. Karen does have a head postured forward neck position. Karen does have problems with severe itching in her left ear particularly.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction and severe degenerative changes
Slight AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Class II occlusion being worse on the left side as compared to the right side
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars
Significant tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm in the anterior six teeth and approximately a millimeter for each tooth in the bicuspid area and first molar area
Anterior open-bite tendency
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism
Decreased oropharyngeal airway

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Keep the lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth, removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure from the anterior six teeth. Also, strip lower first bicuspids, removing a millimeter of tooth structure and strip the mesial aspect of the first molars, removing 0.25 to 0.5 mm of tooth structure. Removal of the tooth structure is to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy.

Surgery
Bilateral condylectomies, meniscectomies, debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to downgraft the posterior aspect of the maxilla, advance it slightly, and upright the incisors
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
