BRITTANY ROHLING								6/8/05

Brittany is 14 years old, referred by Dr. Peter Crump.  Brittany had a hernia repair at 7 months of age.  Brittany does have some problems occasionally with indigestion kind of symptoms with the feeling of her heart coming out of her chest.  It has happened recently a couple of times.  She is a big soccer player and one time it happened after she had some spicy food and another time after some greasy kind of foods and went out and had a pretty rigorous round of soccer when she experienced this.  I suggested that she check with her family physician to have that aspect evaluated.  Brittany has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or hearing loss.  She did get vertigo when she had her heart palpitation episodes.  No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  She is not aware of mouth breathing and feels she breathes predominantly through her nose when she is sleeping.  She takes no medications.  She first became aware of clicking or popping in her jaw joints about 2 years ago of unknown etiology.  She has been in and out of ortho treatment since about the age of 7.  She had a Mahra appliance that she wore for about 18 months but was ineffective for her.  She has been in four orthodontic appliances for approximately two years now.  She has no trouble with headaches, TMJ pain or pain around the head and neck area.  She rates her jaw function at 2, diet at 1, disability at 0.  

In frontal view, Brittany has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 21 mm.   Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance in the upper lip/cheek area.  Upper lip is C-shaped and maybe just a little bit deficient by probably a couple of mm in the mid portion.  Chin is approximately 20 mm AP deficient.  Chin-neckline is extremely short although chin-neck angle is moderately well defined considering the amount of retrusion of the chin.  Brittany has lip incompetence of about 6 to 7 mm.  She has to really strain her lips to get them together and has significant hyperfunction of the mentalis muscles.  Intraorally, she has had lower first bicuspids extracted.  Other teeth are fairly well aligned.  She has good attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has basically a full Class II cuspid relationship.  Slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1 mm vertically shorter than the right side.  Oropharyngeal airway is clear.  The uvula may be slightly elongated.  Soft palate looks relatively normal as do the faucial pillars.  Essentially no vertical overbite relationship.  Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged with the left side being larger than the right side.  A little bit decreased airway on the left side more so than the right side.  Septum may tip just a little bit over towards the left side.  To palpation, there is no tenderness around the head and neck area or over the TMJs.  However, on opening, there are some noises in the TMJs indicative of probably displaced disc that inconsistently reduce.  Maximal incisal opening is 43 mm.  Excursion movement to the right is 4 mm, left is 7 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the presence of all 4 third molars that are unerupted.  The sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  The condyles appear to have significant arthritic changes.  

Right TMJ tomograms show that she is not in centric relation and actually has her mandible postured forward.  The condyle appears to have fairly good shape but there is increased superior and posterior joint space indicative of not being in centric relation.  

BRITTANY ROHLING			6/8/05					Page 2


Left TMJ tomogram has a similar appearance.  The condyle appears a little bit smaller on this side compared to the opposite side.  Articular eminences on both sides are moderately steep with the left one being a little bit steeper than the right one.  Increased superior and posterior joint space.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyles forward.  

Waters view shows that the left turbinate is quite large and appears to block most of the airway.  Sinuses are clear.  

Cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are retruded.  There is a little bit of vertical excess present in the maxilla.  Head is tipped up a little bit.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the soft palate level and 4 to 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  Lateral incisors may be just slightly over-angulated but not too bad.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption and articular disc dislocation without reduction. 
Severe AP mandibular hypoplasia.  
Anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia.
Class II occlusion.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Impacted third molars x4.
Masticatory dysfunction. 
High-occlusal plane angle.
Missing mandibular first bicuspids.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Strip lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.  

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect superiorly and advance it forward.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
HTR implant to anterior mandible.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
