COLIN ROTH									01/03/2007

Colin is 18 years old, referred by Dr. George Adams.  Primary concerns are with Colin's jaw alignment.  He has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain, earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, hearing loss etc.  No other joints bother him.  He takes no medications.  He rates his jaw function, diet and disability all at 0.  

In frontal view, Colin has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Nasal tip is off to the right side about 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm to the right and chin is about 3 to 4 mm to the right.  In profile view, he has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  A little bit of deficiency in the infraorbital area probably about 4 to 5 mm.  Profile view actually shows he has fairly good balance.  Chin-neckline length looks good and chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, he has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  Some crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Lower left cuspid is blocked lingually.  He has adequate attached gingiva.  Lower incisor crowns are tipped towards the left and roots towards the right.  In the upper arch he has all of his teeth back through the second molars present.  Some very minimal crowding in the upper arch.  He has about a 3 mm Class III occlusion on the right side with probably a 5 to 6 mm Class III on the left side.  He has density towards crossbite posteriorly bilaterally and also he has an anterior end-on incisor relationship but a crossbite on the right side in the incisor area.  He has a 0 vertical overbite relationship.  Intraorally, the oropharyngeal area tissues look healthy.  The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars appear normal.  Tonsils are moderate size.  Intranasally, turbinates appear moderate in size.  The septum appears reasonably straight except he has a huge septal spur off the left side that appears to block a good portion of the nasal airway.  Otherwise, the airway appears fairly clear.  To palpation, he has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly except on the left side the excursive movement has a little bit of glitch but probably relatively normal function.  Maximal incisal opening is about 72 mm.  Excursive movements are 8 mm in each direction.  Dental model analysis shows crowding in the lower anterior arch.  The left mandibular cuspid is about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  Upper arch appears a little bit more symmetric anteroposteriorly.  Transversely the teeth on the right side in the cuspid area are about 1 mm higher than the teeth on the left side.  He has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.  Colin has had his 4 wisdom teeth removed.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except for the four third molars.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  I see no evidence of any unusual pathology.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Colin has a skeletal Class III jaw relationship.  There are some vertical differences at the inferior border of the mandible.  He has an end-on incisor relationship and over angulation of maxillary incisors and perhaps slight decreased angulation of the lower incisors. 



COLIN ROTH				01/03/2007				Page 2

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear with cloudiness in the right frontal sinus.  The left side of the nose appears to be blocked off airway-wise but this may be due to the large spur that is present there.  Difficult to identify the size of the turbinate on that side.  On the right side the turbinate is relatively normal in size.  Maxillary sinuses look relatively clear.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows condylar head that is somewhat elongated.  Joint space although thin superiorly appears reasonably well balanced.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows what appears to be a little bit greater vertical joint space superiorly.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  On opening there is fairly good translation of both condyles.  

Colin has had previous maxillary expansion done in the lower arch.  He has had previous braces on the lower arch by Dr. Hendricks when he was in the third grade.  Review of the clinical assessment in the upper lip, it appears to be retruded by about 4 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Left condylar hyperplasia.
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Over angulation of maxillary incisors. 
Significant crowding of lower anterior arch. 
Anterior crossbite and bilateral posterior crossbite tendencies.
Mandibular dental midline shifted about 2 mm to the right and chin about 3 to 4 mm to the right.
Large nasal septal spur on the left side.
Mandibular arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing about 2.5 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy and to keep from flaring the lower incisors too far forward.  Try to advance the left cuspid about 1 to 2 mm to get it into a little bit better symmetry with the right cuspid. 
Surgery.
Left high condylectomy.
Bilateral ramus osteotomy to shift the mandible back on the facial midline.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, expand and upright the incisors.
Removal of large left-sided nasal septal spur. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
