SHOSHANA ROSENBERG								08/21/2008

Shani is 17 years old.  She is referred by  Mark Kogut, DDS, 8325 Walnut Hill Lane, Suite 111, Dallas, Texas 75231, phone number 214-696-3082.  Shani has the following concerns:

Difficulty sleeping. 
Speech affected.
Difficulties eating.
Teeth grinding during the day and night. 
Bite is changing.
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.

Shani’s problems to the best of her knowledge began in about 2003 at the age of 12 of unknown etiology.  Her jaw locked up a few times back then.  She would have clicking and popping in her jaws at that time and she still does have some of that.  She had orthodontic treatment from 2002 through 2006 by Dr. Kogut.  She has had an orthotic appliance since 2006 by Dr. Steve Bender and she actually has had two of those devices to date.  She also has been seeing an ENT doctor, Dr. Kirkham, at Medical City in reference to airway problems.  

Shani gets almost daily headaches at a level of 5 in the frontal and temporal area and they also go back behind her ear area.  In the morning, she gets up very tired and they seem to develop in the day, particularly in the evening.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 6, diet at 5, disability at 4.  She has no earaches, occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time and also clenching during the day.  Her speech is affected by her jaw relationship and position.  She currently takes no medications.  Shani is not aware of snoring, but has moderate daytime somnolence.  She is not aware of sleep apnea issues, but she does have a moderate sleep disorder.  She believes that she breathes predominantly through her nose when her nose when she sleep.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Shani has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  There is some facial asymmetry with the maxillary midline being off the right side by 1 mm, mandibular dental midline off to the right side about 1 mm, and chin off to the right side about 3 mm.  The nasal tip is deviated off to the right side about 4 to 5 mm.  In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency and AP deficient in the chin area of probably 8 to 10 mm.  She has some problems in the nasal dorsum.  Intraorally, Shani has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She is occluded by a clear retainer in the lower arch.  She has some significant thinness of her attached gingiva around the two right central incisors.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has about a 5 mm anterior open bite.  She has about a 3 mm Class II occlusal relationship.  Transversely, the maxilla is fairly level.  The mandible is a little asymmetric with the left side being about 1 to 2 mm lower than the right side.  Mild lower arch asymmetry with the right cuspid 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  The upper arch is fairly symmetric anteroposteriorly.  The oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively healthy.  She does have some moderate constricture of the fascial pillars.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  They appear somewhat inflamed.  The septum appears reasonable in straightness at least anteriorly.  To palpation, she has moderate discomfort of the temporalis, masseters, posterior neck and shoulders and right styloid area.  Not particularly tender over the joints.  On opening, joints seem to function reasonably smoothly, although there is some mild crackling kind of noises in the right side.  Maximal incisal opening is 40 mm, but opening without discomfort about 18 mm.  Excursion movements are about 7 mm in each direction. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  Condyles appear arthritic.  Sinuses appears relatively clear.  
Waters view shows that there is some deviation in the nasal septum.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged and block a portion of the airway.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle is small in size.  She may be postured forward slightly and not in symmetric relation.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.     
Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic and small in size  Articular eminence is moderate in inclination.  Again, it appears the mandible may be postured forward here as the condyle is postured against the articular eminence.  On opening, there is restriction in translation.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Shawni a skeletal Class II and occlusal Class II relationship.  She occludes only on her second molars and possibly her first molars might touch, but she has a 5 mm anterior open bite.  Lower incisors appears a little bit over-angulated.  Oropharyngeal airway appears to be about 8 mm at the soft palate level and about 10 at the base of the tongue.  She does have a head postured forward neck position.

Diagnoses for Shani would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction (compatible with AICR)
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Slight AP maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
Anterior open bite of 5 mm.
Class II end-on occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle of 20 degrees (normal 8 degrees)
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Partial  nasal airway obstruction.
Impacted third molars x4.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.  
Myofascial pain. 
Over-angulation of lower incisors.
Nose deviated significantly to the right side with a substantial nasal dorsal hump.


Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Maxillary osteotomies to the down graft the posterior aspect and the anterior aspect superiorly.  This will also correct any transverse discrepancies. 
Partial inferior turbinectomies.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
External rhinoplasty.  
3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
