DAVID ROSENTHAL							02/18/2011

David’s birth date is 05/01/1967 and he is 43 years old.  Referred by Dr. Lee Fitzgerald.  The orthodontist is Terry B. Adams, DDS, MSD, Preston Sherry Plaza, 8201 Preston Road, Suite #555, Dallas, Texas 75225.  

David’s primary concerns are bone loss in the jaws and tooth loss.  Jaws are malaligned and difficult to eat and chew.  David believes his problems began during his teenage years.  He had orthodontics at the age of 12 and at that time he believes that he was symmetric. When he was 18, he did have an injury where he got his front teeth and his upper jaw knocked backwards in a basketball game.  They were repositioned and pushed back into the sockets.  He wore a splint from about the 18 to the age of 35.  He ended up needing a root canal and was unable to comfortably wear the splint after that so discontinued it.  David has no problems with headaches, no TMJ pain, no myofascial pain.  He rates his jaw function, diet at 8, disability at 0.  He states he does have some grinding noises in his joints.  He takes no medications.  He has no trouble with earaches, gets frequent tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He does have a condition called akathesia which is a form of restless leg syndrome.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  

In frontal view, David has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face, but has asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -2 mm.  The maxillary dental midline is about 2 mm to the right of the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is probably 5 to 6 mm to the right of the facial midline.  The chin is about 10 to 12 mm to the right.  The mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty well aligned with each other.  Left commissure is about 3 mm lower than the right commissure.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 6 mm and chin is retruded about 12 to 15 mm.  Intraorally, David is missing mandibular first bicuspids and probably maxillary first bicuspids as well.  David has a Class III plus cuspid relationship on the left side and about 5 mm Class III on the right side.  He has an anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites.  He appears to hit only on the right second molar and left first second molars.  Also in centric relation, he occludes on the maxillary cuspid and lower first molar back through the maxillary first molar and mandibular second molar.  On the right side, he is open.  He has had his wisdom teeth removed.  David has a transverse cant to the occlusal plane with the right cuspid being higher than the left in the maxilla and in the mandible, the right cuspid is 4 mm higher than the left cuspid.  He does have an open bite of 1 to 2 mm.  David has a moderately enlarged uvula, but the soft palate, fascial pillars and tonsils all look relatively normal.  Intranasally, the septum appears to be deviated a little bit off to the right side.  Turbinates are moderate enlarged.  David does have anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites.  Maximal incisal opening is 42 mm, excursion movement to the right 4 mm and to the left 5 mm.  David does have a mandibular left central incisor that appears to be fractured off from the root tip and just hangs there and is extremely mobile and tender for him.  It has had a previous root canal on it as has the right central incisor.  The inferior border of the mandible on the left side is probably about 10 mm lower than the right side.  Anteroposterior the mandibular right cuspid is about 3 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  The upper arch is reasonably symmetric.  There may be a little bit of a yaw with the maxilla and mandible being shifted a little bit off towards the left side posteriorly a couple of millimeters.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows he is absent only his maxillary third molars and the mandibular third molars are present.  The lower first molars, however, have foreshortened roots.  The maxillary left central incisor has had a root canal and it appears to have some internal root resorption.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  The left turbinate is quite large and left turbinate is also enlarged.  There appears to be significant nasal airway obstruction but has got a little bit of increased thickness at the synovial lining in the floor of the sinus.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condylar head and neck that is much large than the opposite side.  The asymmetry is probably created by condylar hyperplasia versus an osteochondroma.  The joint space is narrowed vertically.  It is also narrow posteriorly.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite small in size particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking at the very small medial side.  There is reasonably good joint space throughout, but it is not known if he was in centric relation.  The articular eminence is steeper on this side.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have an extended condylar head.  There is decreased medial joint space particularly.  The condyle is narrow mediolaterally compared to the opposite side.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 to 5 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There appears to be good joint space vertically and slightly decreased at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly probably 4 to 5 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a skeletal Class III jaw relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway actually looks fairly good.  The occlusal plane is slightly increased.  



Basic diagnoses for David would be:

Left TMJ condylar hyperplasia (arrested growth).
Maxillary AP, vertical, and transverse hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites.
Class III occlusion on the right, super Class III occlusion on the left.
Hypertrophied turbinates creating nasal airway obstruction.
Rule out TMJ articular disc dislocations.
Fractured mandibular left central incisor.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Extract mandibular left central incisor.
2.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
3.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Keep the lateral incisor roots tipped 
                        mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental 
                        osteotomies.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Place a pontic tooth and attach to the 
                        arch wire in the mandibular left central incisor space.
4.	Surgery.  
	a.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward, level it transversely, 		and expand.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back on the 		facial midline and advance it.  
	c.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
	d.	TMJ surgery if indicated from MRI evaluation.  
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
6.	Dental reconstruction to replace mandibular left central incisor.  


