WILLIAM LARRY ROSE								10/27/2005

Larry is 60 years old and referred by Dr. Al Bishop.  Larry has diabetes.  He takes the following medications:
Glucophage.
Glucotrol.
Celebrex.
Cozaar.
Zocor.
Niaspan (also for cholesterol.)

Larry's TMJ problems began at least 20 years ago of unknown etiology.  He just became aware that his jaws are clicking and popping.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
TMJ popping.
Crunching noises when eating. 
Some difficulties eating certain foods.
Occasional pain through the jaw joints and jaw areas.
Snoring.
Daytime tiredness.

The treatment that Larry has had for his condition includes orthodontics for 2 years beginning in October of 2003.  Larry has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  The other joints that bother him include his back, knees and shoulders.  He does have arthritis in his back and knees and thus the reason for the use of Celebrex.  He has no known allergies.  He has had surgery on both shoulders and also on the right knee.  He has occasional clenching and bruxism at nighttime.  He has no particular problems with headaches.  No TMJ pain and no myofascial pain on a daily basis but does get occasional significant pain problems when his joints get out of alignment.  He rates his jaw function at 4, diet at 3, disability at 1.  

In frontal view, Larry has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 26 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -1.  Maxillary midline may be off to the left about 1 mm.  Chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline shifted about at least 4 mm off to the right side of the maxillary midline probably 2 to 3 mm to the right of the chin midline.  In profile view, he has some AP maxillary deficiency and the mandible appears to be retruded.  Not too much distance between the genial tubercles and the trachea.  Chin-neckline is extremely short and chin-neck angle is essentially absent.  The maxilla is probably about 4 mm AP deficient and the mandible is probably 10 to 12 mm AP deficient.  Intraorally, Larry has all of his teeth.  The mandibular is probably 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch, the left cuspid is 11 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  Maxillary occlusal plane is relatively level.  Mandibular occlusal plane shows a little bit of vertical discrepancy.  There is almost a full Class II cuspid relationship on the right side and a Class III end-on relationship on the left side.  Larry has an anterior deep bite of about 3 to 4 mm.  Intraorally, oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  

WILLIAM LARRY ROSE			10/27/2005				Page 2


The uvula appears moderately hyperplastic.  The soft palate may be a little bit elongated but not real significant.  Faucial pillars may be mildly constricted.  To palpation, Larry has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, he has a click in the left joint about 10 mm.  On the right side he has a loud audible pop at about 30 mm of opening and closing click at 5 mm.  Maximal incisal opening is 57 mm.  Excursive movement is about 11 mm in each direction.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated significantly off towards the left side and creates quite a constricture in the nares particularly at the luminal valve area.  The turbinate is moderately enlarged on the left side and there appears to be decreased airway.  On the right side, the airway is more open.  There is a septal spur at the base of the septum extending into the right side of the nose.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  On the left side the anterior aspect of the septum is almost completely lateral to the columella.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows that Larry is probably missing the mandibular left first molar, the second and third molar drifted forward into position.  On the right side, he has all 3 molars.  In the upper left quadrant he may be missing the first molar, second and third molar forward into the first and second molar position.  On the right side it appears that the third molar is absent.  He has crowns on most of the molar teeth.  I cannot evaluate the condyles and I cannot adequately evaluate sinus condition.  

Waters view shows that the bony septum at least is relatively straight though clinically the cartilaginous septum is deviated off towards the left side.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly reasonable shape and may have some anterior beaking present.  The joint space may be a little bit decreased posteriorly.  Articular eminence is relatively normal in architecture.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be positioned somewhat posterior in the fossa.  Articular eminence is relatively normal.  There is a little bit of flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is some decreased airway between the soft palate and the posterior pharyngeal wall with an AP dimension being about 5 mm.  The base of the tongue dimension is a little bit larger up to about 9 mm.  He appears to have perhaps a slight skeletal Class II jaw relationship.  There is some space between the base of the tongue and roof the mouth.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
AP maxillary and posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II occlusion on the right side, Class III end-on occlusion on the left side.
WILLIAM LARRY ROSE 			10/27/2005				Page 3


Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hyperplastic soft palate and uvula.
Nasal septal deviation.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Snoring. 
Anterior deep bite.
Lower arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 3 to 4 mm posterior to the left cuspid.
Mandibular dental midline shifted 4 mm to the right of the maxillary midline but maxillary midline is shifted 1 mm off to the left of the facial midline.
Rule out sleep apnea.
High occlusal plane angle.
Accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Obtain dental models.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction and decrease the occlusal plane angle.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posterior.
Nasoseptoplasty.
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP procedure) only if patient elects not to have maxillary surgery performed. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
