ELIZABETH ROSEN									    02-18-05

Elizabeth is 13 years old. 

Patient Concerns

Her jaws seem to get locked
Crackling noises in the joints
Pain and discomfort
Difficulties eating and chewing

Patient History

Since about the age of 5, Elizabeth has apparently had complaints about her jaws. The etiology is unknown. The only real treatment she has had was a Herbst appliance placed in September of October of last year and was in for a couple of months. This made Elizabeth’s pain worse and created a closed lock situation. She currently takes no medications. She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. No other joints bother her. She has no known allergies and no known difficulties wearing jewelry. She is aware that she does brux at night although it is not as severe currently as it used to be. She has no problems with headaches. Rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 4, diet at 6, and disability at 1. 

Clinical Examination

Upper lip length is 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 5 mm. She has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Mandibular dental midline is about a millimeter off to the right side, and chin is fairly reasonably aligned.

In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Chin is a little bit retruded by maybe about 6 mm or so. 

Intraorally, Elizabeth has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has a little bit of an accentuated curve of occlusion. Transversely the arch is fairly well-aligned. She has a few diasthemas between the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch. Upper lateral incisors are quite small in size. She has almost a full Class II cuspid relationship on the right side and Class II end-on the left side. She has an anterior deep bite of about 5 or 6 mm. Intranasally, the airway appears fairly good. Left turbinate is a little bit larger than the right one but still appears to be adequate airway at least in the anterior aspect of the nose. Incisal opening maximally is 45 mm and about 33 mm without much discomfort. Excursive movements to the right are 5 mm and to the left 6 mm.

To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the temporalis, masseters, medial pterygoids, TMJs, styloid areas, and shoulders. 

Tooth-size analysis reveals a difference of less than 1 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the developing unerupted third molars x 4. Sinuses look reasonably clear. Nasal airway looks fairly clear with the left turbinate being a little bit larger than the right turbinate. Condyles are extremely short in vertical height and appears to be a little sclerosis at least on the right condyle. Condyles appear somewhat broad anteroposteriorly. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite small in size. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle looks a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly and extremely short vertically. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is superiorly and posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Appears to be some flattening. The distance from the sigmoid notch to the top of the condyle is significantly shorter than normal. 

On opening, there is some restricted translation with the condyles just coming down toward the articular eminences but not beyond. 

Waters view shows that the maxillary sinuses and ethmoidal sinuses look fairly good.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the anterior vertical maxillary excess. Chin is a little bit AP deficient. Oropharyngeal airway measures 6 mm at the soft palate level and 7 mm at the base of the tongue. Occlusal plane is slightly elevated. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
AP mandibular deficiency
Vertical maxillary excess
Class II occlusion being worse on the left side as compared to the right side
Mandibular dental midline and chin shifted to the right 2 mm
Anterior deep bite
Impacted third molars x 4
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJs

Periodontal evaluation of lower anterior arch

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies 
Align and level mandibular arch 

Surgery (dependent on MRI evaluation)
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
Maxillary osteotomies to move the maxillary superiorly and correct any transverse problems that may be present
Removal of impacted third molars x 4

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

This treatment plan again pending MRI evaluation should get her the best possible functional and aesthetic result.  

If the MRI shows significant arthritic changes and articular disc dislocation with significant degereration, then we may want to treat Elizabeth in two stages.  The TMJ surgery would be done at the first stage and the orthognathic surgery would be done at the second stage.