B118
B118 is 39 years old and referred by XXXX. B118's TMJ problems began about 3 years ago when she began having jaw pains. The etiology was unknown at that time. By history, however, B118 was diagnosed with Lyme disease. By tracing her symptoms backwards, she feels that she contracted it 5 years prior in California. She has had significant problems with the disease process. Besides the Lyme disease symptoms and problems, the only major medical problem she has is sinus tachycardia.

Three years ago, she developed facial pain over the sinus areas bilaterally, but examination and radiographs showed that the sinuses were not the etiology of her pain. She then received an occlusal splint which helped decrease her symptoms. However, she then developed jaw tremors. She has actually only been on the Flexeril for 2 months. Following the development of the jaw tremors, apparently B118 has had tremors for a number of years and was on a medication called Primidone. When her tremors increased 3 years ago, the dosage was increased. She started Flexeril 2 months ago taking it at night, but now takes it two times per day which is helpful for her. The medications B118 is currently taking include the following:

Flexeril b.i.d.
Primidone 50 mg t.i.d.
Zyrtec 1 tablet q.h.s.
Toprol XL 50 mg q.h.s.
Fentanyl patch 70 mcg q. 48 hours.
Flonase 1 to 2 puffs per day.
Lyrica 100 mg in a.m., 50 mg at noon, and 150 mg at bedtime.
Prilosec 40 mg q.d.
Acidophilus 2 per day.

B118 gets headaches only about two or three times per month that she relates to migraines, but they are at about a level of 8 and can occur in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. She rates her average TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 8, diet at 6, disability at 7. She has no problems with earaches nor tinnitus, but gets occasional vertigo. She has no hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her knees, wrists, ankles, and occasionally her elbows. She does tend to clench her teeth at nighttime and also during the daytime, but she consciously puts her tongue between her teeth and bites down on her tongue.

She has some mild snoring, moderate daytime somnolence that she attributes to the Lyme disease and also perhaps to the medications. She is not aware of sleep apnea. She has a moderate sleep disorder because of the pain and difficulties getting to sleep. She does not believe that she is a mouth breather at night.

Primary concerns that B118 has include the following:
Jaws continues to move and shift.
Teeth do not line up.
It is hard to chew.
The jaw muscles hurt.
Hard to open her mouth.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B118 has fairly good left-to-right symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth relationship is probably about minus 1 to minus 2. Maxillary midline and mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other. In profile view, she has some AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency with the maxilla probably being 4-5 mm AP deficient and the mandible probably about 8 mm AP deficient. Intraorally, B118 has all of her lower teeth back through the third molars and in the upper arch she has all of her teeth also back through the third molars. She has an end-on Class II occlusion of I think probably about 3 mm Class III. The rest of her teeth appear not to touch. It is hard to tell which teeth are actually touching, but it may be her maxillary second molar and lower first molar. All other teeth appear to be out of occlusion. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal. Uvula is moderately elongated, but the roof structures are relatively normal. Intranasally, the turbinates may be just mildly enlarged, but she appears to have a good airway and she has no complaints of difficulties breathing through her nose. She has about a 1-2 mm anterior overbite. Incisal opening where she is comfortable is about 15 mm. Maximal opening was about 37 mm. Excursion movement to the right was 4 mm and to the left about 6 mm. In going into excursion movements, it set off jaw tremors for her. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the TMJs, medial pterygoids, and the right masseter muscle. Although B118 hears popping occasionally in her joints, at this particular visit her joints seemed to function reasonably smoothly.

Diagnoses for B118 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ Lyme disease.
Malocclusion.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. Headaches.
Difficulties eating and chewing.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Medications: Use appropriate antibiotic effective against Lyme disease to see if this helps to decrease symptoms. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints to construct plastic 3-D models of the jaws and jaw joints.
Surgery (if medications do not relieve her symptoms. a. Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, joint debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts. c. Application and then removal of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.

B118 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good mediolateral dimension. Difficult to identify discal tissue within the joint space, although the joint space appears reasonably good. There may be disc anteriorly placed.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. It appears there may be some discal tissue medially displaced. There could also be interiorly displaced discal tissue.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a hockey stick shape to it. There is flattening on the posterior head. There is significantly increased vertical and posterior joint space. The disc appears to be in a vertical orientation. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Out laterally, the disc is not seen indicative of perhaps medial displacement. There is some fluid in the posterior joint space area. On opening, there appears to be good translation of the condyle and the disc with the disc in a reduced position. There is a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. There is possibly a bony projection from the posterosuperior aspect of the fossa with a corresponding depression in the head of the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that also has a hockey stick shape to it. Articular eminence is moderately steep, but not quite as steep as the opposite side. Articular disc is in a vertical orientation, but it appears to fill the condyle. Out laterally, the disc is more difficult to see. There appears to be an increased joint space. The disc is not as readily evident at the lateral aspect of the joint indicative of perhaps medial displacement. On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyle and the disc is in a reduced position. However, towards the lateral aspect of the joint, the disc is fairly thin.

IMPRESSION:
1. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc that is anteriorly displaced in a vertical orientation with possible osteophytic development in the fossa with the disc being medially displaced as well.
2. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc probably medially displaced.
3. In both joints, there is increased vertical joint space and what appears to be some hypertrophy of the synovial tissue which could indicate that she has been on splint	therapy.

