KELSEY ROSSMAN									03/17/2008

Kelsey is 19 years old.  Previous surgeries include removal of her wisdom teeth.  Primary concerns Kelsey has are as follows:  
Headaches.
Jaw pain.
Ear pain.
Jaw clicking and popping.
Cannot open her mouth and then shut it in a straight motion as it jerks off to one side.

She had orthodontics 6 years ago, but has had no specific treatment for her TMJ at this time.  Kelsey had no TMJ problems until January 2008 which she began developing pain primarily in the left jaw joint.  Her TMJ symptoms are mainly on the left side.  The right side, when she got food poisoning and got sick a couple of times this year, she would open and have difficulties getting closed again.  Current medications include Ortho TriCyclen and Motrin for pain.  She gets earaches predominantly on the left side, but no tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss and no other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching during the day time.  She rates her headaches as 7 in her frontal and temporal areas and is located predominantly in the center of the head in her frontal area and not so much in the temporal.  She rates her pain on the left TMJ at level of 5, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 3, diet at 2, disability at 2.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  Kelsey has good facial symmetry and balance.  She has a basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has a vertical overbite of about 1 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look good and tonsils are slightly enlarged, but not too significant.  Intranasally, there is some curvature to the nasal septum.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  She does state she has some difficulties breathing through her nose.  Opening the luminal valves with a nasoscope improved her abilities to breathe through her nose fairly significantly.  She may have some restricted luminal valves.  She has perhaps some slight increased width of the columella.  She is not aware of snoring, daytime somnolence, or sleep apnea.  To palpation, she has moderate tenderness over the masseters and TMJs with the right a little bit worse than the left styloid areas and right medial pterygoid.  On jaw function, she will have an occasional click in the left TMJ.  Maximal size is 60 mm.  Excursion movements are about 8 mm each direction.   
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  
Waters view shows that the bony septum is reasonable straight.  The turbinates are moderate in size.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have a reasonable shape to it, and there appears to be good joint space surrounding it.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little flattening on the top of it and somewhat appears to be increased vertical joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation in both condyles. The right condyle is slightly less thick in anterior and posterior dimensions compared to the right side. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has good facial balance and a good Class II cuspid-molar relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway is adequate.  
The basic diagnoses for Kelsey would be as follows:
Left TMJ anterior and medially dislocated articular disc.
Left mandibular hyperplasia. 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Placement of maxillary and mandibular orthodontic appliances. 
Surgery.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Left mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine and retain occlusion. 