MICHAEL ROSENBLATT								12-12-02

Mick is 54 years old and referred by Dr. Aubry Landry.

Patient History

He has had previous left knee arthroscopy, and he has had a colonoscopy. Mick is in good health with no major medical problems. Mick does have a history of having a fractured jaw in 1967. He had his teeth wired together for a while. Apparently when he gets up in the morning, he does have sort of a pop in his right jaw joint, and it seems to function okay after that. Apparently he doesn’t have much problems with clicking later on after that initial click.

Patient Concerns

Mick’s primary concerns are that over the last two or three years he has developed increasing problems with snoring and with sleep apnea symptoms. He has seen Dr. Stephen Bane, an otolaryngologist, who has suggested a UPPP procedure for Mick. In fact, Mick is scheduled for surgery next Tuesday. Mick is on a CPAP machine, and this seems to help, but he detests the use of that machine, and he cannot use it when he travels. For the last six months, Mick has not been sleeping very well at all. He does have problems with daytime somnolence, particularly in the afternoon. 

The problems as far as Mick is aware began approximately three years ago and have been getting progressively worse particularly according to his wife. Mick has no problems with his nasal airway, no earaches, ringing in his ear, or vertigo. He has no problems with headaches. 

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Mick has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 30 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about –2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin. Mick is missing a lower what looks like the left lateral incisor, and, therefore, has just three lower incisors.

In profile view, Mick has some retrusion of the maxilla probably by about a good 6 mm. Chin appears retruded by probably a good 15 mm. Chin-neckline is shortened, and chin-neckline not well-defined.

Intraorally, Mick has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present, except for missing the left lateral incisor, which is the area where the fracture was to his mandible. Has some crowns on his molar teeth.  He has a crown on the left cuspid. 

In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars present. He has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. Has about 1.5 mm anterior overbite. Uvula is a little bit enlarged but not too significantly. Faucial pillars appear to be based at a wide position. They do not appear to be too close in approximation to the posterior pharynx. The tongue looks moderately large compared to the size of the oral cavity. 
TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly. Oropharynx does appear fairly clear.

Intranasally, septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side at the base and anteriorly. Turbinates are of moderate size. Mick does report having a previously fractured nose.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular left lateral incisor and all four third molars. Has a crown on the mandibular right first molar and left cuspid as well as the maxillary right central incisor. Cannot see the sinuses very well, but they appear reasonably clear. Cannot see the turbinates. Cannot see the top of the right condyle, but otherwise the morphology looks pretty good.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. Septum is deviated. Left turbinate is larger than the right turbinate. No other significant findings are noted.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology with maybe some slight narrowness anteroposteriorly. Fossa has a mild slope to it. There appears to be reasonable joint space around the condyle superiorly and posteriorly. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle and fossa that appear to have fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is a little bit steeper on this side as compared to the opposite side. Joint space looks fairly well balanced. Opening views show excellent translation in both joints with the condyles coming completely out anterior to the articular eminences. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible appear retruded. Oropharyngeal airway space at the soft palate base is about 3 mm and at the base of the tongue is about 4 mm. Tongue fills the entire oral cavity. 

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Hyperplastic soft palate
Hyperplastic uvula
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of only 3 mm (normal 11 mm)
Severe sleep apnea
Severe snoring
Daytime somnolence
Sleep disorder
High occlusal plane angle of 15 degrees (normal 8 degrees)
Relative macroglossia (large tongue)
Missing mandibular left lateral incisor



Recommended Treatment

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and downgraft it posteriorly
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty
Arch bars to maxilla and mandible