 LAURE ROSTY								03/18/2011

Laure is 52 years old, birth date 12/07/1958.  She was referred by Dr. Lou Mercuri.  Laure’s TMJ problems began when she was about 11 years old when she was hit underneath her jaw by a horse.  She may have some fractures of the mandible at that time.  After that she did okay until about 1994.  She was approximately 45 when she began having significant problems.  She has had the following procedures:

1994 right arthroplasty and meniscectomy.
1995 left condylotomy.
1995 right styloidectomy.
1996 left styloidectomy.
1998 right arthroplasty for ankylosis.
2000 right condylectomy.
2001 right arthroplasty for ankylosis. 
2006 right gap arthroplasty with placement of a Christiansen fossa (performed in Mayo Clinic).
2007 right TMJ removal of Christiansen fossa that was fracture.
2007 right TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
2009 left TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  

She is on numerous medications that are listed in the chart.

Laure has posterior headaches that occur in the posterior head predominantly at a level of 7.  She usually gets headaches that occur predominantly in the back of her head about two times for week and she usually wakes up with those in the morning.  They can cause her to have nausea and she keeps Zofran on hand for that.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 5, jaw function, diet and disability at 5.  She has no problems with earaches, occasional tinnitus, and occasional vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her right elbow, right shoulder, right hand and fingers, both knees and possibly the neck, but we are not sure about that.  She does get an elevated sedimentation rate, but her rheumatoid factors have been negative on testing.  She has been diagnosed with these other following conditions:

Hypothyroidism.
Depression.
Raynaud’s.
Arthritis.
Immune suppression and she does receive IV Ig q.28 days.

She is aware of clenching at night.  In addition, she has myasthenia gravis.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Laure has fairly good left-to-right facial asymmetry.  Upper lip length is about 26 mm.  Upper lip tooth relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxillary and mandible dental midline are pretty much on the facial midline.  The chin is just slightly to the right side about 2 to 3 mm.  In profile view, she has some maxillary AP deficiency and some AP mandibular deficiency and the chin may be retruded probably about 15 to 18 mm.  The maxilla is retruded by probably about 4 or 5 mm.  The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, Laure has all of her lower teeth except for the third molars and mandible second molar.  She has a lot of crowding of the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a good Class I cuspid relationship and a 1 mm vertical over bite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy with the uvula just being slightly elongated.  Intranasally, the left turbinate is moderately enlarged, but the right side looks more normal.  She occasionally has to use some nasal spray to breathe through that left side.  The septum is deviated off towards the right side.  She has fairly severe pain over the left TMJ and moderate pain over the left masseter, left styloid area, shoulders, and right TMJ and mild tenderness over the right masseter, right styloid area.  The incisal opening is 35 mm and excursion movement to the right 0, to the left 0.5 mm.   Placing a finger in the external auditory canal on the left side is quite painful.  

Basic diagnoses for Laure would be as follows:

Multiple previous TMJ surgeries including seven on the right and three on the left.
Left TMJ heterotopic bone formation.
Left TMJ traumatic neuroma with painful neuropathy.

Recommended treatment would include the following:

Left TMJ exploration and debridement.
Removal of heterotopic bone formation.
Removal of traumatic neuroma.
Placement of fat graft to left TMJ (harvest from the abdomen).
Consider recontouring of fossa prosthesis component.




LAURE ROSTY			 CT SCAN				03/18/2011

DATE OF ACQUISITION:  		11/22/2010
DATE OF INTERPRETATION: 	03/18/2011

In the left TMJ area, there appears to be heterotopic bone formation behind and perhaps medial to the fossa component that extends back towards the external auditory canal.  It seems to sit right against the bony rim of the external meatus.  



