JONATHAN ROSEN									08/28/2008	

Jonathan is now 7 years 8 months postsurgery.  He had some significantly increased jaw growth postsurgery with a greater amount of condylar growth on the left side as compared to the right side.  This has created some significant facial asymmetry for him.  He does not believe that he has had any further growth in the last 3 years or so.  Clinical exam shows that the upper lip is 20 mm and zero tooth-lip relationship.  The left side of the jaw in the ramus area appears more prominent by about 4 mm compared to the right side.  He has fairly close to being a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  However, there is a cant in the transverse occlusal plan with the left side being 3 to 4 mm lower with the maxillary left cuspid, whereas the mandibular left cuspid is 2 mm lower.  Maxillary midline is shifted 2 mm to the right and the mandibular dental midline is shifted 3 mm to the right while the chin is shifted 6 to 7 mm to the right.  Transverse and vertical hypoplasia at the mandibular ramus angles bilaterally.  He has a hyperplastic uvula.   He has some ptosis of the nasal tip.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  The turbinate is a little bit large compared to the available cavity size and he may some mild nasal airway obstruction on the right side, whereas the left side appears wide open. He has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain.  He has a slight glitch in the left TMJ on opening.  He takes no medications.  No earaches, no tinnitus, no vertigo.  No other joints bother him.  In his profile view, he has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose except for some ptosis in the nasal tip.  Chin appears retruded by about 4 to 5 mm.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Left maxillary vertical hyperplasia and maxillary asymmetry.
Mandibular asymmetry.
AP microgenia.
Nasal ptosis.
Deficiency in vertical and lateral projection of the mandibular ramus angles.
Probably anklyosis of mandibular left first bicuspid. 
Two bone plates in the mandible and a total of 16 screws. 
Bone plates in the maxilla including 4 bone plates and 20 screws.
Right posterior cross bite.
Posterior yaw in the maxilla with it being rotated off to towards the left about 2 to 3 mm.
 
Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Leave the mandibular left first bicuspid out of the arch wire as this tooth may be ankylosed.  However, place a bracket on this tooth since at surgery luxation of this tooth may be possible to mobilize and allow it to erupt into position.



Surgery. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the maxilla transversely, rotate it back on the facial midline, and correct the posterior yaw shifting the posterior aspect towards to the right.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to level it transversely, shift the dental and chin midline to the left side back on the facial midline.
Rhinoplasty to eliminate the nasal ptosis. 
Chin augmentation of about 4 to 5 mm.
Luxation of mandibular left first bicuspid.
Postsurgical orthodontics. 
Crown on the mandibular left first bicuspid if unable to get it into proper functional position.
