JILL ROUSH										03-17-04

Jill is 47 years old and referred by Dr. Bill Wyatt, Hurst, TX. Jill has also seen Dr. Charles Holt, Bedford, TX, and also Dr. Monte Collins, Southlake, TX.

Patient History

She has had problems with severe head pain. Her previous surgeries include tonsillectomy, appendectomy, C-section, and hysterectomy. She has some allergy problems and has had problems with hay fever. When she gets her severe headaches, she can have fainting spells. Currently she takes Fiorinal with codeine, but only when the pain is really bad, and she takes Phenergan at the same time.

Jill is aware of developing jaw joint problems back at about the age of 12. Her dad told her that all of a sudden her lower jaw began to disappear. I suspect this is probably related to idiopathic condylar resorption. She proceeded on with life. Sometime around 1992 or 1995, she started with splint therapy in Columbus, Ohio. She worked with Dr. Shankland there. For the past six to nine months, she has been working with Dr. Charles Holt in reference to splint therapy. She has had at least five different splints. The ones by Dr. Holt are the first that actually have fit her fairly well. To complicate matters, in 1997 she had a fall where she fracture-dislocation her sacrum. The displaced disc was between C6 and C7, but she has had some kind of shift between the vertebrae at C1 and C2. 

Jill has no problems with earaches but does get occasional tinnitus and vertigo but has no hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her neck, back, shoulders, hips, and left knee. She has a problem with her back and has to carry a special pillow with her to sit on to help decrease the discomfort. 

She has multiple drug allergies and will send us a list of those as she is not aware of all of the ones that she is allergic to. She also has allergies to wheat, dairy, beef, corn, and some other food allergies. She has major difficulties wearing jewelry. Since her fall, she says she feels better without wearing jewelry. She says she has had all of her silver fillings removed from her teeth and replaced with nonmetallic materials. She is aware of clenching her teeth at night, and she says she thinks that this may help her breathe better.

Jill has fairly constant headaches that are usually around a level of 4, and they start in the back of the head and go into the temple area and then around the front and even up on top. These are fairly consistent. About every two weeks, her headaches will escalate to a 10, and she can have some significant problems with nausea and vomiting at that level. She rates her TMJ pain at 2, on an average day her overall pain levels are at 5, jaw function at 6, diet at 5, and disability at 8. She is having such significant airway problems that her physician has recommended she have a tracheostomy done to take care of her airway until resolution of her jaw problems can be achieved. Jill has attempted to use a CPAP machine, but she was unable to tolerate it. 

Heather has observed her mother sleeping, and she has severe apneic episodes and significant snoring problems. She wakes up very weak in the mornings and is usually drenched in perspiration as well. She has pain in her chest almost as though her lungs hurt. She has daytime somnolence as well.

Patient Concerns

Severe airway problems
Difficulties breathing particularly at night when sleeping
Low oxygen saturation
Severe sleep apnea problems 
Headaches and head pain
Nausea and vomiting with severe head pain
Difficulties eating and chewing
Pain in the right jaw joint

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Jill has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is probably about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 to 3 mm off to the left, though the chin midline is pretty much on the facial midline.

In profile view, Jill has a very prominent head postured forward neck position. Upper lip is probably a good 6 mm AP deficient. Chin is at least 25 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is extremely short, and chin-neck angle is actually fairly well-defined but probably has only about 22 mm of AP chin-neck length. Where Jill postures her head to breathe the best, she holds her head quite forward on her neck and shoulder complex and tends to tip her head back.

Intraorally, Jill is missing the mandibular left and right first molars. Has some moderate crowding, lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she is missing the bicuspid on both sides. She is missing a cuspid on the left side and first molar with the left bicuspid drifted way forward from its original position. This probably accounts for the reason that the lower dental midline is shifted 3 mm off toward the left side. She is essentially a Class II cuspid occlusion, and Jill has an overjet of about 4 mm. In the upper arch, she is missing first bicuspids, left second molar, and she is missing all four third molars. Intraorally, the oropharynx appears clear, although the soft palate is positioned almost directly back onto the posterior pharyngeal wall area. At first I thought she may have had a pharyngeal flap procedure but she denies this, and radiographically she does not have this either. The soft palate is so posteriorly positioned that it just appears to touch against the posterior pharyngeal wall on oral examination.

Intranasally, turbinates are relatively small in size. Septum is deviated a little bit off toward the right side up at the mid portion, but it is shifted significantly off to the left side at the base of the nose, although there is still an adequate airway. Luminal valves are a little bit constricted but don’t seem to cause any problem for her.

To palpation, she has moderate pain over the right shoulder and milder pain over the TMJs, masseters, styloid areas, and minimal tenderness over the temporalis and medial pterygoid areas. On opening, maximal incisal opening is 33 mm but only about 23 mm without significant pain or discomfort. Excursive movement to the right is 5 mm and to the left 3 mm. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly. She does say that she does sometimes get some popping in her joints. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Old Radiographs
We have no new radiographs on Jill, and the latest ones are from 06/30/03, approaching a year old. However, Panorex evaluation on these radiographs show that she is missing the mandibular left cuspid, first molar, third molar, right first molar and third molar, and in the maxillary arch missing maxillary first bicuspid, left second molar, and bilateral third molars. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Sinuses appear reasonably clear although a little bit cloudy on the left side compared to the right side toward the anterior part of the sinus. Condyles have undergone significant condylar resorption and are quite small. 

Transorbital views of the left condyle show extremely small condyles bilaterally. 

Left closed tomograms show significant evidence of previous condylar resorption, and condyles are quite small vertically as well as anteroposteriorly. Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is even smaller on this side as compared to the left side in anteroposterior dimension as well as vertical dimension. There is increased joint space in both joints, but this is probably secondary to the chronic wearing of splints. Condyles are both postured forward in the fossa. 

We don’t have an adequate lateral cephalogram as soft tissues are not visible. It does, however, show that she has a severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of probably only about 2 mm at the base of the tongue. Extremely high occlusal plane angle and high mandibular plane angle orientation. Severe Class II skeletal and moderate Class II occlusal relationship.

Tooth-size discrepancy demonstrates a Bolton’s difference of 3.4 mm.

New Radiographs
The Panorex shows essentially the same findings as before. There is severe resorption of the condyles. The sinuses looks clear, and turbinates appear about moderate in size.

Right TMJ tomograms show that the condyles are severely resorbed and quite small anteroposteriorly as well as vertically. Sigmoid notch is fairly close to the articular eminence. Articular eminence is moderately steep on these views with a little bit of tendency toward sallowness. Significantly decreased vertical and posterior joint space is present. Could be some anterior beaking present on the condylar head.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that likewise is very small anteroposteriorly and with significant evidence of loss of vertical component. Articular eminence tends a little bit toward a shallow side except is fairly long in length. There is a close proximity between the sigmoid notch and the articular eminence. Condyle appears to have a pseudocyst within the head of the condyle. Joint space is extremely narrow vertically and posteriorly.

On opening, there is some restriction of translation of both joints with the condyles coming down toward but not beneath the articular eminence. Severe degenerative changes are seen in the condyles on this view. 

Waters view shows the sinuses are fairly clear. She has huge frontal sinuses. The turbinates are moderate in size, but there does appear to be adequate airway. There is some deviation of the nasal septum present. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows severe retrusion of the mandible and moderate retrusion of the maxilla. She has a full Class II malocclusion and has a high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway is decreased but not as severe as on the previous x-rays, and this could be due just to tongue posture and Jill trying to keep her mandible in a retruded position. Jill has a fairly prominent gonial notch bilaterally. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe condylar resorption and articular disc dislocations with nonsalvageable discs. Condylar resorption probably due to idiopathic condylar resorption with an onset at about the age of 12
Severe AP mandibular deficiency
Anterior AP maxillary deficiency
Severe posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Class II occlusion
Extremely high occlusal plane angle of 34 degrees (normal 8 degrees)
Missing mandibular left cuspid, first molar, mandibular right first molar, maxillary left second molar, bilateral first bicuspids, and all four third molars
Mandibular asymmetry with the mandibular dental midline being shifted 3 mm to the left of the midline of the chin and facial midline
Significant crowding, lower anterior arch
Residual spacing in the lower arch between the second bicuspids and second molars
AP microgenia
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3.4 mm
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Severe decrease of oropharyngeal airway of approximately 2 mm (normal 11 mm)
Severe snoring
Observed severe apneic episodes 
Daytime somnolence
Chest pains
Significant diaphoresis at night
Rather severe head postured forward neck position most likely to aid in breathing
Masticatory dysfunction
Multiple allergies to medications, food allergies, and difficulties wearing jewelry
Occasional tinnitus and vertigo

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up 1 mm of space around each maxillary lateral incisor. Open up 1 mm of space around each maxillary lateral incisor. Be sure to keep maxillary lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to provide space for interdental osteotomies if they become necessary at the time of surgery
Align and level mandibular arch nonextraction. Shift mandibular dental midline to the right 3 mm to get it on line with the maxillary dental midline and chin. This can be accomplished by retracting the bicuspids and cuspids on the right side. Anchorage will be lost in the second molar mostly likely, and the majority of the space on that side may end up being closed. Try to intrude the incisors or extrude the cuspids and bicuspids slightly to level the lower arch. Upright the roots on the left first and second bicuspid with the first bicuspid functioning as the missing cuspid. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 1.5 mm of tooth structure to help compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy. Be careful not to retract lower incisors as they are currently in a good angulation to meet the presurgical orthodontic goals and will be in a more ideal angulation once the occlusal plane angle is changed

Testing at the Environmental Center at Dallas for hypersensitivities to the materials that would be used in the total joint prostheses

Place samples of chromium cobalt alloy and titanium allow subcutaneously to see if there is a reaction to the alloys as will be used in the prostheses

Sleep study

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it posteriorly
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen) 
HTR implant to anterior mandible

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Dental reconstruction which may include two implants on the mandibular left side and perhaps one in the maxillary left side

Other Systems

Jill has problems with the bones in her neck, back, shoulders, hips, and left knee. As a teenager, she had a lot of problems with urinary tract infections and occasionally as an adult. She does have some polyuria. She was born with a double uterus, double vagina, and double cervix. Probably had fertility problems but had no miscarriages. She has one child, Heather, who is 21 years old. She had a total hysterectomy in 1984 and this is because of endometriosis. She also has had ovarian cysts. She was diagnosed with pelvic inflammatory disease in the 20’s. She has had no abnormal Pap smears. She had some problems with vaginal yeast infections particularly in her 20’s. She has some seasonal allergy problems. She gets occasional tinnitus and vertigo. She has been told she has asthma but she feels that maybe it is more of a problem with her airway than a true asthma problem. She gets hoarseness frequently particularly if she talks long. She gets burning in her lungs and sometimes a squeezing kind of pain in her chest that she relates to her breathing problems. She has had bronchitis at least 15 times, and she has had pneumonia at least 12 times or more. She has problems with nausea and vomiting particularly when she develops her severe pain problems. She does get abdominal pain and cramping and states that she has a partial bowel obstruction with adhesions. Not aware of any STDs. She gets tired a lot. She feels like she is running a fever, but she says when she takes her temperature it is usually okay. She has some though process issues and perhaps some memory factors. She apparently has been diagnosed through blood tests with having Lyme’s disease. Jill apparently has been diagnosed with having Chlamydia through electrodermal screening. Through the electrodermal screening they also diagnosed Jill as having Mycoplasma bacteria present.

From ages 6 to 9, she had some parakeets, at least three to four of them. Her grandfather had a dairy farm with chickens and probably had about 30 chickens, and she and her family would visit there once a week. She has had lots of cats all of her life, and some of those ate birds. She has had dogs all of her life, and some of those ate birds as well. She has been around daily cattle all of her life and horses x 2 for the past 15 years. No implants. 