CHARLOTTE RUSSELL								9/16/05

Charlotte is 57 years old, referred by Paul Clifford, DDS, 7520 Montgomery N.E. Bldg. D, Suite 2, Albuquerque, NM, 87109.  Charlotte was involved in a motor cycle accident on June 18, 2005.  It appears she was driving her new Harley, put the front brakes on and slid into the gravel and crashed.  She hit her chin on the gravel.  It took quite some time before it was identified that she had some jaw fractures.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Lower jaw is more retruded than it previously was.
Teeth do not fit together very well.  

Charlotte does have full upper and lower dentures.  She is much aware of clenching and bruxism at night as well as during the day.  She has some problems with earaches, tinnitus and vertigo but no hearing loss.  The other joints that bother her include her neck.  Charlotte's pain is worse in the mornings when she wakes up and she registers her headaches at a level of 9 throughout the head and neck area.  It decreased to about a level of 4 to 5 during the day after she takes ibuprofen.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5 constantly but it escalates to 10 with jaw function.  Average daily pain is 6, jaw function 5, diet at 6 and disability at 4.  

In frontal view, Charlotte has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Profile view shows she appears to have some AP mandibular deficiency.  Chin-neckline is short.  Charlotte is completely edentulous.  She has a Class II occlusal relationship with an overjet of about 1 mm.  Her dentures were a Class I relationship prior to her inner injury.  Intraorally, the oropharynx looks clear.  Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are all normal.  Her snoring has increased significantly since her accident.  Turbinates are moderately large.  The septum is relatively normal.  There is probably not any real significant nasal airway obstruction but there could be some mild possibly.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly although Charlotte states that she does get a pop in the right joint occasionally.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the styloid areas, masseter with the right side being high-moderate and moderate discomfort over the TMJs and mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles.  Incisal opening is 40 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is 4 mm, left 3 mm, but it was painful for her on the left side. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows an old subcondylar fracture on the right side without significant displacement of the condyle.  On the left side, there is a subcondylar fracture and the condyle is displaced anterior with loss of vertical height on that side.  The sinuses look clear.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  
CHARLOTTE RUSSELL			9/16/05				Page 2


Right TMJ tomogram shows evidence of previous subcondylar fracture.  The condyle appears retruded in the fossa and there appears to be decreased vertical and posterior joint space.  The styloid process is evident and extends down towards the posterior border of the mandible.  Right TMJ tomogram shows significant shortening vertically of the ramus because of the anteriorly displaced subcondylar fracture.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The styloid process extends forward and seems to overlap the posterior border of the mandible.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the patient has a skeletal Class II relationship.  There is decreased oropharyngeal airway of about 5 mm at the soft palate level and about 7 mm at the base of the tongue.  The mandible does appear retruded.  We may be able to improve the airway by advancing the mandible in a counterclockwise direction and increase the vertical height of the ramus.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral mandibular subcondylar fractures with the left side being more greatly displaced than the right side.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Snoring.
Masticatory dysfunction. 
Earaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. 
Tinnitus.
Vertigo.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s. dispensing 30 tablets, refill x3 to help minimize nocturnal clenching and bruxism.
CT scan of TMJs and jaws to aid in construction of 3 dimensional models necessary for manufacturing the prostheses. 
Surgery.
Bilateral condylectomies, advancement in the mandible in a counterclockwise direction and reconstruction of the joints with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Remake dentures. 