AMANDA RUGGERS								10/3/2005

Amanda is 42 years old, referred by Lawrence Ashman, DDS, Farmington Hills, Michigan, 248-865-7398.  Amanda's problems began on October 3, 1987, when she was involved in a motor vehicle accident.  She had a fractured vertebrae in her neck and significant mid facial fractures and a blowout fracture of the right eye.  She has had multiple facial procedures performed including those performed by Dr. Ian Jackson and Dr. Anthony Wolfe.  Dr. Gladstone did about 30 or 40 procedures on Amanda's eyes.  These were all done before 1997.  In 1998, she developed clicking in the left TMJ.  She had an arthrocentesis done and a splint made.  This procedure was done in 1999.  This improved her situation and the clicking and pain essentially went away.  September 17, 2004, she underwent facial restorative procedures in Florida and her TMJ problems began again.  Around March 22, 2005, she had a left TMJ arthrocentesis performed but has had no improvement from that procedure.  She currently takes the following medications:

Vicodin ES 1 tablet 3 times a day.
Valium 10 mg q.h.s.
Flexeril 10 mg b.i.d.
Restoril 30 mg 1 tablet q.h.s. 
Fioricet for headaches p.r.n.
Triazadone 100 mg 2 tablets at bedtime.
Percocet 5 to 10 mg tablets 1 to 3 per day but she alternates this with the Vicodin.  One month she will be on Percocet and another month she will be on Vicodin.
Xanax that she alternates with the Valium.  When she alternates the Xanax and the Valium she takes it usually at night if she is not going out.  She does have a serious sleep disorder for which these medications help.

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or hearing loss.  She gets occasional vertigo.  The other joints that bother her include her lower back at L1 and she has a left total joint hip prosthesis.  She has no known allergies and no problems with jewelry.  She does have vision problems thus the numerous eyes operations have been done.  The most recent operation was by Dr. Tse.  She had the last operation on her eye on September 12, 2005.  She is not aware if she does any clenching or bruxism.  She gets headaches about 5 days per week and they average about a level of 8 in the frontal, temple and posterior head area but they can escalate to 10.  TMJ pain greater on the left side than the right side about a level of 6.  She rates her average daily pain around the head and neck area at 8.  She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 5.  She has had at least 3 splints to help control her bite.  

In frontal view, Amanda has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to lip relationship is about 1 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned at the facial midline.  In profile, she has fairly good facial balance.  Some slight AP microgenia but not too significant.  Intraorally, Amanda has all of her teeth in the lower arch back through the second molars.  The teeth are reasonably well aligned and leveled.  She has some abrasions on the lower anterior teeth particularly the central incisors.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars except she is missing a second bicuspid on the left side that has been replaced by a bridge.  
AMANDA RUGGERS			10/3/05				Page 2


She has a Class I cuspid molar relationship and has about a 1 to 2 mm of vertical overbite.  Amanda feels such frustration with her current jaw problems that she frequently will clench her teeth and grinds her teeth in exasperation to try and make it go away although it frequently will make the situation worse for her.  She has total paralysis of the 7th facial nerve and almost total paralysis of the zygomatic branch of the right facial nerve.  To palpation, she has low severe pain over the left TMJ, high moderate pain over the left masseter, left TMJ, moderate pain over the left styloid area, posterior neck bilaterally and mild pain over the left shoulder, right temporalis area.  Maximal incisal opening voluntarily was 20 mm and only about 13 mm without significant pain.  Excursive movement to the right was 6 mm and to the left 5 mm but in both excursive movements she had significant pain in the left TMJ with actually there being a greater pain level as she went in excursive movement to the left as compared as going to the right.  

OTHER BODY SYSTEMS:  She has back problems at L1 and she has a left hip total joint prostheses.  She has had a few urinary tract bladder infections during the past three years but prior to that she did not really recall having any such problems.  She gets occasional burning when she urinates and she has developed more difficulty urinating now as compared to the past.  She usually has to get up once per night to urinate.  Her periods are irregular and always has been and she has excessive pain.  She has had 2 miscarriages.  She has no children.  She does have significance for two other problems in that she has had sexual relations since her teenage years and has not used any protection.  She does have endometriosis and has had, I believe, surgical exploration for that.  She had an ovarian cyst when she was younger.  She has had a few vaginal yeast infections.  She has burning and dryness of her eyes particularly in the right eye and does have conjunctivitis in the right eye.  She has chronic sinus problems.  She smokes 1 pack of cigarettes per day and has smoked since she was 14 years old.  She did quit once for about 3 years but she is back at it.  She gets frequent colds and viruses and has a cough.  She gets recurrent sore throats at times.  She has chronic bronchitis and she said she had walking pneumonia almost every year from when she was an infant until she was about 11 years old.  She gets nausea when she relates to pain medications and also she said she does get irritable bowel syndrome again related to medications she believes.  She gets occasional diarrhea.  She does have genital herpes but says she is not aware of having Chlamydia.  She does have some chronic fatigue.  She has had contact with a bird weekly for about the last 7 or 8 years.  She takes care of elderly couple and goes in once a week to take care of their house.  They do have a bird and she has to work around the cage but does not clean the cage.  She had cats as a child x2 but her grandmother and mother have had cats most of their lives and she spent a lot time with her grandmother and with her mother.  She had dogs as a child but not since then.  No hoofed animal exposure.  Relative to implants, she has right hip prosthesis and stainless steel wires and bone screws in the face.

She says she has planned to see a dermatologist because she thinks she has melanoma.  She also has recent plans in the future to see her gynecologist for treatment and she feels she is going to need a D&C.  


AMANDA RUGGERS			10/3/05				Page 3


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows that she has crowns on all the posterior teeth.  She has a periapical lesion around the left first molar.  

Left TMJ tomogram which had been taken with a splint as there is space between the posterior teeth show the joint space is fairly well balanced.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is flattening on the anterior head of the condyle present.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking present.  The styloid process is elongated fairly significantly.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.  The joint space looks fairly well balanced.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  The styloid process appears elongated.  On the open views, the styloid process on the left side extends quite away and overlaps the posterior border of the mandible.  The right side does not look nearly as long though it does have some length to it.  

Lateral cephalometric radiographic shows that she has a skeletal Class I occlusion but with some AP microgenia.  She has a bone graft in her nose and the gold weight in her right eyelid.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc medially dislocated. 
Left TMJ pain.
Left-sided myofascial pain.
Headaches.
Calcified stylohyoid ligament.
Eagles syndrome.
Sleep disorder.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Additional medications.
Z-Pak dispensing 4, take 1 Pak as directed, wait 2 days and begin the next Pak.
Celebrex 200 mg tablets dispensing 20, 1 tablet q.d.
Surgery.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Left mandibular ramus osteotomy with bone screw stabilization. 
Styloidectomy.
Application of arch bars.
2.  Removal of arch bars 2 to 4 weeks postsurgery. 