SONNY ROUEL									12/14/2005

Sonny is 30 years old, referred by Dr. William Hang.  Sonny gets occasional earaches and occasional tinnitus.  Often he has vertigo and he has hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  No known allergies.  He is aware that he clenches and perhaps grinds his teeth at night and he may also do this in the daytime.  He frequently wakes up with headaches as well.  He gets daily headaches in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area at about a level of 7.  They can easily escalate to 10.  He has constant pain in the jaw area at a level of 3.  He rates his TMJ pain at 5, overall daily pain at 5, jaw function at 5, diet at 5, and disability at 8.  Sonny is not aware of having any difficulty breathing through his nose, no snoring problems and no sleep apnea problems, but he does have difficulty falling asleep.  Sonny, sometimes however, does wake with a dry mouth.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Occludes only on his front teeth.
Bite seems to be continuing to get worse. 
Headaches.
Shoulder, neck and jaw pain.
Pain gets severe where he cannot work.
Dizziness and lightheadedness.
Occasional earaches and tinnitus. 
TMJ pain.
Lower jaw has shifted forward compared to where it used to be. 

In the frontal view, Sonny has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  The nasal is off to the right side probably by about 4-5 mm.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is 1.  Maxillary midline appears to be pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 to 2 mm off to the right.  The chin is probably about 3 to 4 mm off to the right.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly aligned with each other.  In profile view he has fairly good facial symmetry and balance.  Maxilla may be just slightly AP deficient but not too significant.  Chin-neckline is relatively normal length but the chin neck angle is not real well defined.  Maxilla and mandible could be about 3 to 4 mm AP deficient.  Sonny did have orthodontics done when he was in the 6th grade.  Intraorally, Sonny has all of his lower teeth back through his third molars present.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars and back through second molar on the right side and back through a pegged third molar on the left side.  Best centric relation and mandibular dental midline is off to the right side about 1 mm.  He has a slight Class II occlusion on the right side by a couple of mm.  On the left side, he is a Class III by probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Teeth do not appear to intermesh very well.  When Sonny bites down, only the front teeth and none of the back teeth appear to occlude at all.  The oropharynx appears clear.  The uvula and normal and the soft palate appears a little bit short in length.  Faucial pillars have very good width.  The nasal septum is deviated with the inferior aspect deviated off to the left side in the superior caudal aspect shifted to the right.  He has an anterior overbite of about 1.5 mm.  When he does occlude, he cannot perceive any of his posterior teeth touching on his incisors.  To palpation, he has moderate discomfort over the TMJs and moderate tenderness over the masseters and styloid areas.  
SONNY ROUEL				12/14/2005				Page 2


Sonny says that almost every morning when he wakes up, he gets loud pops in his jaw joints and it does not recur unless he does not use his jaw very much for awhile and then they can pop again but almost every morning, he does get that popping appearance.  The popping is quite loud when it does occur.  Currently today, just on opening and closing, he appears to have some glitches and made a little crepitus noise here and there within the joints with the right side being a little bit worse than the left side.  

Sonny has had some extensive previous treatment for his problem.  He had orthodontics in the 6th grade and had a really good bite following completion of his orthodontics.  Once his jaw problem began, he wore splints and wore them almost continuously for two years.  He took about a year off and then started again.  Still there was no improvement.  He has had physical therapy including hot and cold massages, ultrasonic treatment, massages, etc.  He also has had some extensive chiropractic treatment as well and none of these treatments have helped him. 

MEDICATIONS
Zetia for cholesterol.
Vicodin 5 two to three tablets at a time and generally without relief.
Darvocet generally without relief.
Excedrin generally without significant relief. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the absence of maxillary right third molars but all other third molars are erupted in.  The left maxillary third molar is small in size.  Difficult to evaluate sinus nasal airway.  The condyles appear relatively normal.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are all clear.  The turbinates are moderate in size.  He does have a deviated nasal septum in the bony aspect that is even worse than the cartilaginous aspect.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows there appears to be increased vertical joint space within the joint.  Articular eminence is moderately steep but not too bad at all.  The condyle appears to be posteriorly in the fossa at least in one view.  The superior joint space does seem to be excessively large compared to normal.  The condyle appears to have fairly good shape and morphology.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking tendency.  Articular eminence appears relatively shallow.  The joint space appears fairly well balanced posteriorly but they anteriorly appears a little but narrow between the condyle and the articular eminence.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he does have some vertical asymmetry but basically there appears to be Class I cuspid occlusion.  Oropharyngeal airway appears relatively.
SONNY ROUEL				12/14/2005				Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ articular disc displacements and significant inflammation. 
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Malaligned bilateral mandibular third molars and maxillary left third molar. 
Occludes only on the incisors. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Medications. 
a.  Klonopin 1 mg q.h.s. plus 1/2 tablet b.i.d. if necessary for daytime muscle spasm.
b.  Celebrex 200 mg tablets 1 tablet q.d.
      2.   Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.  Align and level maxillary arch.
            b.  Align and level mandibular arch. 
      3.   Surgery.
a.  Bilateral TMJ debridement and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with 	     Mitek anchors.
b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly and 
achieve a Class I occlusion.
       4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
 
