B119
B119 is 31 years old. Her jaw problems began when she was about 28. The etiology is unknown. She began taking Wellbutrin 300 mg q.d. four years ago. Other medications she takes include:

Spironolactone 50 mg q.d.
Ibuprofen.
Levocet for headaches but she does not like to take it very often.
B119 gets headaches about 3 to 5 days per week at a level of 5 in the temporal and posterior head area bilaterally. Her headaches can escalate to a 10 and this occurs about every 3 or 4 months when she develops a severe migraine headache. She gets some earaches, occasional tinnitus, and occasional vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her hips, knees, and 3 fingers on the right hand. She has been told that she has a possible autoimmune disorder and has an elevated ANA. She has chronic fatigue and generalized achiness. SHE IS ALLERGIC TO PENICILLIN.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B119 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. The maxillary midline and chin are pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is shifted maybe 1 to 2 mm to the left side. In profile, she has reasonably good facial balance with maybe just a slight minimal deficiency of 3-4 mm in the maxilla and mandible. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has quite a shift in the lower arch on that side with the first bicuspid being blocked out lateral and the cuspid being tipped a little bit lingually on that side. Also, she has an accentuated curve of Spee on the left side with the cuspid being about 2-3 mm higher than the right side. The entire dental alveolus appears to be a little bit higher on the left side as compared to the right side. The mandibular left cuspid is probably almost 2 mm higher than the right cuspid. She is basically a Class I cuspid on the right side and maybe just slightly Class II on the left side by maybe 2 mm. She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy with a normal uvula, soft palate, fascial pillars, but the tonsils are moderately enlarged bilaterally. Intranasally, the structures look reasonably normal. In 2004, she did get a car door slammed into her nose and may have cracked or broken her nose and she has a little bit of a bump on top of it. To palpation, B119 has some very minimal tenderness over the medial pterygoid muscles and retromandibular area. On opening, she has popping in both joints with an opening click at 10 mm in the left joint and closing click at 5, while on the right side, the opening click is probably at 15 mm and closing click at 10 mm. Occasionally, the right side make a loud audible popping noise. The maximal incisal opening is about 50 mm and excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction. On excursion movements, she has popping in both joints. Basic diagnoses would be:

Bilateral temporomandibular joint arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
Mandibular hyperplasia.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Elevation of the mandibular left central incisor through cuspid with lingual tipping of the cuspid and buccal tipping of the first bicuspid.
Chronic trauma to her left check and lip area because of malocclusion.

Recommended Treatment includes:
1.	Bilateral TMJ disc repositioning with Mitek anchor
2. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies
B119 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology and good mediolateral width. The joint space looks reasonably good. There may be discal tissue present. It is possible there could be some anterior displacement of the articular discs. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with only about a minimal downward curvature of 1-2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is smaller in size than the opposite side. There appears to be some degenerated change associated with this joint. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm There is an indentation in the left lateral pole of the condyle. The discal tissue appears to be anteriorly and medially displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology, but with a little bit of sclerosis on the head and some flattening on the anterior head. Out laterally, the disc is anteriorly displaced, but more medially the disc appears to be in better position, although the disc appears degenerated at the medial side of the joint. The condyle appears to be somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa. There is fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there appears to be early reduction and fairly good translation of the condyle and the articular disc.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology, but with some flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. The articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced with a little fluid in the superior joint space. There is greater displacement at the lateral aspect of the joint than medial. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. There appears to be early reduction and good translation of the condyle and articular disc.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced (more so at the lateral aspect of the joint) with reduction on opening.

