HEATHER ROUSH									01/16/2006
Date of Birth:  11/26/1982

Heather is 23 years old and is referred by her mother.  Heather does have endometriosis and actually had laparoscopic surgery last month for it.  She also has had previous surgery for removal of her appendix.  Otherwise, she is in fairly good health except for some joint problems.  She does have some allergies.  She takes Darvocet primarily for her endometriosis pain.  She is allergic to citanest/epi and also to nickel.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Bite is off and she occludes only on two teeth. 
Headaches.
Jaws popping. 
Difficulties eating and chewing.  
Severe snoring.
Severe daytime tiredness.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Probable sleep apnea syndrome. 

She does get earaches on the left side and gets occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo and possibly could have some hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her neck, back shoulders, right wrist, hips occasionally and her knees.  She does not believe that she clenches or grinds her teeth at night.  She does believe she breathes through her mouth particularly when sleeping.  

Heather believes that her TMJ problems began when she was about 13 years old.  She actually began orthodontic treatment at the age of 5 when she had a tongue crib placed.  She had further orthodontics at the age of 8 and then eventually had full appliances and completed her orthodontic treatment by the age of 13 and was placed in retainers.  Her bite did keep shifting and she did have some problems but her orthodontist at the time told her she just needed to live with it.  About 2 years ago she began orthodontic treatment with Dr. Monte Collins.  Prior to that she had been under splint therapy with a number of different doctors and has had at least 10 different splints.  One doctor actually postured the mandible way forward into a super Class III position and she felt better with the mandible held forward although it did considerably alter her bite relationship.

She gets daily headaches at about a level of 5 in the temporal and posterior head area.  They can escalate to 7.  She gets TMJ pain at about a level of 6 and average daily pain at about a level 5.  She rates her jaw function at 7, diet at 5, disability at 5. 

In frontal view, Heather has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is at least 4 mm.  Maximally midline shifts off to the left side about 1 to 2 mm and to the right side about 2 mm.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are actually fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Heather has a head postured forward neck position.  Upper lip supralabrale is probably almost 5 mm posterior to the subnasale.  She has some prominence in the nasal dorsum.  The upper lip is retruded about 6 to 8 mm at least.  
HEATHER ROUSH				1/16/2006				Page 2

Chin is retruded about 20 to 25 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has thin but appears to be adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the first molars and is missing the second and third molars.  She has an end-on incisor relationship and appears to hit only on the left maxillary central lower lateral incisor.  All the other teeth apparently are out of occlusion.  Alignment-wise she has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the left side by probably ________ and on the right side by probably 1 to 2 mm.  Transversely, there is a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the right cuspid being about 1.5 mm lower then the left cuspid.  In the lower arch, the left cuspid appears to be about 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  In the upper arch, the left cuspid is probably at least 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  Oropharynx tissues appear relatively normal and healthy.  The uvula is relatively normal length.  The soft palate appears elongated and fairly close to being against the posterior pharyngeal wall area.  Faucial pillars are mild to moderately constricted.  Intranasally, she has a slight deviation in the nasal septum off towards the left side at the base with a septal spurring factor present.  Turbinates are relatively normal in size and does appear to be adequate airway. The luminal valves may be slightly constricted.  Heather does have fairly severe snoring.  She also has fairly significant daytime somnolence.  She is not sure if she has sleep apnea and she is not aware if she wakes up unable to catch her breath.  To palpation, Heather has some mild to moderate discomfort over the right temporalis, right masseter, medial pterygoids, right TMJ, right styloid area, mild tenderness over the left temporalis and the left masseter area.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly except she would occasionally have a pop on the right joint, noticed on excursive movement but it was very inconsistent and occurred only once during the examination.  Incisal opening was 43 mm and excursive movements were about 10 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary second and third molars and mandibular third molars.  Roots on the maxillary teeth appear a little bit foreshortened.  Roots on the lateral incisors may be a little foreshortened.  Roots on the lower incisors may be a little bit foreshortened but not too significant.  Sinuses look relatively healthy and clear.  Condyles appear arthritic and short in vertical height.  She has some prominence in the gonial notch area. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The bony septum appears relatively straightened and the turbinates appear relatively small with the right one being a little bit larger than the left one but it appears that there is a passable airway.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears short in vertical height but has fairly good anteroposterior dimension.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is decreased superior and posterior joint space present. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit more arthritic than the opposite side with and flattening on the anterior head.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  There is decreased superior and posterior joint space.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles with the right one showing a little bit greater translation than the left one.
HEATHER ROUSE				01/16/2006				Page 3


Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Heather has AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency and posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  She has a significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with a distance from the soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall being about 3 mm and the base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall being less than 4 mm.  He has a high occlusal plane present.  It appears that only the incisors touch and the rest of the teeth appear to be out of occlusion.  Heather likely has a tooth size discrepancy because the upper laterals appear smaller than the lower laterals.  Her models were sent off to the insurance company so they are not available for analysis.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption and articular disc dislocation without reduction and significant deformation of the discs.
Severe AP maxillary deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
Severe AP mandibular deficiency. 
High occlusal plane angle. 
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. 
Missing maxillary second molars and all 4 third molars.
Occludes only on the left maxillary central incisor, mandibular lateral incisor. 
Bilateral posterior open bites.
Class III end-on occlusion being worse on the left side compared to the right side. 
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Earaches.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies particularly on the left side. Open 1 mm of space between each lateral incisor and cuspid to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure and retract to close the spacing.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis advancing the mandible approximately 20 mm.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and down graft the posterior aspect.  
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
External rhinoplasty.
Chin augmentation.
3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 