JULIA RUDES										06-09-04

Julie is 13 years old and referred by Dr. George Adams, 2845 Parkwood Blvd., Ste. 100, Plano, TX  75093.

Patient History

Julie has had a previous tonsillectomy. She has some problems with allergies. She takes allergy antigen. She has had an adverse reaction to PENICILLIN. Otherwise Julie is in good health with no major medical problems.

Julie had  headgear in about the fourth grade that she wore for about six to eight months for about 14 hours per day. She also has had a palatal expander x 2 at about the same time. She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, and no clenching or bruxism. No headaches, no TMJ pain, no pain around the head and neck area. Jaw function at 6, diet at 3, and disability at 2.

Patient Concerns

Teeth and jaws don’t fit together
Difficulties eating and chewing
Choking response that occasionally occurs where she will get something caught in her throat when eating and then cough up and bring up an excessive amount of mucous material that she cannot swallow but has to spit out
Noises in the jaw joints

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Julie has fairly good left-to-light facial symmetry. Nasal dorsum and tip are a little bit broad. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip is about -2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 1 mm to the left as is chin which is probably a millimeter or 2 to the left. 

In profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm. Chin actually looks in fairly good AP position. Chin-neckline looks relatively normal in length, and chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Has an accentuated curve of Wilson involving the molars and second bicuspids. The lower front teeth appear in quite vertical position. Has really thin attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. 

In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids. Has a V-shaped architecture to the upper arch. She has a super Class III cuspid relationship being probably about 9 mm Class III on the left side and maybe 10 mm on the right side. She has an anterior open bite of at least 4 to 5 mm. She has anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites. In centric relation, she occludes only on the right first and second molars and on the left maxillary first and second molar, lower second molar. All other teeth are out of occlusion. On the right side, the first molars just barely touch. Oropharynx looks clear. Uvula is a little bit hyperplastic but not too significantly.

Her turbinates are moderate size, and perhaps at night when she is sleeping they could provide a little bit of blocking of her nasal airway. She apparently does a lot of mouth breathing particularly when she is sleeping. No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. TMJs seem to function smoothly. Slight cant to the occlusion with the right maxilla being a millimeter higher than the left side and the right mandible being maybe 2 mm higher than the left side.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates are moderate in size particularly on the right side and might be excessive large. There are four impacted third molars. Missing maxillary first bicuspids. Cannot visualize the condylar heads very well. Condylar heads and necks appear slightly elongated but not too significantly.

Waters view shows that the nasal septum appears distorted shifting off toward the right side up superiorly and back in the vomer area then maybe coming a little bit off toward the left side. Right turbinate appears enlarged, and the left one is difficult to identify. Left maxillary sinus appears cloudy compared to the right side. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some significant anterior beaking on it that has a hockey stick shape curve to it. Appears to be decreased posterior and superior joint space. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. May be an increased anterior joint space.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit better shape and morphology. A little anterior beaking present. Posterior and vertical as well as anterior joint spaces appear a little bit more well-balanced. Articular eminence is just slightly steeper and longer on this side as compared to the opposite side.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Cephalometrically, Julie has a skeletal Class III jaw relationship and occlusion. She has a high occlusal plane angle in the lower arch. Oropharyngeal airway looks fairly good, except at the base of the tongue there appears there may be some adenoid tissue. The airway is only about 3.5 mm. 

Tooth-size analysis reveals a difference of only 1 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

Rule out bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia and articular disc dislocations
AP maxillary deficiency
Slight vertical maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary deficiency
Mandibular prognathism
Apertognathia
Super Class III occlusion 
V-shaped architecture of the upper arch
Missing maxillary first bicuspids bilaterally
Occludes only on the left maxillary first and second molars and mandibular second molar and the right first and second molars
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars
Hypertrophied turbinates
Lingual adenoid tissue.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of approximately 3 mm (normal 11 mm)
High occlusal plane angle in the mandible of 20 degrees (normal 8 degrees)
Significant difficulties eating and chewing
Slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 to 2 mm higher than the left side
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of about 1 mm
Significantly increased curve of Wilson affecting the mandibular bicuspids and molars

Recommended Treatment

Continue to monitor and evaluate facial growth to determine if condylar hyperplasia is present or not

MRI of left and right TMJs to be done in the summer of 2005

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. . Open about a millimeter of space around each upper lateral incisor to help compensate for the mild tooth-size discrepancy. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies 
Align and level mandibular arch

Do final assessment of growth and development 

Surgery (The most ideal time would be the summer of 2006)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, expand it, and correct the slight vertical maxillary deficiency
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a counterclockwise direction and move it posteriorly
Consider possible bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repairs if condylar hyperplasia verified and/or discs are dislocated
Surgical removal of four bony impacted third molars
Possible turbinectomies if nasal airway obstruction is verified
Removal of lingual tonsils if they did not recede on their own

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
