JENNIFER ROVEZZI								07/14/2008 

Jennifer is 19 years and referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich.  Primary concerns that Jennifer has are:

Her teeth are not aligned properly.
Her jaws are not aligned properly. 

She has a bipolar disorder and she takes Lamictal 200 mg q.d. and Seroquel 400 mg q.h.s.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Jennifer has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  She has some slight increased fullness in the masseter area on the left side compared to the right side.  Upper lip length is 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is -3 mm.  The maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline may be just slightly off to the right side.  Chin appears to be off to the right side probably about 2 to 3 mm.  The left side of the face appears to be 2 to 3 mm longer than the right side.  In profile view, she has just some slight AP deficiency in the maxilla maybe 2 to 3 mm.  Chin appears in pretty good AP projection.  The lower lip appears a little bit retruded relative to the projection of the chin.  Intraorally, Jennifer has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  Teeth are fairly well aligned with no particular crowding present.  She has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Upper lateral incisors are tipped in lingually as are the left bicuspids.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship in the right side by probably 4 mm and the same on the left side.  She has about a zero vertical overbite.  A slight accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch is present.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal except the tonsils are moderately enlarged and she has some tonsillar/adenoid kind of tissue on the left side of the posterior aspect of the soft palate.  Fascial pillars appear to be somewhat posteriorly positioned.  Intranasally, the right turbinate is enlarged.  The left turbinate I can only see the very anterior aspect of it and it appears moderate in size at that level, but the septum is deviated significantly off towards the left side decreasing the functional airway.  Jennifer has bilateral masseteric hyperplasia.  There is a cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 1 to 1.5 mm higher than the left side.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  The right joint seems to function reasonably smoothly.  She has a little glitch occasionally on opening in the right joint at probably about 40 to 45 mm.  Maximal incisal opening is 62 mm.  Excursion movements are about 6 mm in each direction.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all third molars, but the rest of the teeth are all present.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The condyles look somewhat enlarged.  
Waters view shows that there is deviation of the septum off towards the left side.  The right turbinate is somewhat enlarged.  The left turbinate does not appear as large, but there appears to be significant decreased oral airway bilaterally.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The left sinus looks slightly larger than the right sinus.  There is slight vertical asymmetry with the left side being a little bit lower than right side.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have reasonably good morphology.  Articular eminence is moderate in steepness.  Joint space looks relatively balanced.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit more flattened on the posterior aspect of the head.  Articular eminence has moderate inclination.  There appears to be good joint space.  There is a little bit more of a hockey stick shape to this condyle.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Jennifer has a skeletal Class II relationship with an extremely low occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 7 mm and at the base of the tongue about 10 mm.  There is a skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship.  Tooth size analysis reveals a Bolton's difference of 1 mm.  
Basic diagnoses for Jennifer would be as follows:
Anterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia. 
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
Class II end-on occlusion.
Low occlusal plane angle and mandibular plane angle. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Deviated nasal septum off to the left side. 
Nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior maxilla inferiorly and the posterior maxilla superiorly to increase the occlusal plane angle and expand. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a clockwise direction.
Nasal septoplasty. 
Bilateral partial turbinectomies. 
  3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

