YOLANDA RUNNELS									08-30-04

Yolanda is 41 years old and referred by Dr. Al Bishop.

Patient History

Yolanda’s problems began at the age of 22 when she was hit on the right side of the jaw. She sustained a ruptured eardrum at that time as well as damage to the jaws. Her jaw was not fractured. Her jaw joint began clicking and popping after this incident. It has continued on but really hasn’t caused her too much problem until more recently. She has undergone orthodontic treatment using Invisalign which she finished in October of 2003. This did not improve her jaw problems. 

She has no trouble with earaches or tinnitus and gets some vertigo, but it is relatively infrequent, and she has no hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is aware of clenching and bruxing of her teeth at night, and she also catches herself doing this during the day. She gets headaches in the temporal area at about a level of 7, and these occur about two times per month now. They can get so severe that they cause nausea and vomiting. The Excedrin Migraine and the BC Powder seem to help circumvent these getting as severe as they used to be. She has daily TMJ pain at about a level of 6 and average daily pain overall is at 3. She rates her jaw function at 2, diet at 3, and disability at 2, although when she gets the severe headaches, her disability can rise to a level of 10.

Patient Concerns

Popping of the jaw joints
Headaches 
Pain in the jaw joints
Jaws starting to lock

Current Medications

Zyrtec
Excedrin Migraine
BC Powder 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Yolanda has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Chin might be just a little bit deviated off to the right side about 3 mm.

In profile view, she has good facial balance. A little bit of prominence in the nasal dorsum. Chin-neckline looks good. Chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. 

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. A little bit of crowding, lower anterior arch. Seems to have adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Has a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship with about a 2-mm overbite relationship. Transversely, there is a little bit of a cant in the occlusion of about 1 mm on the left side being slightly longer but not of any significance. Oropharynx looks clear, but Yolanda does have a rather severe gag reflex, and this did limit some of our visualization. 
Intranasally, there is a little deflection of the septum but not too significantly. Turbinates are sort of moderate in size. She does have relatively narrow nostrils, and she thinks that she does breathe through her mouth a fair amount. Yolanda is under quite a bit of stress. Currently she is going through a divorce. She has two boys, ages 11 and 13. She has had previous C-sections x 2, and she has had a hysterectomy, a hemorrhoidectomy, and a tonsillectomy. 

Yolanda has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. She has loud audible clicks and pops in her jaw joints. On the right side, it occurs at about 10 or 15 mm of opening and on the left side at about 15 to 20 mm of opening. On closing, the left side has a reciprocal click at between probably 5 and 10 and the right side is probably 0 to 5. The audibility of the pops in the joints is louder on the left side as compared to the right side. 

On palpating the TMJs, the condyles appear to extend beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Maximal incisal opening is 53 mm about 37 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movements to the right are about 8 mm and to the left about 7 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that she is missing all four third molars. Sinuses look clear. Septum looks reasonably straight. Turbinate in the left side looks quite large. Condyles look fairly reasonable in shape.

Waters view shows that the sinuses all look clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size with the left side appearing a little bit larger than the right side. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone some changes. The top of the condyle has either developed some reactive bone up in there that extends to the condyle superiorly or there has been some minor resorption at the posterior aspect of the head of the condyle that gives sort of an abnormal shape. Posterior joint space is significantly decreased. Anterior joint space may be slightly increased. Articular eminence is moderately steep, and the length of the eminence is relatively within normal limits. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit better morphology than the opposite side. A little bit of flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. Posterior joint space is decreased as is the superior joint space. Increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep and of relatively normal length. 

On opening, there is some restricted translation in the left joint where the condyle comes down just onto the articular eminence, and the right side has some better translation. 

Cephalometric, Yolanda has what appears to be good facial balance vertically and anteroposteriorly. Oropharyngeal airway appears good. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction
Mandibular hyperplasia
TMJ pain
Headaches
Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch. Consider some stripping of the lower anterior teeth to keep from flaring them any further forward

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion and create space for the articular discs within the TMJ joint space

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
