BETHANY ROYALTY								4/25/05

Beth is 31 years old referred by Dr. J. Clifton Alexander, 5500 Preston Road, Suite 360, Dallas, TX, 75205.

She does have neurocardiogenic syncope.  

Current Medications:
Lipitor 20 mg 1 q.d.
Wellbutrin XL 300 mg 1 q.d.
Dynacin 100 mg 1. q.d.
Zebeta 5 mg ½ tablet q.d.

She has no allergies that she is aware of.  The Zebeta is for high blood pressure.  Beth also states that she has anxiety.  Beth has no problems with tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  However, she used to have problems with vertigo and that is what started the investigation that diagnosed the neurocardiogenic syncope.  She does get a pinched nerve in the right side of her neck/shoulder that can radiate down into her arms of unknown etiology.  This happens infrequently at the current time.  She does not really have any problems with headaches, TMJ pain or pain around the head and neck area.  She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 0. 

Patient Concerns:
Lower jaw shifted off towards the right side.
Teeth do not fit together very well.
Teeth are becoming more out of alignment.
Trauma to the cheeks by biting by accident.

Beth believes her problems began around the year 2000.  In 2001, she went to see Dr. Goodson in reference to her lower jaw and her chin shifting off to the right side.  Beth feels that there are changes still going on as her teeth are becoming more malaligned.  

In the frontal view, Beth has very good symmetry in her middle and upper third face.  She has asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is about 16 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2-1/2 mm.  Nasal tip is deviated off to the right side about 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is off to the right side 1 to 2 mm.  Mandibular midline is shifted probably about 4 mm off to the right side.  Chin is probably 6 to 7 mm off to the right side.  

In profile, Beth has a C-shaped curve in the upper lip.  The Maxilla is 3 to 4 mm AP deficient.  Chin appears to be about 10 to 12 mm AP deficient.  Chin-neckline is very short and chin-neck angle is not defined.  There is some slight ptosis to the nasal tip being inferiorly positioned probably 10 mm.  In lower arch, Beth has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Teeth are tipped at the incisor tips towards the left side and roots towards the right side.  Maxillary right cuspid is partially blocked out of the arch.  Beth has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and critical Class I cuspid relationship on the left side.  She has an anterior deep bite of probably 5 mm.  

BETH ROYALTY				4/25/05				Page 2		

Beth has a transverse cant in her occlusal plane with the right side being about 3 mm higher than the left side.  Oropharynx appears relatively clear.  Uvula is of normal length.  Soft palate is mildly elongated.  Fascial pillars are moderately constricted.  Fairly large turbinates appear to cause some decrease in nasal airway dimension.  She states that she probably breathes through her mouth when she is sleeping.  She is not aware of snoring at night.  She sometimes has daytime somnolence.  Not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  

To palpation, Beth has no tenderness in the head and neck area.  

Incisal opening is 49 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 6 mm, to the left 9 mm.  Both joints seem to function relatively smoothly.

Radiographic Evaluation:

Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except she is missing the left maxillary mandibular third molar and mandibular right third molar.  Maxillary right third molar is impacted.  Sinuses are relatively clear.  Left condyle head and neck appears much longer in length than the right side.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged and block a good part of the airway.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite long in length including the head and the neck of the condyle.  Joint space appears a little bit narrowed.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.

Right TMJ tomogram shows condyle has some anterior beaking.  Condylar head and neck is extremely short compared to the opposite side.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  It is slightly steeper than the opposite side.  The joint space appears perhaps a little bit narrowed, but not too dissimilar from the opposite side.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  It is probably a 10 mm difference in length of the left condylar head and neck compared to the right condylar head and neck with the left side being longer.  

Cephalometric radiograph shows that there is a moderately high-occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway looks very good.  Upper lip appears short.  There appears to be AP maxillary mandibular deficiency.  Beth was not biting together all the way when the cephalometric radiograph was taken.  Beth has a slight tooth incisor discrepancy with a Boltons difference of 1 mm.
BETH ROYALTY				4/25/05				Page 3

Basic Diagnoses:
Left mandibular condylar osteochondroma.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Cant in the transverse occlusal plane with the right side being 3 mm higher than the left side. 
Significant crowding of lower anterior arch.
Lower incisor crowns tipped to the left and roots tipped to the right. 
High-occlusal plane angulation. 
Hypertrophy turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Impacted maxillary right third molar.
Maxillary dental midline shifted 2 mm to the right, mandibular midline shifted 4 mm to the right and chin shifted 7 mm to the right. 

Recommended Treatment:
Bone scan of mandibular condyles.

Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Upright the lower incisors by shifting the coronal portion of the tooth to the right and the root tips to the left.  Consider slenderizing the anterior teeth 1 mm to compensate fore the slight tooth size discrepancy.  
Surgery.
Left mandibular low condylectomy and articular disc repositioning ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance mandible in counterclockwise direction and decrease occlusal plane angle.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it and decrease occlusal plan angle, and level transversely.
Reduction turbinectomies. 
Removal of maxillary right impacted third molar.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 