STEPHEN RUSO									09/07/2010

Stephen is 27 years old and is a self-referral.  Stephen is in good health with no major medical problems.  Stephen’s TMJ problems began about 2 years ago when he developed some popping in the left jaw joint of an unknown etiology.  He has had previous orthodontics from the age of 13 to 17 that included extraction of primary mandibular E’s and closure of that space as there were no permanent second bicuspids.  The upper first bicuspids were extracted.  In 2009, he had intrusion of the posterior maxillary teeth because he had an open bite and this helped close the open bit down some.  He takes ribose for energy.  

Primary concerns that Stephen has include:

Poor sleep.
Daytime somnolence.
Fatigue.
Mouth breathing.
Airway constriction.
Poor occlusion.

Stephen rates his headaches at 0, TMJ pain and myofascial pain at 0.  He rates his jaw function at 2, diet and disability at 0.  He has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, nor hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He is aware of bruxing at nighttime.  

In frontal view, Stephen has fairly good left-to-right symmetry.  Upper lip length is 23 mm.  Upper lip tooth relationship is 5 mm.  The maxillary and mandibular midlines are just slightly to the left 0.5 mm as is the chin.  In profile, the maxilla appears to be about 6 mm AP deficient and chin about 18 mm AP deficient.  The chin neckline and chin neck angle are short and non-defined.  Intraorally, Stephen is missing the mandibular second bicuspids, but has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch, he is missing what appears to be the first bicuspids.  He has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship, being about 2 or 3 mm Class II and has about a 2 mm over jet.  He has about a 1 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal, although the uvula is somewhat elongated.  Stephen has been told by staff at UCLA and also by Dr. Jack Gunter that he needs a septoplasty.
Stephen has a wide columella and narrow nostrils.  Intranasally, the septum may be deviated a little  bit off towards the left side, but the left turbinate is enlarged and almost touches against the septum.  Nasal airway obstruction is caused bilaterally by the narrow nostrils, plus on the left side there is a hypertrophied turbinate and deviated septum.  To palpation, he has some mild tenderness in the right retromandibular area, but otherwise is pain free.  Joints function smoothly.  Stephen has a history of mild to moderate snoring.  He has got moderate to severe daytime somnolence.  He is not aware as to any sleep apnea.  He has moderate difficultly sleeping at night.  He is predominantly a mouth breather at nighttime and some during the day as well.  He does have a slight head postured forward neck position.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars as well as the mandibular second bicuspids and maxillary first bicuspids.  

Coronal view radiograph shows that he has some sinusitis in the left maxillary sinus.  The left turbinate is quite large and appears to be impinging upon the nasal septum.  The nasal septum in the bony area is deviated a little bit off towards the left side.  He has a little thickening of the maxillary sinus lining on the right side beneath the infraorbital rim.  

Axial view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side anteriorly in the cartilaginous portion.  The left turbinate is quite large.  The right turbinate appears relatively clear.  There is significant thickening of the sinus lining and membrane in the left maxillary sinus, but the right side appears reasonably clear. 

Left TMJ sagittal radiograph shows a condyle that appears a little bit small.  There appears to be good joint space.  There appears to be a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that may be a little bit small.  There appears to be good joint space.  Articular eminence has a moderate inclination. 

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show that the condyle is a little bit narrow.  There is a slight decreased lateral joint space, but the vertical medial joint space looks relatively normal.  

Right TMJ coronal tomogram show what appears to be good joint space.  The condyle may be a little bit small.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has basically a skeletal Class I, slight Class II occlusal relationship.  The mandible may be postured forward slightly in the radiographs.  Oropharyngeal airway is quite constricted with an airway dimension of only about 1 mm between the soft palate and the posterior pharyngeal wall and about 3.5 to 4 mm at the base of the tongue.  The occlusal plane angle may be slightly increased in angulation.  The vertical height of the mandible anteriorly appears that it may be slightly elongated.  There is some AP microgenia present as well.  
Basic diagnoses for Stephen would be as follows:

Maxillary AP hypoplasia and anterior vertical hyperplasia. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
AP microgenia. 
Hypertrophied left turbinate.  
Wide columella/narrow nostrils.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of less than 2 mm.
Missing mandibular second bicuspids and maxillary first bicuspids and all four third molars.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Sleep study.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.  
            a.       Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up 0.5 to 1 mm of space between the upper   
                       laterals and cuspids to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.  Tip lateral incisor     
                       roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental 	    
                       osteotomies.  
             b.       Align and level the mandibular arch.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward in a 			counterclockwise direction.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and move the anterior 			aspect superiorly. 
	c.	AP augmentation genioplasty.
	d.	Left nasal partial inferior turbinectomy. 
	e.	Reconstruction of the columella.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
5.         Restorative dentistry to build up maxillary lateral incisor crowns to eliminate spacing   
            between the lateral incisors and cuspids.