ALISON RUSSO								11/14/2011

Alison is 37 years old, birth date 06/27/1974.  She was referred by Dr. Matthew Bruner, 17130 Avondale Way NE, Suite 109, Redmond, WA 98052, phone #425-883-3353, fax 425-885-3338.

Alison believes that her TMJ problems began as young as the age of 8 when she developed headaches.  It would hurt for her to sing.  She was in gymnastics and feels that she may have injured her jaw at that time with a whiplash injury coming off the bars.  She began chiropractic treatment for her head and neck area beginning at the age of 14.  She had orthodontic treatment from the age of 14 to 16 that included extraction of probably first bicuspids in all 4 quadrants.  She also had her wisdom teeth removed.  She began splint therapy as far back as 1992 through 1995 when she was in college where she had a night guard.  She started more formal splint therapy in 2003 and has had 3 splints since that time.  With the first splint, it apparently just included the anterior teeth and her molars erupted to a point that without the splint she would occlude only on 3 teeth.  The first splint was made by her dentist.  She then went to see Dr. Edmund Truelove at the University of Washington.  In 2009, she saw Dr. Matthew Bruner who reinitiated the splint therapy.  She wears a splint now only at night.  

She has been under chiropractic treatment since the age of 14 through all of these years and has also tried acupuncture.  She currently is receiving craniosacral therapy every 3 weeks.  In addition, she takes multiple supplements to help reduce inflammation.  There are approximately 15 supplements that she takes to aid her condition.  These are recorded on the back side of the questionnaire.   Besides those 15 supplements, she does currently take progesterone cream that she is weaning off of.  Alison gets headaches about 3 times per month at about a level of 7 in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area.  She rates her daily TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 4, diet at 5, and disability at 3.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor hearing loss but gets occasional vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her fingers, hips (right greater than left), right ankle, and neck.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime, but can control it during the day.  Her rheumatologist has diagnosed her with psoriatic arthritis and in addition she has been diagnosed with premenstrual disorder and low blood pressure.  Although Alison has no overt signs or symptoms of psoriasis, her rheumatologist has given her that diagnosis based on the CT findings of the TMJs and the history of several members of the family having psoriasis.  

Primary concerns that Alison has include the following:

She does not want the cartilage and bone around her jaw joints to degenerate any further and she would like to maintain what she has left.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
In frontal view, Alison has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is close to being on the facial midline as is the chin.  The maxillary midline is just about 1 mm to the left.  In profile view, she has just slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably 2 to 3 mm.  The chin is retruded about 10 mm.  Chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, she is missing probably the lower first bicuspids bilaterally, but she has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has some very minimal crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she is missing probably the first bicuspids as well and has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has palatal tori.  She has a Class I end-on cuspid relationship on the right side by probably 3 mm and on the left side she is probably just about 2 mm Class II.  She has an over jet of about 2 mm.  She has an anterior vertical over bite of 1.5 mm.  She has just a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1 mm higher than the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On jaw function, she has crepitus in both joints with the right side being worse than the left side.  The maximal jaw opening is 42 mm, but 22 mm without pain or discomfort.  The excursion movement to the right is 9 mm and to the left 8 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of a bicuspid from each quadrant likely the first bicuspids.  Third molars are also absence.  Sinuses are clear.  Turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  There is significantly advanced arthritis in both temporomandibular joints.  Articular eminences are somewhat flattened. 

Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight.  Right turbinate is somewhat enlarged.  The sinuses are clear.  

Axial view shows that the septum is straight, a turbinates are moderate in size with the right one being slightly larger than the left one, and the sinuses are clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with advanced arthritis with areas of pitting and erosion.  There is anterior beaking present.  There appears to be degenerative changes on the surface of the condyle as well as on the fossa particularly on the articular eminence.  The joint is significantly narrowed and it appears there could be areas of bone-on-bone contact. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows the arthritic condition is more progressive than the opposite side.  There is anterior beaking present.  There appears to be some free calcified bodies within the joint space.  The articular eminence has some irregularities in it as well as does the condylar head where there are areas of pitting or erosion present.  The joint space is narrowed.

Left TMJ coronal view shows an arthritic condyle with an area of erosion in the mid portion of the condyle.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with significant arthritic changes.  There is an osteophyte sticking up from the lateral aspect of the condyle that appears to have almost bone-on-bone contact with the fossa.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 to 5 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are slightly retruded.  The oropharyngeal airway measures only about 3.5 mm at the soft palate level and also at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnoses for Alison would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ psoriatic arthritis.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion.  
High occlusal plane angle facial morphology.
Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars.
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3.5 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Evaluation at the Environmental Center in Dallas for metal hypersensitivities.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 			removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.
3.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
4.	Surgery.  
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a 					counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion and retain. 