PAMELA RYSTED									10-27-04

Pam is 44 years old and referred by Dr. Farhad Moshiri, Springfield, MO.

Patient History

Pam has a history of PVCs and SVT. Her cardiologist is Dr. Vanosdol. She takes powder magnesium 2 times per day, and this controls her arrhythmias. She has had previous surgeries that include the following:  1979 C-section; 1984 tubal ligation; 1990 partial hysterectomy; 1990 breast implants; 1996 knee surgery; and 2001 right ovary removed and left ovary was detached from the colon. Pam is in good health otherwise. She does have some allergies and some sinus stuff. 

Pam is not really sure when her problems began. She remembers when she was about 7 or 8 years of age that she dove into a creek and hit her head on the bottom of the creek extremely hard to the point that she lost her voice for about an hour and jarred herself quite significantly. She feels that her problems when she became aware of them probably began around the age of 29 years old. About seven years ago, she had a bad fall and hit her head on cement, and this exacerbated her problems, but she was already having headaches at that time. Previous treatment includes the fact that she had orthodontics x 2. She had an esophageal echocardiogram at the end of May or first part of June of this year, and this significantly exacerbated her pain and headache problems. In the past and currently, she has had the following therapies:  Acupuncture, massage therapy, osteopathic treatment, auriculotherapy, activator therapy, lidocaine injections into predominantly the neck muscles, migraine protocol including B2, B6, B12, and magnesium, and four weeks ago Dr. Moshiri gave Pam an occlusal splint. This has helped her significantly in her overall pain levels, although she still has significant problems. She takes Allegra, B2, B6, B12, and magnesium.

She gives no history of earaches, tinnitus, or hearing loss and rarely gets vertigo. The only other joints that give her problems are her knees, and she gets injections once a year that significantly help that situation. She has NO KNOWN ALLERGIES and no difficulties wearing jewelry. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night. Frequently she wakes up with headaches. If she gets one of her severe headaches, they can last a couple of days. She sometimes will wake up with significant headache problems. In fact, this is fairly frequent. However, a lot of times the severe headaches do not develop until the afternoon after she has been working all day. She gets severe migraine headaches about two times a week that usually are around a level of 8 on the average that occur in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area, but they can escalate to 10. She is not aware of having any headache problems on the right side. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 5, diet at 5, and disability at 4. 

Patient Concerns

Bite and jaw alignment worsening
Severe left-sided migraine headaches
Jaws get tired very easily
Cramping in the left jaw area
Swelling on the left side of the face
Difficulty eating and chewing

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Pam has fairly good facial balance in the middle and upper third face. Nasal tip may be deviated a little bit off toward the left side probably about 2 to 3 mm. Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline or may be just slightly to the left about a millimeter. Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the left. Chin is about 9 mm off to the left. Left side of the inferior border of the mandible is probably a good perhaps 6 to 8 mm higher than the right side.

In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably about 4 mm. Chin is about 10 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is extremely short. She has a lot of fullness in the submental area. As she postures her lower jaw forward and the upper lip is filled out, it does improve her profile, although she still does maintain some of the fullness in the submental area. 

In the lower arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. Teeth are reasonably aligned and leveled at this time. Has some lingual inclination of her teeth from the cuspid on posterior on the left side and on the right side may have just a little buccal tipping tendency particularly in the molar area. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side by about 2 mm and on the right side a little bit closer to a Class I relationship. As she closes together, she feels as though she hits on her right side before the left side. In the upper arch, she has a significantly increased curve of Wilson on the left side greater than the right side. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is a little bit hyperplastic. Pam has a transverse cant to the occlusal plane with the left side being about 4 mm higher than the right side. She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm. She has a crossbite tendency on the left side. 

Intranasally, she does have deviation of the nasal septum off toward the right side. Right turbinate is on the low normal side of size, and she appears to have good airway there. Right turbinate is a little bit enlarged, but because of the curvature of the septum, she appears to have adequate airway on that side as well. Nostril is a little bit constricted but not too significantly. 

To palpation, she has mild tenderness over the left temporalis, left masseter muscle area, and mild to moderate tenderness over the left TMJ. All other areas are free of discomfort at this time, although there are areas that do act up for her particularly on the left side from time to time. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly at this time, although she says she can hear a little bit of popping occurring in the left joint. I could not really detect anything significant with the stethoscope or by palpation that I could definitely use as a diagnostic aid. Maximal incisal opening is 52 mm. She could open 40 mm without too significant of a pain. Excursive movements to the right are 9 mm and to the left 8 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

On Panorex, she has all of her teeth, except she is missing the third molars. Has a large crown on the left second molar. Sinuses look relatively clear. Turbinates are moderate in size and there appears to be a good airway, although the right turbinate appears much larger than the left turbinate. Right TMJ condyle appears a little bit flattened anteriorly but otherwise looks good. Left TMJ condyle appears to have lost significant vertical height, anteroposterior dimension, and has just some significant osseous changes associated with it. 

Waters view shows that she has a root canal in the maxillary right central incisor. Pam does not give any history of having a root canal, so it may be just an artifact on the film or a superimposition of another structure. Sinuses appear clear. Right frontal sinus has very minimal formation. Septum appears quite deviated. Left-hand side of the mandible appears shorter vertically than the right-hand side. Left side of the mandible is probably about 6 to 8 mm shorter vertically than the right side. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Superior joint space is decreased significantly, although posterior joint space and anterior are fairly adequate. Articular eminence has a very shallow slope to it. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is small vertically and anteroposteriorly. Appears that there has been condylar resorption that has occurred here. Decreased posterior joint space, although the vertical joint space looks okay. Articular eminence is relatively shallow in angulation. 

On opening, there is good translation in both joints with the condyles coming out actually anterior to the articular eminences.

Waters view shows that there is a vertical difference at the angles of the mandible but not quite as much as appears clinically with only about a 4-mm difference posteriorly. At the occlusal plane level, appears to be a vertical difference of probably about 3 to 4 mm. Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good with the distance to the soft palate being about 9 mm and at the base of the tongue about 10 to 11 mm. She has a little  bit of a high occlusal plane angle. Some slight AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency. Pam does have a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 2 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ reactive arthritis with significant loss of condylar volume and articular disc dislocation with severe deformation and non-salvageable
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
AP maxillary deficiency
Left maxillary vertical deficiency
Left mandibular vertical deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Class II end-on occlusion on the left side, Class I occlusion on the right side
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 4 mm higher than the right side
Premature contact on the left side in centric relation
High occlusal plane angle
Increased curve of Wilson on the mandibular left posterior segment and in the upper arch
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism
Severe left-sided headaches
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment

Trial of Klonopin to see if this helps decrease nocturnal clenching and bruxism

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch. Try to upright the mandibular left posterior teeth which are in lingual inclination now by tipping them somewhat buccally. This may create a crossbite, but this will easily be corrected at the time of surgery 

CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery

Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with correction of the facial asymmetry using TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to lengthen the left side, expand, and advance

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
