AMY SAGNERI 									7/14/05

Amy is 15 years old, referred by Dr. George Adams, Plano, TX.  Amy had previous orthodontic treatment when she was about 8 years old by Dr. Jensen.  She had maxillary expansion appliance and also wore some kind of headgear to try to correct her anterior crossbite.  Apparently at the completion of the treatment, the bite was reasonably corrected, but it did not hold and the anterior crossbite returned.  She does take Tylenol.  She has no problems with earaches or tinnitus.  She gets vertigo with her headaches, but has no hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  No problems wearing jewelry.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing at night.  Her jaw does get tired with use.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Teeth do not fit together very well.
Headaches.
Jaw gets tired with use.

She gets headaches that she rates at about a level of 7 in the frontal and temple area that occur about 2 to 3 times per week.  They can cause nausea for her.  The pain can escalate to a 9.   She does not think she has any TMJ pain.  She could not rate her jaw function.  She rates her diet at about a level of 2.  She was also unable to rate her disability.  She also was unable to rate her level of average daily facial pain and headaches.  

In the frontal view, Amy has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm.  Maxilla, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, Amy has some AP deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm.  The mandible appears a little bit prognathic by probably 3 to 4 mm.  Chin-neckline appears a little bit long.  She has a 90 degree nasolabial angle.  In the closed view, Amy does appear to be slightly vertically over-closed.  It appears that Amy opens her jaws probably with a 5 mm open bite.  The AP position of the chin looks much better.  Chin-neckline looks better balanced in that vertical position as well.  Intraorally, Amy has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch.  There is some very minimal crowding.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth except she is missing the first bicuspids.  She has a full Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally.  She has an anterior crossbite but the molars have been expanded in the upper arch of first and second molars bilaterally but the rest of the teeth are in crossbite.  She has a good attached gingiva around the anterior teeth.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.  The right cuspid is up probably a good 2 mm from the rest of the anterior teeth.  She has an anterior reverse deep bite of 3 mm.  Intraorally, the tissues all look normal with a normal uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars.  Intranasally, however, the turbinates appear moderately large.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  The columella is moderately wide and the nostrils are somewhat narrow.  Amy states that she is a mouth breather particularly at night when she sleeps.  On opening, Amy has fairly good smoothness of her jaw joints.  To palpation, she has rather high tenderness and discomfort over the styloid areas that she measures at a level of 8.  At the SCMs she registers a 5.  In the temporalis and right TMJ area she registers a 1.  The joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is about 56 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 6 mm, left 7 mm.

AMY SAGNERI				7/14/05				Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of all 4 third molars in the absence of the maxillary first bicuspids.  Sinuses appear equal.  All 4 third molars are present but unerupted.  Difficult to evaluate the condyles.  

Waters view shows that the bony septum is fairly straight.  Turbinates particularly on the right side appear enlarged.  Sinuses look relatively clear although the maxillary sinuses look like there could be some fluid present. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears reasonably good with maybe just a little bit of sclerosis on the head but difficult to tell.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  Joint space is difficult to evaluate but appears a little bit narrow.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have reasonably morphology.  Joint spaces look reasonably balanced.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyles beneath the articular eminence.

Cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class III occlusal relationship.  Amy appears to have a high occlusal plane angle and slightly overangulated lower incisors.  Oral pharyngeal airway looks fairly good except she has a fairly large adenoid mass up in the nasopharynx.  Turbinates appear to extend just to the posterior aspect of the hard palate.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Rule out bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Rule out bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular prognathism. 
Transverse maxillary excess.
Anterior mandibular vertical excess. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Class III occlusion.
Anterior crossbite and crossbite back through the bicuspids but not at the molar area.
Slight accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch.
Mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.
Missing maxillary first bicuspids extracted for orthodontics reasons.
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x4.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Mouth breather. 



AMY SAGNERI				7/14/05				Page 3


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
MRI of left and right TMJs.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies (if condylar hyperplasia is active) and bilateral TMJs articular disc dislocations (if discs are dislocated as determined by MRI.)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and narrow it transversely. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible backwards.
Vertical reduction genioplasty.
Surgical removal of 4 bony impacted third molars.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.