PETER RYAN								03/21/2011

Peter is 17 years old, birth date 02/10/1994.  Referred by Dr. Tom Lowder, 2709 W. Hunstville Avenue, Springdale, AR 72762.  His orthodontics have been done by Dr. Rick Roblee, 1915 Green Acres Road, Fayetteville, AR 72703.  

Peter does have some clicking and popping in his jaw joints of unknown etiology and the patient is not aware how long the clicking has been present.  He has been in orthodontic treatment for 3-1/2 years beginning at about the age of 13.  He has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain.  He rates his jaw function, diet, and disability all at 0.  He takes no medications.  No earaches, vertigo or hearing loss and just some slight tinnitus.  No other joints bother him.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  He does have some mild snoring, but no significant daytime somnolence nor sleep apnea.  He is a mouth breather at night and also does mouth breathe during the day as well.

In frontal view, Peter has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper  lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 4 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the left side as is the chin.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other.  Peter has a lip incompetence of close to 10 mm.  The maxilla is retruded about 5 mm.  The chin is retruded about 18 mm.  The chin neckline is short.  He does hold his head in a head forward neck postured position.  Intraorally, Peter has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  The lower teeth are relatively nicely aligned and leveled.  He has attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth, although the roots are quite prominent to the labial cortical plate.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He is just slightly Class II on the right side by probably 1 mm or so and the left side is probably 3 to 4 mm Class II.  In centric relation, he is probably 3 mm off to the left both dentally and at the chin area, but he hits and shifts a little bit towards the right side.  He has about a zero over bite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the septum appears to be just slightly off towards the right side, but on the left side he has got a significant deviation of the septum about 1 cm back off to the left side.  On the right side, it appears that the turbinate pretty much touches against the septum and on the left side there is some fairly close contact as well.  On opening, he has an audible click in the right joint at about 15 mm of opening and 10 mm of closing.  The left side seems to function reasonably smoothly.  The incisal opening is 48 mm, excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being higher by at least 2 mm compared to the left side.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars that are impacted.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  Bony septum looks fairly straight.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are fairly enlarged.  Bony septum area is reasonably straight.  

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight except there is a bone or cartilage spur that sticks off to the left side that appears to block a good portion of the airway there.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the right side where it seems to block most of the functional airway.  Sinuses are clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The joint space looks almost excessive.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little bit posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  The condyle appears smaller in size as compared to the opposite particularly towards the medial side.  The joint space actually is somewhat increased vertically but decreased posteriorly.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width.  There is some decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint.  Otherwise, joint space looks good.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a good mediolateral width.  There is decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The vertical joint space is not as great as it is on the other side.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is some AP maxillary hypoplasia and AP mandibular hypoplasia.  There are two images at the inferior border and at the occlusal plane indicated of some very asymmetry.  Airway is surprisingly better than expected with an AP dimension at the soft palate level of about 9 mm and at the base of tongue at about 20 mm.  There is a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being higher by at least 2 mm compared to the left side.  

Peter has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of about 2.5 mm.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia, but anterior vertical hyperplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
AP microgenia.
Slight Class II end-on occlusion being a little bit worse on the left side as compared to the right side.
Slight shift on the left side between CR and CO with the mandible shifting slightly towards the right side. 
Vertical asymmetry with the right side being 2 mm shorter vertical than the left side. 
Right TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Impacted third molars x4.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Rule out disproportionate condylar growth in a vertical direction. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2.5 mm.
Nasal septal spur obstructing left side of the nose secondary to trauma.
External nasal deformity. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJs.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  
	b.	Continue to align and level lower arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 		removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.  
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and legament repair with Mitek 			anchor.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction, decrease occlusal plane angle and level 			transversely.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance in a counterclockwise direction 		and level transversely.
	d.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
	e.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
	f.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
	g.	Nasal septoplasty. 
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 