MICHAEL SALAS 								03/16/2011

Michael is 20 years old, birth 09/17/1990.  Referred by Dr. Chuck Medearis, 1902 Country Club Drive #150, Carrollton, TX 75006-5823.  

Michael’s jaw problems began when he was about 16 or 17 when they started to make popping noises of unknown etiology.  He did have orthodontics with a palatal expander at the age of 10.  He has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, nor myofascial pain.  He rates his jaw function at 2, diet at 0, disability at 0.  He takes no medications.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He is aware of bruxing his teeth at night.

In frontal view, Michael has fairly good facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is probably 3 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted just slightly towards the right side 1 or 2 mm.  The chin is also shifted towards the right side about 2 mm.  In profile, Michael has some prominence in the lip area.  Chin actually is in pretty good AP position.  The chin neckline looks relatively normal.  He does have a high mandibular plane angle.  Intraorally, Michael has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  The four incisors are in lingual inclination and positioned posterior to the mesial margins of the cuspids.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has about a 6 mm Class III relationship bilaterally.  He is almost a full Class III in the molar area.  He has a cross bite on the right side and an end-on incisor relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues looks healthy.  Tonsils are moderately enlarged.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  Michael does report that he has no snoring or daytime somnolence, no sleep apnea and no sleep disorder.  He does breathe through his mouth at nighttime when he sleeps, and he is aware of clenching and bruxing in the nighttime.  To palpation, Michael has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Today joints seem to be functioning smooth, and he states he is not hearing any clicking or popping today.  It is usually when he opens wide that he gets popping noises in the joints.  The incisal opening is 52 mm.  On closing, he had an audible pop in the right TMJ.  The incisal opening is 52 mm, excursion movements are 8 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The septum appears reasonably straight and the turbinates appear moderate in size.  The condylar head and necks appear elongated.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  Turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  

Axial view shows that the septum appears reasonably straight.  The turbinates are moderate in size and the sinuses are clear.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has flattening of the top of the condyle particularly at the lateral pole.  The condylar head and neck appear elongated and the condylar head appears elongated.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow.  There appears to be narrow joint space.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit flattening on the superior head.  There is decreased superior joint space particularly towards the medial side of the joint.  It appears that there could be some kind of calcification within the joint in the area at the disc.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with a good mediolateral width.  There is some flattening on the lateral aspect of the condylar head.  There is decreased joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 3 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width.  There could be some type of calcification within the joint space.  There is decreased vertical joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the fossa.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a skeletal Class III relationship, although somewhat hidden because of the moderately high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway looks good.  He does have an end-on incisor relationship and Class III cuspid-molar relationship.  

Basic diagnoses for Michael would be as follows:

Maxillary posterior vertical and transverse hypoplasia. 
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Right TMJ articular disc displacement.
Class III end-on occlusion. 
Cross bite anterior and right posterior.
Crowding of lower anterior arch.
Probable tooth size discrepancy related to small lateral maxillary incisors. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJs.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially 			and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand it and down graft it posteriorly. 
	c.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a 				counterclockwise direction.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 	