JOANN RYAN									7/11/05

Joann is 47 years old.  Joann is in good health with no major medical problems.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS 
Teeth do not fit together.
The jaws do not work well. 
Difficulty eating and chewing.

Joann has had problems with her jaw joints for as long as she can remember and cannot recall the time of onset.  Her problems have gotten worse in the last 15 years.  She uses a splint to decrease the symptoms.  The etiology of her problem is unknown.  She did have orthodontics as a teenager.  She has worn a splint for 10 to 12 years now and this does help control the locking and the pain.  More recently she has had some dental work done although she is in temporaries she is planning to have 9 Veneers placed on the maxillary teeth.  The only medication Joann takes is Estrogen and Tylenol for her headaches when she gets them.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her left wrist which she has had previous surgery on for an injury and also her right knee that also had previous surgery.  She did have a hysterectomy in 2001.  Joann is aware of clenching and grinding her teeth at night.  She is not aware of having any allergies.  She is not aware of any problems wearing jewelry.  In frontal view, Joann has good facial symmetry and balance.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 to 4 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale.  There is about 3 to 4 mm of AP deficiency in the upper lip.  Chin is retruded by about 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is short.  Chin-neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, Joann has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she appears to have all of teeth back through the second molars present.  Upper lateral incisors appear somewhat small.  She has a Class II occlusal relationship being probably 5 mm Class II.  She has about a 4 mm overjet present.  She has about a 1 mm vertical overbite.  Transverse occlusal plane is fairly level.  Oropharynx appears clear and tissues look healthy.  Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear normal.  Intranasally, the turbinate appear moderately sized.  The septum appears relatively straight.  It appears that there is probably adequate airway.  The columella, however, is quite wide and nostrils are relatively narrow.  Luminal valves appear relatively normal.  She gives no history of snoring, daytime somnolence nor sleep apnea problems.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the TMJs, masseters and left styloid area.  As Joann moves her jaws, she has some glitches and popping kind of noises in her joints and probably some crepitus kind of noises. She feels that she hears more of a popping noise on the left side and a grinding kind of noise on the right side.  Maximal incisal opening was about 45 mm and about 33 mm without significant discomfort.  Excursive movements in each direction were about 10 mm.  
JOANN RYAN				7/11/05				Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth back through the second molars.  Third molars are absent.  Both TMJ joints look quite arthritic with the right one looking actually worse than the left one.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Airway looks reasonably good on both sides of the septum.  She has crowns on the mandibular molars and maxillary second molars.  She has root canals on the maxillary left central and lateral incisors. 

Waters view shows that the right turbinate appears somewhat large compared to the left side and appears to block off some of the airway.  The septum may be a little bit deviated in the bony part particularly the superior aspect.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite small with evidence of previous condylar resorption.  The condyle is seen posterior in the fossa.  Articular eminences are fairly long and steep.  There is an increased anterior joint space.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that likewise appears to have undergone some arthritic changes and appears to have lost some volume.  Decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is fairly steep and long.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles but both condyles are quite small, although they do sit beneath the articular eminence. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the maxilla appears AP retruded.  Lip thickness is thin.  She has some anterior vertical maxillary excess.  The mandible appears AP retruded.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  There is a decreased oropharyngeal airway with AP dimension of only about 5 mm at the soft palate level and about 6 mm at the base of the tongue. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and severe deformation.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Slight AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
Crowding of lower anterior arch.
Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of probably around 4 to 5 mm. (No models were available at the time of examination.)
Overangulation of lower incisors.
High occlusal plane angulation.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 to 5 mm (normal 11 mm.)
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
JOANN RYAN				7/11/05				Page 3


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up approximately 1 mm of space around each upper lateral incisor and hold that dimension.  The temporary Veneers could be built up to fill in that space.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Strip the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing.
CT scan of jaw joints and jaws.

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward, move the anterior aspects superiorly, and down graft the posterior aspect to decrease the occlusal plane angulation.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
Restorative dentistry to finalize veneers and other necessary dental work