MORGAN RUTTER								08/17/2011

Morgan is 21 years old, birth date 09/08/1989.  Referred by Dr. Mike Reznik, 3831 E. 52nd Street, Odessa, TX 79762.   

Morgan has had some prominence of the mandible and a skeletal Class III relationship since she was quite young.  She had her first stage of orthodontics in the first grade.  She was placed into braces in the fifth grade and had lower bicuspid teeth extracted.  She reinitiated orthodontics again in January 2011.  

Morgan has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function at 1, diet and disability at 0.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, may have some slight hearing loss on the left side.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and also sometimes during the day.  The only medication she takes is a birth control pill.  She has no problems with snoring, daytime somnolence, nor sleep apnea.  She feels that she is likely a mouth breather at night.  

In frontal view, Morgan has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry particularly in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is probably 18 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1.5 to 2 mm to the left.  The chin is about 4 to 5 mm to the left.  The mandibular dental midline and chin are pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, the maxilla is only 5 to 6 mm AP deficient.  She has some slight prominence of the mandible by maybe about 3 mm or so.  Intraorally, she does have all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She in fact did not have lower bicuspids removed.  She has fairly thin mucosa around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth also back through the second molars.  She has just about a full Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and end-on Class III on the left side by probably 4 mm or so.  She has a slight anterior open bite of about 1 mm on the left side and 0 on the right side.  She has just a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 1 mm higher than the left side.  The left mandibular cuspid may be about 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  The maxillary right cuspid may be 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  She has an anterior and left-sided cross bite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy except her tonsils are quite large.  She says she gets periodic sore throats.  She gets a sore throat about 3 or 4 times per year.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  The transverse width of the nose looks as though it is quite narrow.  Columella is wide and the nostrils are narrow.  The incisal opening is 52 mm, excursion movement to the right 7 mm and to the left 4 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The four maxillary incisors appear to have extremely blunted roots.  The right turbinate appears moderately enlarged.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum appears relatively straight.  The right turbinate appears moderately enlarged, but the left one appears more normal in size.  The transverse width of the nose appears somewhat restricted.

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight and the right turbinate is moderately enlarged with a decreased airway.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has good morphology.  The joint space is very narrow consistent with either extremely thin discs versus a displaced disc.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is slightly larger than the left side.  The vertical joint space is narrow indicative of either the disc being quite thin or displaced.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 mm.  The vertical joint space looks narrow. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is somewhat narrow appearing in width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 4 or 5 mm. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is AP maxillary deficiency and mandibular prognathism.  The oropharyngeal airway space looks fairly good.  

Morgan’s paternal grandmother had a mandibular prognathism and her grandfather on her mother’s side also had prognathic mandible.

Basic diagnoses for Morgan would be as follows:

Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia.
Class III occlusion being worse on the right side compared to the left side.
Anterior and left sided cross bites.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Hypertrophied tonsils.
Wide columella and narrow nostrils.
Extremely short roots on the four maxillary incisors.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots 			mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental 				osteotomies. 
	b.	Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back on the 			facial midline and move it posteriorly.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, expand, and move superiorly.
	c.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	d.	Tonsillectomy (by Dr Weprin).
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  