THERESA RUTLEDGE								10-22-02

Theresa is 33 years old and referred by Dr. Lee Kamelchuk, 1107 Gleneagles Drive, Huntsville, AL  35801. She has seen Dr. Mike Koslin in Birmingham.

Patient History

Theresa has had previous surgeries for sinus problems, endometriosis, gallbladder, and she also had an ERCP, which is an evaluation of the bile ducts through endoscopic type evaluation. She apparently had some significant water retention problems from one of her surgeries including pulmonary edema and gaining about 20 pounds in fluid retention. They thought she was going into ARDS but pulled out of it. Theresa was involved in a motor vehicle accident in 1989 and sustained multiple internal injuries, and this has required several operative procedures. 

Theresa feels her problems with her jaws may have begun around 1989 when she was involved in an MVA and sustained her internal injuries. She also hit her jaw in that accident, although she had no acknowledged fractures. She has developed significant headache problems, and she has had sinus surgery x 2 trying to correct those problems. She has a significant history of nocturnal clenching and bruxism. She gets headaches daily and frequently wakes up with headaches. On the average, her headaches run at about a level of 7 and occur in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. They, however, can escalate to a level of 10. 

Theresa rates her TMJ pain and discomfort about a level of 5 particularly on the job, overall pain at 8, jaw function at 2, diet and disability at 4.

Patient Concerns

Primary concerns that Theresa has include the following:

Headaches.
Neck and shoulder pain.
TMJ pain.
Teeth don’t fit together very well.
Difficulties eating and chewing.

Current Medications

Medications that Theresa currently takes include the following:

Ultrace MT-18.
Clarinex.

Clinical Evaluation

Frontal view shows that Theresa has some relatively good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is 3 mm. Maxillary dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 1 to 2 mm to the left. Chin is pretty much on the facial midline. 

In profile view, Theresa has a little bit of deficiency in the maxillary projection. Mandible is maybe just slightly retruded. Chin is relatively prominent compared to the AP position of the lower lip. Chin-neckline is slightly short. Chin-neck angle is not well-defined. 

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Mandibular left first bicuspid is partially blocked out of the arch, and the second bicuspid is rotated probably about 80 degrees. Some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. She has adequate attached gingiva. She has significant abrasions of the lower anterior teeth. She has an accented curve of occlusion in the lower arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class I cuspid relationship bilaterally but with a division II malocclusion anteriorly. She has an anterior deep-bite of probably a good 8 mm. She has a reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch. She has a crossbite in the left mandibular first bicuspid area. Transversely, maxillary arch is fairly level, but on the left side, the bicuspids are down just a little bit, probably 1 to 1.5 mm. She has some noises in her joints bilaterally to palpation, but by placing the fingers in the ears, she has definite popping in both joints with an opening pop at probably around 15 mm and a closing pop at about 5 mm. Maximal incisal opening is 42 mm counting the overbite. Excursive movements are about 8 mm in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses are clear and nasal airway actually looks quite good. She is missing all four third molars. Accentuated curve of occlusion is noted in the lower arch. Condyles look fairly good with a little flattening posteriorly on the anterior head. Articular eminences are very steep, being a little bit greater steepness on the right side as compared to the left side. No other abnormalities noted.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is very flattened in the posterior head area. Superior joint space actually appears to be increased, although posterior joint space appears to be diminished some. Articular eminence is quite steep with probably about 85% inclination.

Right TMJ tomogram shows some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. Superior anterior joint space appears slightly increased, although the posterior joint space may be slightly decreased. Also, there appears to be increased anterior joint space between the bottom part of the condylar head and the articular eminence. Articular eminence is quite steep on this side being probably 80% to 85% of inclination.

On opening, there is good translation of both TMJs. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Nasal airway looks fairly good. Jaws are fairly symmetric, although the lower dental midline is off to the left. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows probably a skeletal Class I kind of position with a Class I occlusion but division II malocclusion anteriorly. She has a low occlusal plane angle facial morphology. Chin is prominent relative to the position of the lower incisors. Oropharyngeal airway looks to be within normal range. Oropharynx appears clear. Some mild crenations on the tongue. 

Intranasally, turbinates are of moderate size with the left one being larger than the right side. However, the nasal airway appears fairly good. Slightly wide columella base but probably not causing a significant problem. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations in a vertical orientation and presence of very steep articular eminences.
Relative mandibular hyperplasia.
Slight AP maxillary deficiency.
Class I division II occlusion.
Vertical inclination of maxillary incisors.
Significant vertical inclination of mandibular incisors.
Anterior deep-bite of approximately 7 to 8 mm. 
Crowding, lower anterior arch, particularly in the left bicuspid area.
Mandibular dental midline shifted 1 to 2 mm to the left of the facial and chin midline.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Earaches.
Vertigo.

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Correct reverse curve of occlusion. Tip upper incisors forward approximately 2 mm. Keep upper lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to allow for interdental osteotomies if they are necessary.
Align and level mandibular arch. Tip lower incisors forward at least 2 to 3 mm. Try to level the accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch.
Consider using a bite plate to open bite in order to place appliances on the lower arch and to allow orthodontic access to align and level the arches. Upper splint may work the best to allow better access to the lower arch alignment and leveling. Could leave the maxillary incisors out of the splint to enable forward and upward repositioning of those teeth.

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization.
Consider possible maxillary osteotomies if necessary to achieve the best functional and aesthetic outcome.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

I gave Theresa a prescription for Klonopin 1 mg tablets, disp. 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x 4.