DIANE SALARANO									06-28-04

Diane is 48 years old. 

Patient History

Diane’s problems began in 02/1988 when she had a sudden onset of TMJ problems. She was involved in an MVA in 1986, but this primarily created problems in the neck and shoulder area, and she wasn’t aware of any particular problems in the joint. She went to see Dr. John Delfino. Dr. Delfino did bilateral open joint arthroplasties in 1988. In 1989, she saw Dr. Ken Rotskoff, who did a left TMJ discectomy and placed a temporal fascial flap. In 1989, she also had a left coronoidectomy and also later she had the temple fascial graft clipped. In 02/1991, she had a left TMJ Christensen total joint prosthesis with chromium cobalt on methyl methacrylate condylar head. In 1991, she had decompression through a craniotomy of the fifth cranial nerve. 

She has had an adverse reaction to CECLOR and CEPHALOSPORINS. She also had a reaction this past week to GALLIUM she believes.

Diane has no problems with earaches but does have tinnitus but no vertigo except occasionally when she gets up. She has some hearing loss. She has difficulties wearing jewelry, particularly cheap jewelry that may contain nickel. She is going through menopause. She uses a CPAP machine although she has been told she does not have sleep apnea, but she does have a significant sleep disorder problem of unknown etiology. No one has been able to really help her with this situation to date. She gets headaches about once a month that she rates at a level of 8 that hurt predominantly in the left frontal and temporal area. She rates her TMJ pain with medications at a level of 7, overall facial pain at 4, jaw function at 3, diet at 6, and disability at 7. She is on disability and unable to work at this time.

Patient Concerns

TMJ pain
Headaches 
Pain to the left side of head and neck area particularly when sleeping
Sleep disorder with prolonged arousals at night even with medications
Ringing in the areas
Chills
Difficulties eating and chewing

Current Medications

Zoloft 50 mg q.d. 
Wellbutrin ER 100 mg
Methadone 10 mg t.i.d. and 5 mg tablet usually in the afternoon
Vioxx 25 mg at bedtime
Seroquel 25 mg at bedtime
Zyrtec 10 mg at bedtime
Zonegran 100 mg q.h.s. 
Serevent inhaler 2 inhalations b.i.d. 
Roxicet 1 tablet q.6h. p.r.n. breakthrough pain
Allergies

CECLOR, CEPHALOSPORINS, and GALLIUM. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Diane has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Some decreased vertical height on the left side with the left side being probably 3 mm or so higher than the right side. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 4 mm. Maxillary dental midline is a little bit off to the left. Mandibular dental midline is close to being on the facial midline, but chin is deviated a couple of millimeters off to the left. 

In profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably 4 to 6 mm. Mandible is AP deficient by probably about 10 mm. Chin-neckline is not well-defined.

Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids. Lower arch is constricted. The rest of the teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled. In the upper arch, she is also missing the first bicuspids and has some transverse deficiency in the upper arch as well. She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with an anterior deep-bite of about 4 mm. Oropharynx appears clear. Soft palate might be a little bit posteriorly positioned. Uvula is relatively normal in size and shape. Faucial pillars look relatively normal in transverse width. She has some snoring problems, but her husband is not sure how severe it is. She has severe problems with daytime somnolence. She takes Provigil 1 tablet a day. She had to take 1-½ tablets just to get to my office today. She does have problems with chills. She is on a CPAP machine. She has increased fullness of her right temporalis muscle compared to the left temporalis muscle. Even when biting together, there is more activity on the right side than the left side. 

On opening, she has significant audible crepitation in the right TMJ. On the left side, it seems fairly smooth in function. As she opens, Diane shifts significantly off toward the left side probably 6 to 8 mm. Maximal incisal opening is about 40 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 3 mm and to the left 7.5 mm.

Intranasally, turbinates appear to be maybe slightly enlarged but not too significantly. Appears to have a good nasal airway inside. Luminal valves appear somewhat constricted. When I told those valves open, she could breathe better through her nose. She does use the Breathe Right nasal strips to help open up her airway. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses are clear. Nasal airway looks reasonably clear. All four third molars and all four first bicuspids are missing. Right TMJ condyle appears flattened on the anterior aspect with a little bit of peaking on the condylar head. Left TMJ demonstrates the presence of a Christensen total joint prosthesis with an acrylic head. Seven screws support the mandibular component to the ramus. Coronoid process has been cut off, but it is still sitting there and probably joined back to the mandibular ramus area through a fibrous attachment. Difficult to tell if there is any fracture of the fossa component, but it appears from what I can see that it is probably intact.

Left TMJ tomogram shows the presence of the Christensen prosthesis. It appears that there may be some acrylic still remaining between the pin and condylar component and the fossa. Screws appear to be in position. Difficult to rule out the possibility of any fracture of the fossa component.

Right TMJ tomogram shows the condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa with decreased posterior and superior joint space. The superior head of the condyle appears sclerotic. A little bit of anterior beaking present. Sort of a shallow prominence of the articular eminence. 

Open view shows good translation of the right condyle but minimal translation of the left condyle. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses all appear to be clear. There is a significant difference in vertical position of the angle of the mandible with the left mandibular angle being at least 10 to 12 mm elevated compared to the right side. Nasal airway looks good, although she does have a nasal septal spur back in the bony part of the nose extending out toward the right side. 

Cephalometrically, Diane has a Class I skeletal relationship. The head is tipped up somewhat. May want to retake this x-ray with the head at a more normal angulation. Occlusal plane may be somewhat elevated. Upper incisors in a vertical inclination. Oropharyngeal airway, however, looks to be fairly adequate with an airway of about 8 mm at the base of the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue about 13 mm. 

Other Systems

She has problems with her little fingers where they catch, some problems with her left hip, and left knee. In the past few years, she has had problems with urinary tract infections. She has polyuria and nocturia two to four times per night. She has had one miscarriage and has no children. She does have fibrocystic breast disease. She has had a cervical problems and has had a conization. For the past two years, she has been getting some oral yeast infections and has been attributed to an oral steroid that she was taking. She has discontinued that, and this has helped her. She has some itching associated with allergies around her eyes but nothing really significant. She gets some seasonal sinus problems. She used to smoke up to a pack a day but stopped in 1988. She has tinnitus and some hearing loss. She has had bronchitis probably about four times. She has adult-onset asthma that began at about the age of 35. It not sure if she has irritable bowel syndrome. She does have problems with constipation that she relates to the medications. She has severe fatigue. She tends to run a low-grade fever. No thyroid problems she is aware of. No really significant exposure to birds. She has had some cats and dogs most of her life. No hoofed animals.

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ Christensen prosthesis with a possible reactive heterotopic bone
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and probable perforations
AP maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Missing all four first bicuspids
Anterior deep bite
Transverse cant in the occlusion with the maxillary left side being 1 mm vertically short compared to the right side but the mandible being 3 mm vertically short compared to the right side
Decreased oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level
Severe sleep disorder
Severe daytime somnolence
Decreased oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level with a dimension of 5 mm
Frequent sleep disruption at night
Left-sided headaches
Left-sided TMJ pain
Left-sided myofascial pain
Difficulties eating and chewing

Recommended Treatment

Trial of Klonopin 1 mg tablet, disp. 10, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x 4

CT scan of TMJs to include axial, coronal, and sagittal views

Evaluation at Environment Center to rule out hypersensitivities (i.e. materials in the prosthesis, environmental factors, molds, etc.)

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch 

Surgery
Remove left TMJ Christensen prosthesis
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest graft from abdomen)
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and level transversely

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

They live in an old house. They have been there for about 15 years. Quite possibly she should have mold or yeast problems or other factors around the house that could be contributing to hypersensitivities and subsequently her pain. She says, however, she feels that when she wakes up at night it is primarily due to the fact that she can’t catch her breath more than she feels that it is related directly to pain. It is possible that she could be having some muscle spasms that may be causing some hyperfunction of the soft palate, and, thus, decreasing her functional airway. Therefore, the pain might indirectly be contributing to her sleep problems and her impression that she cannot get her breath at night when she is sleeping.
