LAURA SARGENT									05/10/2006

Laura is 43 years old, referred by Dr. Fred Voorhees in Austin, TX.  Laura is in good health except for jaw problems.  Her TMJ problems began when she was about 13 years old when she was in orthodontic treatment.  The lower jaw was pushed backwards and it caused her disc to become displaced.  In 1986, she had bilateral disc repositioning including a left condylar shave by Dr. Ken Stobaugh.  In 1987 she had probably vertical osteotomies of the mandible where the bite shifted and then in 1989 she had right TMJ surgery done again.  In 1992 she had bilateral sagittal split osteotomies done to correct her bite.  Those three procedures were all done by 
Dr. Raymond Reid.  During the years she has had extensive physical therapy and had been through several pain management programs.  Her treatments had resulted in her developing an abnormal curvature of the neck.  She has had chiropractic treatment ongoing for 10 years.  She has worn a splint for 20 years 24/7.  She has had biofeedback.  She has been on pain medications but found them ineffective.  Her pain settled down about 1994 and was fairly manageable with chiropractic treatment and her splints.  In August she fell from a ladder and got hit in the jaw with a box and since then has had continuing difficult problems.  Apparently Laura has temporary Silastic implants placed in the joint.  However, when they were taken out apparently one of the temporary implants torn and a piece may still remain inside the TMJ.  We are not sure which side that is on.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Pain. 
Crunchy grinding noises in the jaw joints. 
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Burning sensation through the jaws.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: 
Vitamins.
Coral calcium.
MSM glucosamine.

Laura has no problems with earaches or vertigo but does have tinnitus that she says has been there all of her life.  She has some hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her knees and ankles.  She has some allergies to pollens.  When she lived in Houston she had no trouble with it, now that she lives in Austin she has developed some allergies but it is pretty well controlled currently.  She reports that she has had a slight reaction to latex in the past.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  No headaches but she does get headaches if she does not wear her splint.  As long as she wears her splint she has no headache problems and she does wear the splint 24/7.  She does remove her splint to eat but otherwise kept it in all the time.  She rates her TMJ pain on the left side at 8, right side at 5.  Average daily pain is at 8, jaw function is at 2, diet is at 2 and disability is at 2.  

In frontal view Laura has fairly good symmetry in lateral and upper third face.  There is some slight asymmetry perhaps in the mandible.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. 

LAURA SARGENT				05/10/2006				Page 2


Nasal tip is about 3 mm off to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline is off to the left about 
1 mm.  Chin is actually fairly well aligned maybe just slightly to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other.  In profile view Laura has some deficiency in the maxilla of probably a good 6 to 8 mm.  Chin appears retruded by probably about 12 to 15 mm.  No definition to the chin-neckline.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has good attached gingiva.  Lower left central incisor looks smaller in size as compared to the other teeth.  Very good left to right symmetry with the cuspids.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Fairly good front, back symmetry.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 2 mm higher than the left side.  When Laura bites together she hits only on her incisor teeth and the rest of her teeth are out of occlusion.  She hits primarily on the central incisors only.  She can force her teeth together and get the back teeth to barely touch.  She is close to being a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has about a 1 mm overbite relationship.  Intranasally, the septum may be deviated just perhaps a touch towards the left but she has a spur coming off the right side.  Turbinates are sort of moderate in size.  She eludes that she breathes through her nose mainly when she sleeps and only when her allergies flare up does she breathe through both her mouth and her nose.  She has some mid snoring.  No daytime somnolence and she is not aware of any sleep apnea symptoms.  She said she had a sleep study done about five years ago.  At that time she had a sleep problem where she would wake up three to four times per night.  She was told it was secondary to stress.  She does not have that problem currently.  To palpation she has mild tenderness of the temporalis, TMJs, left masseter, left SCM.  Maximal incisal opening is 35 mm and without too much pain discomfort to 30 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 4 mm, left 2 mm.  She has crepitation in both joints.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex.  This is a composite report of the Panorex we took today on May 10, 2006 as well as one taken January 10, 2006.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  All four third molars are missing.  There are stainless steel wires in the ramus bilaterally.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  Turbinates appears moderate in size.  The condyles bilaterally appear very arthritic and the fossas appear arthritic with significant flattening of the articular eminences.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that is quite flat and sclerotic on the head with anterior beaking.  Minimal joint space is present.  Articular eminence is relatively flat and probably related to previous eminectomy type procedure.  

Left TMJ coronal tomogram shows severe arthritic changes with virtually no joint space.  Bone on type of the condyle appears rough and the fossa appears rough and pitted.  There is a lateral osteophyte that has developed.  There appears to be multiple small osteophytes on top of the condylar head.  




LAURA SARGENT 				05/10/2006				Page 3

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite flattened on top.  There is an osteophyte sticking up off the posterior head of the condyle and appears to be some bony protuberance coming down from the fossa as well.  There appears to be a free calcified body anterior to the condyle.  Articular eminence is quite shallow again probably result of previous eminoplasty.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic.  Decreased joint space with what appears to be bone-on-bone contact particularly at the medial aspect of the joint.  A little of space although not much towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  Lateral pole of the condyle has a lateral osteophytic development on it and it extends out almost to the extent of the lateral rim.  There is a pseudocyst in the medial aspect of the condyle.  Three-D renditions of both joints show that there is severe arthritis present bilaterally and it appears that there has been eminoplasties or eminectomies performed.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible appear to be in a skeletal Class I position to each other but both appear retruded.  The airway at the soft palate level is about 5 mm and at the base of the tongue it is about 5.5 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
AP maxillary deficiency and asymmetry. 
AP mandibular deficiency and asymmetry.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm (normal dimension 11 mm.)
Class I malocclusion.
Severe TMJ pain with the left side being worse than the right side.
Multiple previous TMJ and orthognathic surgeries.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications.
Antiinflammatory medications.
Pain medications.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery option I.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Option II.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and transversely level the occlusal plane.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.

LAURA SARGENT 				05/10/2006				Page 4


Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

Following our consultation, she met and talked with two of our patients who has bilateral joint prostheses and maxillary osteotomies.  She spent probably a good 45 minutes to an hour with these two patients.  One patient was one month postsurgery and the other was about two weeks postsurgery. 
