DONIE HILL-SASSER								6/22/05

Donie is 69 years old, referred by Dr. Kevin McBride.  

CURRENT CONDITIONS
Fibromyalgia.
Arthritis. 
Allergies.
Hypothyroidism.
Sjogren's syndrome.
Osteoporosis.

PREVIOUS SURGERIES
TMJ reconstruction.
Hysterectomy. 
Cataract removal. 

MEDICATIONS
Celebrex 200 mg q.d.
Synthroid 125 mg 1/2 tablet q.d.
Prevacid 30 mg q.d.
Effexor 75 mg q.d.
Lipitor 10 mg tablet 1/2 tablet q.d.
Benadryl p.r.n.
Vivelle 0.05 (hormone patch.)
Miacalcin spray.
Fiorinal p.r.n. pain and is usually on required 2 to 3 times per month.

Donie does get some left-sided earaches, no tinnitus, occasional vertigo but no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her lower back, right hip, shoulders, wrists and fingers.  She does have scoliosis.  She is aware of clenching her teeth at night and also during the day.  She gets headaches in the temple and frontal areas on the right side about a level of 7.  She has TMJ pain at a level of 7 predominantly in the right side.  She rates her average daily pain around the head and neck area of 4 but the pain can escalate up to 9.  She rates her jaw function and diet at 5, disability at 4.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Pain in her jaw joints, right side greater than left. 
Pain down through her jaws particularly on the right side.
Headaches predominantly on the right side.  
Bone growth apparently extruding from around the prosthesis. 
Concerns about decreased jaw opening and function.
Sleep disorder. 
DONIE HILL-SASSER			6/22/05				Page 2


By history, Donie's problems began about 15 years ago when she developed TMJ problems.  She saw Dr. Kevin McBride and in 1991 he apparently did work on the right TMJ and placed a Proplast/Teflon implant inter-positional implant in the right side.  Apparently an infection developed and infected up to and around her eye and so she had a second surgery for right joint debridement probably sometime around 1992.  In 1993, she had the right TMJ reconstructed with a Vitek-Kent total joint prosthesis with Proplast/Teflon associated with it.  Donie is unaware of having any snoring problems or sleep apnea problems.  She is tired during the day, however.  She does relate this tiredness to the fact that she does not sleep well at night. 

In frontal view, Donie has fairly good facial symmetry and balance.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm.  Maxillary midline is about 2 to 3 mm off towards the left side.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are very well on the facial midline.  In profile view, she has some AP deficiency in the maxilla and mandible.  Intraorally, Donie is missing a bicuspid on the left side or she may have all of her teeth but just very poor root angulation on the bicuspids.  In the upper arch, she has dental work on almost all of her teeth and has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Donie has a Class II end-on cuspid on the right side and Class I cuspid on the left side.  She has an anterior deep bite of approximately 4 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look good and uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are all pretty relatively normal.  Donie informed me she just finished up a round of antibiotics for sinus infection and bronchitis.  Intranasally, she has relatively small turbinates.  She does have some significant constricture in the luminal valves being a little bit greater on the right side than the left side.  The columella is relatively normal and the nostrils themselves are relatively normal in size.  She has some moderate nasal obstruction mainly due to the luminal valves.  To palpation, Donie has moderate pain over the temporalis muscles, TMJs, styloid areas, right SCM and right medial pterygoid area.  On function, she has a click in the left TMJ about 10 mm of opening and closing click at 5 mm.  Right joint seems to function relatively smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is about 35 mm, opens without significant pain at 30 mm.  Excursive movement to the right about 6 mm and to the left approximately 2 mm.  As Donie opens, her mandible shifts significantly off towards the right side probably about 5 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows that she has crowns on all of her maxillary teeth and all of her mandibular posterior teeth including the right cuspid.  She has root canals on the bilateral mandibular second bicuspids, first and second molars, left first bicuspid, maxillary right lateral incisor.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  She has a Christensen total joint prosthesis on the right side with an acrylic head and significantly decreased space between the functional pin and the metal plate.  Screws appear to still be in position with no particular extrusion.  

Waters view does not show the Christensen prosthesis on the right hand side.  The septum has a little bit deviation particularly at the superior aspect of the nose.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  Sinuses are clear.


DONIE HILL-SASSER			6/22/05				Page 3


Left TMJ tomogram shows a tomogram posteriorly positioned in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space.  This would be indicative of an anteriorly displaced articular disc.  The condyle appears narrow anteroposteriorly and a little flattened on top.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows the presence of a Christensen total joint prosthesis with a metal fossa.  It appears there is decreased dimension between the pin and the metal fossa.  On opening, there is some minimal translation of the prosthesis and fairly good translation of the left mandibular condyle.  There may be some reactive bone around the prosthesis.  Styloid processes are fairly prominent particularly on that right side.  Reevaluating the MRI evaluation seem to indicate that the dark area around the prosthesis is probably related to foreign body giant cell reaction and some heterotopic bone.  The foreign body giant cell reaction could be fairly extensive in this joint based on the MRI and probable breakdown products from the acrylic condylar head.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Right TMJ severe foreign body giant cell reaction secondary to failed Christensen total joint prosthesis with acrylic head.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
TMJ pain, right side greater than left side.
Right-sided headaches.
Myofascial pain, right side worse than left side.
Masticatory dysfunction.
Class I end-on occlusion on the left side, Class II end-on occlusion on the right side.
Maxillary midline shifted 2 to 3 mm to the left. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Test for allergies to materials and prosthesis through the Environmental Center, and metal implants placed in the forearm. 

CT scan TMJ Concepts protocol.

Surgery.
Removal of right failed Christensen total joint prostheses.
Right TMJ extensive debridement.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from abdomen.)
Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.