MORGAN SANDERS								12/21/2006

Morgan is 20 years old and is referred by a former patient, Karon Pyle.  Morgan is in good health with no major medical problems.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Robaxin 500 mg p.r.n. 
Naproxen 550 mg 1 to 2 per day but she is currently not taking it because her prescription ran out. 
Ibuprofen occasionally. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Constant left-sided TMJ pain.
Clicking and popping in the joints with occasional crepitation on the left side.
Frequent headaches occurring in the mornings and evenings usually. 
With significant flareups she gets swelling on the right side of her face and flattening on the left side. 

She gets left-sided earaches occasionally but no tinnitus.  She gets occasional vertigo but has no hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching her teeth during the daytime. She does not believe she clenches at night as she feels she breathes through her mouth mainly at night.  However, she does wake up with headaches in the morning and then they get better in the afternoon and then they get worse again at night.  She rates her headaches on the left side at a level of 6 in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 7, diet at 4 and disability at 6. 

Morgan's problems began at about the age of 14 when she was aware of clicking and popping in the joints.  She did not develop pain until she was involved in a motor vehicle accident at the age of 18.  The pain is confined just to the left side.  

She did have previous orthodontics from the age of 12 to 14.  She feels that her teeth have shifted and moved since that time.  She had her tonsils removed in 1996 and had all 4 third molars removed in April of 2005.  Since December of 2005, she has been under splint therapy with approximately 6 adjustments with Dr. Duplantis.  The current splint therapy that Morgan was on did help her initially but now when she wears it at night, it seems to actually make her headaches and pain worse.  

In frontal view, Morgan has more fullness in the right side of the face than the left side.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 4 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Chin is shifted just slightly to the left side probably about 2 to 3 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 1-1/2 mm to the left.  She has lip incompetence of approximately 4 to 5 mm.  Morgan has a head postured forward neck position.  She has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip.  She appears to have some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded approximately 8 mm.  Chin-neckline appears short and chin-neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, Morgan has retained primary right second molar but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars present.  
MORGAN SANDERS			12/21/2006				Page 2


She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the left side and a slight Class III occlusal density by probably 10 mm on the right side.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being maybe 1-1/2 mm lower than the left side.  All pharyngeal areas look healthy.  She has some scarring from where the previous tonsillectomy was done.  Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars look all within normal limits.  Intranasally, she has a deviation of the septum off towards the right side.  The right turbinate appears relatively moderate in size and there appears there may be a little bit of a decreased airway on the right side.  On the left side, the turbinate appears enlarged perhaps more posteriorly but difficult to assess the airway dimensions in that area.  Anteriorly, the airway dimension is fairly good because of the septal deviation off towards the right.  There may be mild to moderate airway obstruction.  The columella is wide and nostrils are relatively narrow.  Luminal valves appear relatively normal.  She may have some mild snoring at night.  She has mild daytime somnolence but is not aware of sleep apnea problems.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the left masseter right shoulder and minimal tenderness over the right styloid area.  On opening, she has a click in the left joint between 5 to 10 mm of opening but cannot detect a closing click.  The right side seems to function relatively smoothly.  Cranial nerves 5 and 7 appear to be intact.  As Morgan opens, the mandible shifts towards the left side by about 3 to 4 mm.  Maximal incisal opening is about 33 mm with deviation to the left of 3 to 4 mm.  She can open about 28 mm without significant discomfort.  Excursive movement to the right 4 mm, left 8 mm.  It appears that she has a closed lock situation or semblance of that on the left side.  Morgan appears to have a transverse yaw of the posterior aspect of the maxilla and mandible towards the right side perhaps 2, at the most 3 mm.  Right commissure may be 2 mm lower than the left side.  The right side of the mandible at the inferior border appears that it may be 3 mm lower than the left side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except for the four third molars that are absent.  She has retained primary right second molar with absence of permanent successor.  Sinuses appear clear.  Nasal airway appears somewhat diminished on the right side.  

Waters view shows that there is a deviation of the nasal septum and a small spur present.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged and the airway does not look particularly good.  The left sinus appears cloudier than the right side but the ethmoid and frontal sinuses appear clear.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it.  It appears narrow anteroposteriorly.  There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space but increased anterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep and a little bit steeper than the opposite side. 



MORGAN SANDERS			12/21/2006				Page 3


Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears larger in size.  Articular eminence is not quite as steep as the opposite side.  There appears to be decreased posterior joint space.  On opening, there is some restriction of translation noted bilaterally but the left side has significantly less translation as compared to the right side.  On the opening view, the left condylar head appears smaller in the anteroposterior dimension as compared to the right side.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a head postured forward neck position.  Her tongue is positioned relatively low in the mouth but at the base of the tongue she has a diminished airway of about 4 mm.  At the soft palate level, the airway is probably about 6 mm.  She appears to have a moderately high occlusal plane angle and some AP mandibular deficiency.  Suprisingly the occlusal plane and the inferior borders appear to be more coincident on the ceph than they do clinically.  Morgan has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction with the left side worse than the right side.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess. 
Slight Class III occlusal tendency on the right side, Class I on the left side.
Facial asymmetry with a posterior yaw of the maxilla and mandible towards the right side 2 to 3 mm.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
 Retained mandibular right primary second molar with absence of permanent successor.
 Crowding of lower anterior arch.
 Lower arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 2 mm anterior to the left cuspid.
 Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 Wide columella and constricted nostrils.
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure.  Slenderize the mandibular right primary molar removing at least 1 mm from that tooth and retracting the anterior teeth while trying to maximize the posterior anchorage.



MORGAN SANDERS			12/21/2006				Page 4


Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction and correct the transverse asymmetry.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly, advance and correct the posterior asymmetry. 
Reconstruct columella to enlarge the nostrils.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
