IRENE SANCHEZ									01-27-03

Irene is 49 years old and referred by Dr. Michael Adame, 206 W. Mahl, Edinburg, TX  78539.

Patient History

Irene has had previous surgery for gallbladder and also for rhinoplasty. Other problems that she has include anxiety, hypothyroidism, hypertension, and acid reflux. She has had problems with bronchitis. She has had problems with hay fever in the past, and up until about three years ago she had mild asthma. She had to take medications for the asthma including an inhaler.

Irene’s problems in reference to her jaw joints began somewhere around the late ‘70s or early ‘80s of unknown etiology. She states she has had a lot of dental work done, and she has had teeth extracted that probably didn’t need to be extracted. She underwent orthodontics from 1995 through 1997 by Dr. David Adame. She has had a night guard since 1998 to the present. She has had some extensive dental work done. 

She has no problems with earaches but does have some tinnitus and gets occasional vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her back, left shoulder occasionally, fingers occasionally, and more recently her hips. She gets muscle cramps in her feet. She is aware of having nocturnal clenching. 

She rates her TMJ pain at 5, overall pain on an average day at 3, but it does escalate up to an 8. She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 2, and disability at 3. She has no particular problems with headaches.

Patient Concerns

It is difficult to get into a stable jaw relationship where she can be comfortable
TMJ pain
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints
Ringing in the ears
Significant snoring problems
Possible apnea problems when sleeping
Daytime somnolence
Difficulties relaxing her tongue

Current Medications

She takes the following medications:
Synthroid
Acion (for increased blood pressure)
Paxil
Prilosec



Clinical Examination

In frontal view, she has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. On the left side, the face appears a little bit shorter vertically than the right side. Upper lip length is 25 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline may be about a millimeter off to the left side. Mandibular dental midline is a little bit closer to the facial midline. Nasal tip is just slightly to the right side. Chin may be a couple of millimeters to the left. 

In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose. Chin may be just slightly retruded. Chin-neckline is not well defined. Chin may be back maybe 4 to 5 mm. 

Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular right first molar with a pontic in its place and mandibular left first and second molars. She has reconstructive dentistry that includes the first bicuspid all the way back through the third molar on that side. She has a 3 x 3 retainer anteriorly. Has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars, although she does have some crowns particularly in the left posterior quadrant. She has a posterior crossbite tendency on the right side. Slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by probably a couple of millimeters. On the left side, she is a little bit Class III by a millimeter or two. Posterior teeth appear to be out of occlusion bilaterally. In Irene’s centric occlusion where he mandible is back all the way, her posterior teeth appear to touch as do the anteriors. She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side of about 2 mm, and on the left side she is Class I. Her more comfortable bite is how it was initially described where it appeared that the posterior teeth may be apart. As she goes into her centric relationship, she does have audible popping in her jaw joints with most of the problem on the left side. She does have some crenations on her tongue. Oropharynx appears clear. Posterior faucial pillars may be somewhat posteriorly positioned. Uvula is relatively normal in size.

Intranasally, the right turbinate appears enlarged. Left turbinate is difficult to see. Nasal septum is deviated off toward the left side particularly at the anterior aspect of it. 

To palpation, she has some very mild tenderness over the right styloid area but no other pain around the head and neck area. Maximal incisal opening is 47 mm but with comfort 40 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 7 mm and to the left 11 mm. On opening from her centric relation position, she had an opening click that appeared to be bilaterally at around 10 mm and closing click at about 5 mm. As she postures her lower jaw forward some, the loud audible clicking is not present. Evaluating the transverse cant in the arches demonstrates that the left side is 2 mm higher than the right side. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular right first and third molars, left first and second molars, and bilateral maxillary third molars. Root canals on the mandibular right second molar and maxillary right second molar. There may also be a root canal in the maxillary left first molar but difficult to tell on this radiograph. Sinuses are a little hard to evaluate, and there could be a little bit of cloudiness in the left sinus. Left condyle appears a little bit smaller and shorter in vertical height than the right side. 

Left TMJ tomogram is probably taken with her lower jaw postured forward. Appears to be some sclerosis on the head of the condyles and some anterior beaking present. Slope of the articular eminence is moderately shallow, and there is some sclerosis at the peak of the eminence. Slightly increased posterior joint space with decreased vertical joint space. This is indicative of probably poor posturing of the mandible. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit of flattening on the anterior head. Some mild anterior beaking but not much. Increased posterior and superior joint space. Articular eminence is fairly normal in length and angulation. Condyle may be postured forward. 

Open views show good translation of both condyles out beyond the articular eminence with it being a little bit greater translation on the right side as compared to the left side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Right turbinate appears larger than the left turbinate. Vertical deficiency in the height of the face on the left side is noted. Could be as high as 10 mm vertically shorter on the left angle area as compared to the right side. 

Cephalometrically, vertical asymmetry of the inferior border of the mandible is noted. Oropharyngeal airway is significantly decreased at the soft palate level being only about 2 to 3 mm. At the base of the tongue, the airway is a little bit larger with a distance of about 8 mm. Appears to fill a good portion of the oral cavity. Appears to have a high occlusal plane angulation.

Retake of tomograms in centric relation reveals the following:
Right TMJ tomogram in centric relation shows decreased posterior and superior joint space. Sclerosis on the head of the condyle compatible with anterior displacement of the articular disc.
Left TMJ tomogram in centric relation shows decreased superior and anterior joint space. Anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Compatible with findings on the MRI of degenerative changes. Probably at least 5 to 7 mm difference in vertical height of the condylar head and neck on the left side to the right side. The left side is much shorter.

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and severe degenerative changes
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia
Maxillary asymmetry with the left side being significantly vertically shorter than the right side
AP mandibular hypoplasia and significant asymmetry
Hyperplastic soft palate
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway
Severe snoring
Sleep apnea
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Class II end-on occlusion on the right side, Class I occlusion on the left side
Crossbite on the left side, functionally stable
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the maxilla being 2 mm vertically shorter in the cuspid area and 5 to 6 mm vertically shorter in the molar area as compared to the right side
Nasal deformity secondary to previous surgery

Recommended Treatment

Consider workup for sleep apnea

CT scan of maxilla and mandible and TMJs (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Presurgical orthodontics
Place appliances on the upper arch
Place appliances on the lower arch

Surgery, Treatment Option #1
Left TMJ condylectomy, debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Right mandibular ramus osteotomy with bone screw stabilization
Fat graft to left TMJ (harvested from abdomen)
Place arch bars if patient prefers this over orthodontic appliances
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP procedure) with lateral inversion flaps

Surgery, Treatment Option #2
Left TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Right mandibular ramus osteotomy for advancement
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance forward, level the occlusal plane, and correct transverse width factors
Coronoidectomy
Fat graft to left TMJ (harvested from abdomen)
Arch bars if patient selects this method over orthodontic appliances
Reconstruct nose
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP procedure) with lateral inversion flaps