YOLANDA SANCHEZ								07/24/2006

Yolanda is 42 years old, referred by Dr. Gary Schwarz.  Her orthodontist is Dr. David Adame.  Yolanda has had previous surgery for carpal tunnel release, hysterectomy, appendectomy, C-section and tonsillectomy. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Headaches. 
TMJ pain. 
Difficulties eating and chewing. 

Yolanda's TMJ problems began initially about 15 years ago.  She wore a splint for about two years at that time.  Her symptoms decreased and she discontinued wearing the splint.  At about the age of 35, the pain began to get worse again.  In 2004 another splint was made and she wore that for about two and a half years.  She just recently discontinued it because she had orthodontic appliances placed and the splint no longer fits.  In April of 2006, she had bilateral TMJ arthrocentesis procedures performed.  None of these treatments have helped her. 

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:   
Xalatan for glaucoma.
Timoptic. 
Imodium p.r.n.

She does get occasional earache but has no tinnitus or vertigo.  She does have hearing loss and wears hearing aids.  The other joints that bother her include her hands, fingers, elbows and right knee.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night.  She gets headaches about two times per week that she rates at a level of 4 and they occur predominately in the frontal, temporal and posterior head areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at 4 on an average day but the worst gets up to about a 10.  She rates her facial pain and headaches at 4, jaw function at 8, diet at 8 and disability at 5.  

Yolanda apparently breathes through her mouth when she sleeps.  She has some mild snoring problems.  She is mildly tired during the day.  She is not aware of any sleep apnea symptoms.  She apparently had some sleep apnea problems in the past.  She said about a year ago she had difficulties with that but that has cleared.  She says she has lost some weight.  This could have been contributory to the improvement. 

In frontal view, Yolanda has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  Maxillary mandibular and chin midline are all pretty well aligned to the facial midline.  In profile view, she has some problems in the nasal dorsum.  The maxilla may be a little bit AP deficient by maybe 2 to 3 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded by about 15 mm.  Chin neckline is short and well defined.  There is quite a bit of fullness in the submental area.  Intraorally, Yolanda has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  A little bit of crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She appears to have good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars as well.  She is fairly close to being in a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  
YOLANDA SANCHEZ			07/24/2006 				Page 2


She has about 1.5 mm of overbite relationship.  She has a high occlusion plane angulation facial morphology.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  Soft palate may be mildly elongated.  Faucial pillars are mildly constricted.  It was difficult to see in the back of her throat because of some limited opening and because there is some significant discomfort.  It is difficult to see the tonsils but they appear to be present and slightly enlarged.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side and there is a septal spur off to the right side.  The right turbinate appears relatively normal size.  The left turbinate is enlarged but because of the septum deviation it does not appear to create any significant airway problems.  She reports mild snoring.  She has no daytime somnolence and no sleep apnea syndrome except she did say that she had problems with that last year.  To palpation, she has mild tenderness over the masseters, TMJs and styloid areas.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  There is calcification between the apex of the mandibular right mesial root of the first molar.  Sinuses appear clear.  Some significant arthritic changes in the joints being a little bit greater on the right side than the left side.

Waters view shows that the bony septum is relatively straight.  There is a significant deviation in the nasal septum posteriorly.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the joint space is actually slightly excessive.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  It appears that she had the coronoids removed.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears somewhat degenerated.  Joint space is hard to identify.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a relatively high occlusal plane and posterior vertical deficiency in the maxilla and mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 3 to 4 mm.  She has a mild increased occlusal plane angle.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with significant deformation. 
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia. 
High occlusal plane angle. 
Class I cuspid molar relationship.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
  Myofascial pain. 


YOLANDA SANCHEZ			07/24/2006 				Page 3


  Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
  Snoring.
  Previous history of sleep apnea.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the chin.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
