ELAINE SANTANGELO								08-13-04

Patient History

I first saw Elaine on 01/24/1985 when she was 28 years old. She had had TMJ problems since 1978. She had clicking and popping in her jaws at that time. On 01/26/85, I performed bilateral plications of the TMJ articular discs bilaterally. I also did some reconstruction of the right articular eminence. She has done fairly well since that time. She did end up seeing because of pain problems and her insurance requirements Dr. Colin Bell in 1996. He made a splint for her and then placed her on some short-term medications which seemed to help her. She progressed on seeing him occasionally. She tried to make an appointment with him on 05/20 of this year, and Dr. Bell informed her that he no longer treated TMJ patients. Elaine was referred to Dr. Billy Phillips for management of her TMJ problems, and then Dr. Phillips suggested that Elaine come back here.

Elaine is currently 48 years old. She gets some left-sided earaches but no tinnitus and gets occasional vertigo. She has hearing loss on the left side, but the hearing loss and perhaps the earaches in part may be due to repeated rupturing of the left tympanic membrane and several repairs on that ear from flying. No other joints bother her at this time. She is very much aware of clenching and bruxism nighttime and daytime. She has actually broken splints because of the amount of clenching and bruxism that she has. Her pain is worse in the mornings when she first wakes up, and then in the evening it gets quite severe again. She has been on and off splint therapy since the ‘90s as well as medications. She gets headaches at a level of 10 in the frontal and temporal areas in the mornings, and they decrease some but then become more intensified in the evenings to about a level of 8 or so. Rates her average daily TMJ pain at 8 although it can easily escalate to 10. Average daily pain overall is at a level of 8, jaw function at 8, diet at 7, and disability at 5. The only other surgery that she has had since she was last here is she did have some breast implants done, and she had that done in 08/2003. 

Elaine is not aware of having any allergies of any kind. She does not feel she has any problems wearing cheap jewelry. Elaine has significant weakness bilaterally in the frontal nerve distribution area. She says that Dr. Fritz Barton intentionally cut a portion of that nerve to decrease forehead lines.

Current Medications

Synthroid 0.0125 mg q.d.
Bextra 20 mg b.i.d.

Patient Concerns

Severe TMJ pain
Severe headaches
Difficulties eating and chewing
Feels as though the balls in the jaw joints fall out of place
Pain problems and jaw dysfunction problems are getting progressively worse

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Elaine has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm.

In profile view, she has good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Chin may be AP deficient by probably about 10 to 12 mm. Chin-neckline is short. 

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some areas inside her cheeks particularly on the left side where she bites her cheeks. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a number of crowns on particularly the upper right side. She does have an implant on #14, and #29 has an implant also. She has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship and has about a 2-mm anterior overbite.

Intranasally, turbinates are of moderate size. Septum is reasonably straight, but there is a perforation in it. She is not aware of having any snoring problems and no sleep apnea problems. She is moderately tired in the afternoons.

To palpation, she has severe pain around the temporalis muscles, TMJs, high moderate pain in the shoulders, masseter areas, moderate pain of the SCMS, and milder pain over the medial pterygoids and posterior neck area. Maximal incisal opening is 30 mm but only about 18 mm without significant pain. Excursive movement to the right was 5 mm and to the left 6 mm. 

On opening, she has some fine crepitation in the left TMJ. Right joint seems reasonably smooth. However, there is very minimal translatory movements within the joints.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses look relatively clear. She has an osseointegrated implant in the maxillary left first molar/mandibular right second bicuspid. Third molars are missing. She has a bridge replacing the maxillary right second bicuspid. She has a bridge with pontic replacing the maxillary right second bicuspid. She has root canals on the maxillary right first bicuspid, first molar, left second bicuspid. Condyles appear somewhat arthritic with the left one appearing somewhat more arthritic than the right side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is postured somewhat forward in the fossa. Appears to be absent in the joint space. Condyle appears arthritic. Appears sclerotic on top with some anterior beaking. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Appears that there may be bone on bone contact.

Right TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle that is arthritic and more of a mushroom kind of condylar head. Anterior beaking is present. Significantly decreased joint space is present. Articular eminence is quite shallow even slightly more than the opposite side.

On opening, there is very minimal translation of the condyle with it being just slightly more on the right side as compared to the left side. 

Waters view shows that the right sinus appears quite cloudy. She has very small almost nonexistent frontal sinuses. Left sinus aeration appears quite restricted as well. Nasal airway appears good. 

Cephalometrically, she has a Class II skeletal relationship with a high occlusal plane angle. Airway actually looks reasonably good. She has AP microgenia. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis
Severe TMJ pain
Severe headaches
Severe myofascial pain
Severe masticatory dysfunction
AP microgenia
Severe clenching and bruxism likely a result of the TMJ pathology

Recommended Treatment

Medications
Klonopin to help control clenching and bruxism
Consider possible pain medication if required

CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)
Application of arch bars
HTR implant to anterior mandible

Postsurgical removal of arch bars probably 1 to 2 months postsurgery

I gave Elaine the following prescriptions:
Klonopin 1 mg tablet, disp. 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s. May take ½ tablet b.i.d. if necessary to control daytime bruxism, refill x 3
Bextra 20 mg, disp. 30 tablets, 1 tablet 1 to 2 times per day p.r.n. pain, refill x 3