JOHNNY SANDERSON								03/31/2008

Johnny is 56 years old,  referred by Dr. William Hang, 101 N. Westlake Blvd., Suite 202, Westlake Village, CA 91362.  Johnny’s primary concerns are as follows: 
Severe sleep apnea.
Jaw and TMJ pain. 
Difficulties breathing through his nose.

The onset of the TMJ problems is unknown and John remembers having noises in his right joint
particularly for as long as he can remember of unknown etiology.  He had orthodontics in 1975 
and has his lower jaw set backwards also in 1975 when he was approximately 21 years old.  He 
had his wisdom teeth extracted in 1974.  In 1986 and 2005, he had cysts removed from his back.
In 2003, he had a heart stent placed.  John takes the following medications:

Coumadin 5 mg q.d.
Zocor 20 mg q.d.
Tiazac 240 mg q.d.
Toprol XL 50 mg q.d.
Altace 5 mg q.d.

John gets headaches at about a level of 4 mainly on the right side in the frontal and temporal area
that increase referred pain to behind his right eye.  He rates his average daily pain at about 4 to 5. 
He rates his TMJ pain at about 6 when it reaches it peak and other times around about  level of 2.  
Most of the pain is on the right side.  He rates his jaw function at 3, diet at 0, disability at 2.  He
does wake up with his jaws sore in the morning.  He has a mouthpiece for his CPAP machine. 
He has been on the CPAP machine since 1998 and oxygen was added since 2007.  He gets 
chiropractic treatment about one time per month and this seems to help his pain level some.  He 
gets earaches on the right side, gets occasional tinnitus, occasional vertigo.  He has a 10% 
disability in reference to his hearing.  Other joints that bother him include his right shoulder and 
some of his fingers.  He is aware of bruxing at night, although with his mouthpiece and the 
CPAP machine this may help reduce that some.  He has significant difficulties breathing through 
his nose and is predominantly a mouth breather.

He has severe snoring, moderate daytime somnolence, severe sleep apnea, and is predominantly a mouth breather at night time and during the day.  He does have some lower back problems that 
have been present 1994 through 1997 and did receive some shock treatments for that, but 
continues to have problems. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, upper lip length is about 30 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is probably about minus 2 to 3.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline may be just slightly to the right 1 mm.  Chin may be about 2 to 3 mm to the right.  In profile view, the upper lip supra labrale is posterior subnasally.  Maxilla is probably a good 6 to 8 mm AP deficient.  Mandible is probably about 15 mm AP deficient.  Intraorally, John has all of his lower teeth back to the second molars.  There is some spacing between the left cuspid and first bicuspid.  There is a bit of crowding on the right side.  Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other particularly at the spacing where all close and teeth align. In the upper arch, John has all of his teeth back to the second molars.  He has crowns on the second molars at least.  He has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side being probably 2 mm Class III.  On the left side also is about 1 to 2 mm Class III.  He has a posterior crossbite on the right side and lesser total crossbite back in the molar area.  On the left side, he likewise has an extremely significant crossbite.  He has a reverse curve of Wilson in the lower arch.  He has an end-on incisor relationship with zero overbite.  Posterior crossbites are probably 8 to 10 mm on each side.  Uvula is moderate elongated.  Soft palate looks relatively normal and fascial pillars are relatively normal and are mildly constricted.  Tonsils appears relatively normal to mild enlargement.  Nasal turbinates are fairly good size and may be larger posteriorly as compared to anteriorly.  He did have his turbinates “burned” a couple of years ago and this helped slightly.  Holding his nostrils open with a nasal speculum improved his ability to breathe through his nose.  There is some deviation in the nasal septum.  Nostrils do look relatively normal in size, but the luminal valves appear constricted bilaterally.  To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the TMJs, styloid areas, and left medial pterygoid. On opening, he has noise in both joints, but most of it is coming out over the articular eminence in both joints.  He may have a soft click in the right joint that may be at 25 mm of opening and at 20 mm of closing.  On excursion movements, he has a definite glitch and click in the right joint.  Maximal incisal opening is about 55 mm, excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.  Transversely, John has a fair level occlusal plane.
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the narrow mandible anteroposteriorly in the ramus area related to the previous surgery he had which were probably vertical oblique osteotomies.  He had his jaws wired together for 6 weeks when he had his surgery done.  He has a root canal on the maxillary right second bicuspid and crowns on the maxillary second molars.  The sinuses are not well visualized, or at least the inferior aspect appears to be clear.  The condyles appear to have a reasonable shape.  
Waters view shows that the bony septum at least is fairly straight.  Turbinates are enlarged, particularly on the left side appears to obliterate most of the nasal airway.  Sinuses appear small, but appear relatively clear.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit sclerotic on the head.  Joint space looks reasonably good, although there could be just a slight decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Right TMJ tomogram is not quite as clear, but it appears that there is decreased vertical and posterior joint space and a little bit of anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is slightly less steep compared to the opposite side.  On opening, there is relatively good translation. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that John has a retruded maxilla and mandible and a Class III skeletal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway in this view shows that there is an airway about 11 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue, probably about 13 5 mm.  
Basic diagnoses for John would be as follows:
Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc posteriorly dislocated.
AP, vertical, and transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.  
Severe sleep apnea. 
End-on Class III occlusion.  
Anterior and severe bilateral posterior crossbites.  
Hypertrophied turbinates.  
Constricture of bilateral nasal luminal valves.  
Severe nasal airway obstruction.
Predominantly a mouth breather.  
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2.5 mm.  
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Right side earaches.
Reverse curve of Wilson lower arch. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally.  Open up 1 mm of space between the crowns of the laterals and cuspids to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to tip lower posterior teeth lingually to decrease the reverse curve of Wilson.
Surgery. 
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, expand, and down graft the posterior aspect.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.  
Bilateral partial nasal inferior turbinectomies.
Reconstruction of luminal valves.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors with bonding or veneers.