JULIE SASSENRATH									01-14-04

Julie is 31 years old and referred by Dr. Moody Alexander.

Patient History

Julie has had some previous surgeries. They include the following:

At the age of 2, a tumor was removed blocking the right eardrum
Tonsils and adenoids removed
Septum and sinus surgery
Hole in left eardrum repaired with a graft

Julie is in good health. 

Medication wise, she takes birth control pills, and she takes Imitrex when she gets migraine headaches.

Julie is not aware of when her jaw problems began. It has only been about a month ago that her dentist identified that she had a click in her left jaw joint. The onset, therefore, is unknown, and the etiology is also unknown.

She has had no specific treatment for her jaws. 

She has no known allergies. She can’t wear cheap earrings. She is not aware of any problems with clenching or bruxing in the day rule out night. She gets headaches two to three times a week that she rates about a level of 4 that occur predominantly in the frontal and temporal areas. Her migraines she has one or two times per month, and they usually register about a level of 8. She rates TMJ pain at 0, overall pain at 4, jaw function and diet at 0, and disability at 2. The disability is associated predominantly with the migraine headaches that she periodically gets.

Patient Concerns

Teeth and jaws are not properly aligned
Pop in the jaw joints
Headaches which she has had all of her life
Discomfort in the cheeks
Discomfort in the right temple area

Medications

Birth control pills
Imitrex
Excedrin, Aleve, etc., for headache control

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Julie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. She has prominent masseter muscles and has a low mandibular plane angle facial morphology. Nasal dorsum is a little bit broad, and she has a hump in the mid dorsum part. The lower alar cartilages are somewhat wide. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 5 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline. 
In profile view, she has a little bit of fullness in the upper lip area down by the incisor aspect. Seems to have fairly good projection of the subnasale. The nasal dorsal prominence is more obvious. Chin appears AP deficient by perhaps 6 to 8 mm. Chin-neckline is short, and chin-neckline is moderately well-defined. If she Julie postures her mandible forward, it does improve the facial balance some. Chin still looks a little bit AP deficient with her mandible postured forward into an end-on incisor relationship. 

Intraorally, Julie has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some large lingual tori bilaterally. She has some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. There is a slightly accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch but not too bad. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch. She is a little bit Class II end-on occlusion being a little bit greater on the left side than the right side with the right side being probably 3 mm Class II and the left side being probably 2 mm Class II. She has an anterior deep bite of probably about 6 mm. Transversely, the occlusal plane appears fairly level. Transversely, the arches look fairly symmetrical. 

Intranasally, she has had previous complete turbinectomies performed with a little bit of turbinate remaining on the left side way posteriorly. She has had previous septal surgery with evidence of that surgery. Airway looks good and wide open. She has been skiing and has noticed no problems with the cold air and breathing since her turbinectomies and nasal septoplasty. 

Julie has had some temporary buildups of her crowns on the maxillary left central and lateral incisors. 

TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly, except on the left side, if she opens really widely, there is a definite pop on opening and closing that appears to be at about the same level at about 40 mm. The closing click is at about the same level. It may be just the condyle popping out over the articular eminence at that point. To palpation, she has about a level of 1 tenderness over the right temporalis muscle but all other areas are apparently free of discomfort and pain with palpation. Maximum incisal opening is about 51 mm and about 41 mm with reasonable comfort. Excursive movement to the right is about 7 mm and to the left about 8 mm. 

She had her turbinectomies and nasal septoplasty done in St. Louis by an otolaryngologist. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that both maxillary sinuses appear fairly clear except there is a little bit more cloudiness on the left one. She is missing all four third molars. Maxillary left central incisor has a root canal, and the crowns are built up on that tooth as well as the adjacent left lateral incisor. Condyles look a little flattened anteriorly and appear to have some anterior beaking present. 

Waters view shows that the nasal airway is wide open. Septum is a little bit deviated at the very top part of it off toward the left side. Left sinus appears a little bit more opacified than the right side, but there is not too much difference.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some superior peaking of the condyle and flattening of the anterior head of the condyle. Condyle, however, appears to be fairly well balanced and positioned in the fossa. Articular disc could possibly be a little bit vertically oriented in the right joint and could possibly be acting as a wedge pushing the condyle posteriorly. 
Left TMJ has significant flattening on the anterior head of the condyle, and a little bit of anterior beaking may be present. Vertical joint space appears may be decreased in dimension. Articular eminence is moderately steep as it is on the opposite side. Disc may be vertically oriented. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles, but the left one has a little bit more forward translation as compared to the left one and may be part of the reason for the click in that joint. 

Cephalometric radiograph shows that there is a slight Class II skeletal relationship. Occlusal plane may be just a little bit high but difficult to tell. Oropharyngeal airway looks very good. Angles of the mandible appear quite prominent. Anterior deep bite is seen, and the Class II end-on occlusion is appreciated. Oropharyngeal airway appears very good except down by the hyoid bone there is a slightly dimension of probably about 6 mm. At the soft palate level, the AP dimension is about 18 mm and at the base of the tongue is about 10 mm. Appears to be a little bit of maxillary prominence and a little bit of AP chin deficiency.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation
Maxillary AP hyperplasia
Slight vertical maxillary hyperplasia
AP mandibular hypoplasia
AP microgenia
Class II end-on occlusion with division II relationship in the incisors
Reverse curve of occlusion, upper arch
Mild crowding, lower anterior teeth
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 1 to 2 mm
Slight overangulation of the lower incisors
Anterior deep bite
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
External nasal deformity

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Try to intrude the maxillary central incisors 1 to 2 mm if possible. Be careful of the left maxillary central incisor as it possibly could be ankylosed. If ankylosis is realized on that tooth, then align and level the maxillary arch in three segments:
Segment 1:  Left cuspid through second molar
Segment 2:  Left lateral incisor through right lateral incisor
Segment 3:  Right cuspid through right second molar
Place a downward step in the arch wire to align the four incisors at the lower occlusal plane level. This will involve extruding the maxillary lateral incisors slightly. Keep the lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to help compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy 
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly and posteriorly
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible into occlusion
Augmentation genioplasty of approximately 5 mm
External rhinoplasty

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
