B121
B121 is 58 years old. She is referred by Dr. XXXX. B121's problems began she believes somewhere around 6 years ago when she noticed she had difficulties opening her jaw. The etiology was unknown. She did have orthodontics as a teenager and had bicuspids extracted. Orthodontics was started again at age 54 to try to get her teeth together and treat the TMJs.

She gets headaches at about a level of 5 in the temporal areas about once or twice per week. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 6, diet at 4, disability at 5. She takes no medications. She gets left-sided earaches, occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She has had hepatitis. She feels that she may clench her teeth some at nighttime, but it is difficult to tell because her teeth do not fit together very well and she wears fairly heavy elastics at night.

In frontal view, B121 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 26 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is zero. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline and chin. The nasal tip is off to the right side about 3 mm. She did have an injury to her nose when she was about 7 years old on a jungle gym. In profile view, she has probably 4 or 5 mm of AP maxillary deficiency. In profile, the maxilla appears to be retruded 4 to 5 mm and the mandible appears to be retruded about 12 to 15 mm. The chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well defined. Occlusally, she is missing the lower probably first bicuspids and in the upper arch probably first bicuspids as well. She has discrepancies in the marginal ridges of all the molar teeth on the right side and to a lesser extent on the left side. She does have her third molars in. The maxillary right central incisor is a little bit lingually inclined. When she bites in centric relation, the mandibular dental midline and chin midline shift off to the right side about 2 mm. She is basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and Class III end-on on the left side. The mandibular right cuspid is about 3 mm posterior to the left cuspid. She has an open bite on the left side that extends from about the left lateral incisor back through the second molars. On the right side, she has an overbite just in the second and third molar area. She is wearing vertical elastics on the left side and she says when she wakes up in the morning she feels as though those teeth touch, but then they come apart again, and it is just one tooth in the very back that touches. In the lower arch, she has two distinct occlusal plane levels with the left side being probably 3 to 4 mm lower than the right side. All of the posterior teeth in the mandibular left side are anterior to the same teeth on the right side by 3 to 4 mm. The maxillary occlusal plane actually appears fairly level with may be the left side being just about 1 mm lower in the cuspid area than the right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. Intranasally, it is very difficult to visualize. The nasal septum is deviated significantly off to the right side and obliterates a good part of the nasal valve on that side. She also has a spur that comes off the septum over into the left side that almost touches against the moderately enlarged turbinates. She has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and about 4 mm Class III occlusal relationship on the left side. She has a 1 mm anterior overbite. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the right TMJ, but nothing of real significance to the head and neck area. As opens and closes her jaws, she has sort of a crunchy sort of sound that she hears and feels. To palpation, there is just some mild tenderness over the right TMJ. Maximum incisal opening is 55 mm, opening without discomfort 35 mm. The excursion movement to the right is 9 mm, to the left 14 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
B121 is missing her maxillary third molars, upper probably first bicuspids, and lower first bicuspids, but her lower third molars are erupted in. she has root canals on the mandibular right central and lateral incisors. She also has a root canal on the mandibular left first molar. The condyles appear a little bit arthritic. Unfortunately, it appears she may have been holding her mandible forward when the x-rays were taken. On the left joint, the condyle is postured forward in the fossa. The condyle has a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it. The articular eminence is relatively short, but fairly steep.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little flattening on the anterior head. The articular eminence is moderately steep. There appears to be some decreased superior joint space in this side. It appears that her mandible is postured off towards her right side.

Left TMJ coronal view shows that there may be some decreased joint space superiorly.
Right TMJ coronal view shows that she definitely has decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint and also medially. Both condyles appear somewhat arthritic. Both lateral poles of the condyle extend beyond the lateral rim of the fossa and are quite palpable.

Coronal radiograph shows that she has severely deviated nasal septum in the bony area with it actually touching against the left lateral wall of the nose. The cartilaginous anterior aspect of the septum cartilage is deviated significantly off towards the right side. The turbinates, particularly the right inferior and middle turbinates are extremely large. The mandibular left turbinate appears a little bit more normal in size.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a retruded maxilla and mandible and she has a high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway is decreased to about 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 to 9 mm at the base of the tongue.

Basic diagnoses for B121 would be as follows:
Right mild TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. Maxillary AP, posterior vertical, and transverse hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class I occlusion on the right side, Class III end-on occlusion by 3 to 4 mm on the left side.
Missing all four first bicuspids.
Maxillary midline shifted to the left 1 mm, mandibular dental midline shifted to the right 1 to 2 mm along with the chin. Mandibular teeth on the left side are 1 to 2 mm lower than the teeth on the right side.
Possible multiply anklyosed maxillary and mandibular teeth.
Posterior cross bite tendencies.
Retained mandibular third molars. Marginal ridge vertical variations particularly in the lower arch. High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 6 mm.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Severely deviated nasal septum.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Headaches. TMJ pain.
Lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being 3 mm anterior to the right cuspid.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. MRI of left and right TMJ.
2. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch. b.	Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Try to get the right mandibular central incisor into the arch (this could be an ankylosed tooth). Try to align the marginal ridges.
3. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
4. Surgery. a.	Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair. b. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. c.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. d.	Bilateral partial turbinectomies. e.	Nasal septoplasty; f.	Extraction of mandibular malaligned third molars.
5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B121 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width, and, in fact, the lateral pole extends out beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. There appears to be decreased superior joint space. It is difficult to identify discal tissue, although it appears that there may be some that is laterally displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. The lateral pole extends beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. There appears to be discal tissue that may be medially and anteriorly displaced, although in one area it possibly could be laterally displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head. The articular eminence is moderately steep. There is a little bit of hockey stick shape to it. The disc for the most part appear to be in position. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the articular disc with the disc remaining in a reduced position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head and may be some slight anterior beaking. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced just at the lateral aspect of the joint, but over medially it appears to be in a better position. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle and the disc with the disc in a reduced position.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc that appears to be in position with good translation of the condylar head and disc. Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint but with early reduction and good translation of the condyle and disc.

