ANDREW SALTOUN								05/17/2010

Andrew is 29 years 11 months old.  Referred by Dr. Maz Moshiri.  Andrew has had previous rhinoplasty and has had a septoplasty x2.  Otherwise, he is in fairly good health except for some allergy and sinus problems.  He takes the following medications:

Propecia.
Allegra.
Nasacort.  

Andrew believes that his TMJ problems began at about the age of 15 in approximately 1995 of unknown etiology.  He had orthodontics for about 2 to 4 years on and off and finished at about the age of 17.  He had palatal expanders performed.  He has had his wisdom teeth removed.  He gets headaches at about level of 2 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area.  He rates his TMJ pain at 2, average daily pain at 0, jaw function at 7, diet at 4, and disability at 3.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, and no other joints bother him.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  

In frontal view, Andrew has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -2.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The nasal tip is a little bit off towards the left side about 2 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline, but the chin is a little bit to the left about 2 to 3 mm.  In profile view, he has some ptosis of the nasal tip.  The maxilla appears to be 3 to 4 mm AP deficient.  The chin appears to be about 12 to 15 mm AP deficient.  The chin neckline is shorter, thought the chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  Andrew has a little more fullness on the right side of his mandibular ramus side, and the left side of the mandible appears vertically short by about 3 or 4 mm.  Intraorally, Andrew has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present.  He has fairly good attached gingiva except the left cuspid root is exposed somewhat as are some of the centrals.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has a Class II malocclusion.  He has small upper lateral incisors.  He has about a 4 mm anterior open bite.  He has a slight Class III cuspid relationship.  He has anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites.  He has an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch, and a reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch.  He has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side about 2 mm higher than the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy, but the uvula is moderately elongated.  Andrew has had a previous rhinoplasty and had some cartilage removed from the lateral aspect of his nose which is causing some constricture of the nasal valves.  Intranasally, he does have some constricture in luminal valve area.  Holding the nostrils open, Andrew could breath much better.  The turbinates appear to be moderate in size at least anteriorly.  Anteriorly, the septum is deviated off towards the left side and posteriorly is deviated off to the right side.  He has at least moderate nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, he has some moderate tenderness over the left TMJ, milder tenderness over the right TMJ and shoulder area.  On opening, he has some popping in both joints on the left side at opening at about 15 mm and closing at 10 mm and on the right side opening popping at 20 mm and closing at 15 mm.  Andrew has to manipulate his jaws as he opens and also manipulates it as he closes back down again, manipulating it side to side in order to obtain opening and closing.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  Joints appear a little bit arthritic.  

Coronal view shows hypertrophied turbinates and some deviation of the nasal septum.  He has a little thickening of the sinus membrane more so on the right maxillary sinus than the left.  

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight at least at the base of the nasal floor, but the turbinates are fairly good size and seem to block most of the airway.  The thickened sinus membrane is seen in the right maxillary sinus.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is significantly posteriorly positioned in the fossa and is very narrow anteroposteriorly with an increased anterior joint space.  There is also decreased vertical joint space present.  There is significant anterior beaking and significant anteroposterior thinning of the condylar head.  The articular eminence is fairly steep. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle similar to the opposite side.  In fact, it is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  There is some anterior beaking present and some degenerative changes.  There is increased anterior joint space.  The articular eminence is fairly steep. 

Left TMJ coronal view shows decreased joint space at the medial aspect of the joint with almost bone-on-bone contact there.  Out lateral, there appears to be a little bit better joint space.  

Right TMJ shows a condyle that appears to have a medial extension with decreased vertical dimension at the medial aspect of the joint and increased space at the lateral aspect of the joint.  There is a depression in the mid part of the condylar head.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are retruded.  There is an oropharyngeal airway of only about 5 mm at the most and may be only 4 mm at the base of the tongue and may be 5 at the soft palate level.  He has a slightly increased occlusal plane angle in the lower arch and a slight reverse curve of Spee.  Turbinates appear enlarged.  

Basic diagnoses for Andrew would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. 
Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia. 
Anterior open bite (apertognathia).
Occluding only on the maxillary and mandibular first and second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Deviated nasal septum. 
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
External nasal deformity including collapse of the nasal valves. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch at two different occlusal plane levels.  Align the 			anterior four incisors in elevated plane above the cuspids and posterior teeth.  			Place a vertical step in the arch wire to achieve this.  Open up 1 mm of space 			between the upper lateral incisors and cuspids.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially 
                        and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 				counterclockwise direction. 
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward, expand it, and 
                        level the occlusal plan. 
	d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	e.	Nasal septoplasty.
	f.	Nasal reconstruction including bone grafting. 
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  