B122
B122 is 56 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. B122's TMJ problems began roughly 12 years ago. She originally had orthodontics from the age of 14 to 16 and apparently a chin cup was used as well as tongue guards. When she was about 25 years old, she was placed in a retainer and wore that through age 47. At age 47, because of the escalating pain problems, she was placed in a night guard which she continues to wear today.

B122 rates her headaches that she gets daily at a level of 10 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. She gets vision blurring and nausea and vomiting. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 4, diet at 7, disability at 9. She does not get earaches nor tinnitus, but has moderate vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her right hip, left knee, and her neck. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night time. She was previously diagnosed as having hyperparathyroidism and had a resection of her parathyroid glands. She also has osteoporosis.

She takes the following medications:
Zomig 5 mg p.r.n. headaches.
Accutane 20 mg.
Meloxicam.
Flexeril 10 mg, but she just received this prescription and has not used it very much.

She does have some mild snoring, moderate daytime somnolence, but she is unaware of sleep apnea issues. She may be a mouth breather at night. She wears a head support device that she designed herself to help support her jaw and help decrease some of her pain levels.

CLINICAL EVALUATION. In frontal view, B122 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 28 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about -1 to 2. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline has shifted about 1 to 2 mm to the right. The mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other. In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably 2 to 3 mm. The maxilla is retruded by 4-6 mm. The chin appears to be retruded by 18-20 mm. The chin neckline is extremely short and the chin neckline is not well defined. Intraorally, B122 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch. She has some significant stripping around the roots of the lower anterior teeth and has lack of attached gingiva there. In the upper arch, B122 has all of her upper teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally being probably 3-4 mm Class II on the left side and about 5-6 mm on the right side. B122 has an anterior open bite of about 3-4 mm. She has an overjet of about 4 mm. She appears to have an increased curve of Spee in the upper arch and perhaps a slight reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy. At least anteriorly, the turbinates appear relatively normal in size. The septum appears reasonably straight. The columella is moderately wide and the nostrils are narrow. Holding the nostrils open improves B122's ability to breathe through her nose. To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area. She did take a Zomig tablet earlier and this may affect her usual pain levels that may be present to palpation. Maximal incisal opening is 36 mm, opening without significant discomfort 26 mm. The excursion movements are 8 mm in each direction. With all her movements, she has loud audible crepitus in both joints.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and she has all the rest of her teeth present. She has a lot of gingival restorations present. Sinuses look relatively clear. Joints appear arthritic.

Coronal view shows that she has relatively small turbinates. Sinuses appear relatively clear.
Axial view shows that the sinuses appear clear. The nasal septum is fairly straight and turbinates are relatively small. She may have had a previous turbinectomy as she had some surgery performed to open a blocked sinus.

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show that she has a severe arthritis in the left joint with loss of condylar volume and some anterior beaking present. The condyle is very narrow anteroposteriorly and there is definite loss of vertical dimension. The articular eminence is moderately shallow. There is decreased superior joint space.

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms shows a joint with significant arthritis. There is anterior beaking. There is decreased joint space. The articular eminence is relatively shallow.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms shows there is significant arthritic changes present. There are some pseudocysts in the head of the condyle. There is very narrow superior joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm. There is obvious loss of vertical height of the condyle.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is arthritic with pseudocysts in the head of the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm. There is decreased vertical joint space.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B122 has a retruded maxilla and mandible. She appears to occlude only on her second molars. She has a severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of about 2 1/2 to 3 mm at the base of the tongue and 3 mm at the soft palate level. She has a high occlusal plane angle.

As B122 postures her lower jaw forward, she can breather easier. She basically occludes only on the second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion. She may have some premature contacts on the right second molars before the left second molars touch. B122 has a tooth size discrepancy of about 2-1/2 to 3 mm. She had an open bite in her teenage years that was treated and apparently was closed up fairly well. I suspect she may have had AICR that has just recently in the last few years has really begun to act up and cause problems. B122 after she eats gets some significant lightheadedness which probably correlates that particular symptom to the TMJ pathology.

Basic diagnosis for B122 would be as follows:
Severe sleep apnea.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm (normal is 11 mm).
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Periodontal defects over mandibular anterior arch. Tooth size discrepancy of 2-1/2 to 3 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Periodontal treatment to lower anterior arch.
2. Sleep study.
3. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Place a step between the cuspids and lateral incisors with a vertical step to align the 4 incisors at an elevated plane. Extrude the maxillary left cuspid 1-2 mm to the level of the posterior teeth on that side. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward and to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
4. CT scans of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
5. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Bilateral mandibular coronoidotomies.
6. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B122 MRI AGE: 56/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is arthritic. There appears to be loss of vertical volume. There is decreased joint space with probable areas of bone-on-bone contact. There appears to be a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. There are pseudocysts in the head of the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 1-2 mm. There appear to be degenerative changes in the fossa.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that likewise appears quite arthritic. There is decreased superior joint space. There may be some bone-on-bone contact in some areas. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. There could be a little bit of fluid spots within the superior joint space and some pseudocysts in the head of the condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is severely arthritic. It is very narrow anteroposteriorly. There is anterior beaking present. There is significant loss of vertical volume and anteroposterior volume of the condyle. The articular eminence is moderately steep. There is significantly decreased vertical joint space and possible bone-on-bone contact. There are pseudocysts in the head of the condyle. There are some small areas of fluid in the joint area. On opening, there is restricted translation. There is some discal tissue anterior sitting beneath the articular eminence and the disc is severely deformed and degenerated. On opening, the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with severe arthritic changes. There is decreased vertical and posterior joint space. The articular eminence is relatively flat compared to the opposite side. The disc is anteriorly displaced and has a slightly better shape than the opposite side. There are pseudocysts in the head of the condyle. On opening, there is restricted translation and the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular discs anteriorly displaced, with severe deformation, degeneration, and non-reducing.

