ALICE SCHERDER									7/6/05

Alice is 41 years old, referred by Dr. Duane Keller, St. Louis, MO.  Alice's problems began on March 13, 2002, when she was involved in an automobile accident.  She was stopped, a car slammed into her rear-end and then knocked her into the car in front of her.  She sustained a whiplash injury.  She had neck and back injuries.  Later, she became aware of having jaw joint problems.  She began having headaches relatively soon after the accident and at this point cannot remember a day when she has not had significant headache problems.  She has been to see numerous doctors and she has had the following interactions:  physical therapy for 3 years, chiropractic treatment Dr. David Beavers and Dr. David Lee another chiropractor, neurologist, massage therapy, orthopedic surgeon, sports medicine clinic evaluation, Dr. Farhad Moshiri, and Dr. Gerald Murphy.  In addition, she has gone through psychotherapy and she has also seen at least one other oral maxillofacial surgeon.  Dr. Gerald Murphy referred Alice to Dr. Duane Keller who subsequently referred Alice to me.  The pain has been so intense for Alice that at times she has had suicidal thoughts.  She currently takes Fioricet p.r.n. and using no more than 2 a day.  She has seen Dr. Keller and has had a bite splint that she has worn for over a year now.  She has had at least 2 splints.  She also had a bite splint by Dr. Moshiri.  So all together, she has had 3 splints.  No other treatment she has had to date has helped her pain. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Severe headaches.
Nausea.
Severe neck and back pain.
Severe TMJ pain.
Pain in the muscles.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Inability to work because of the severe pain problems.
Sleep disorder. 

She gets occasional earaches.  She gets tinnitus and gets frequent vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her neck, back, left shoulder and her sacroiliac area.  She is allergic to erythromycin, but has no problems wearing jewelry and has no other known allergies.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing of her teeth.  Her pain usually gets worse towards the end of the day.  She has continuous headaches and they average about a level of 8 in the frontal, temporal and sometimes in the posterior head area.  They can escalate to 10.  She rates her TMJ pain which is worse on the left side than the right side at a level of 8.  Her average daily facial pain and headaches are at a level of 8.  She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 5, disability of 8. 

Upper lip length is 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the left.  Chin looks like it is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, Alice has a head postured forward neck position.  Maxilla might be retruded by maybe 2 to 3 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded about 12 to 15 mm.  Intraorally, she is missing mandibular right second and third molar on the left side, probably is missing the third molar.  The rest of the teeth are fairly well aligned and she has good attached gingiva along the lower anterior teeth.  

ALICE SCHERDER				7/6/05					Page 2


In the upper arch, she is missing the left first molar with the second molar drifted considerably forward.  She has a Class I cuspid relationship on the left side, but a crossbite posteriorly.  On the right side, she has a crossbite posteriorly, but has a Class III relationship by probably about 3 mm.  She has about 1.5 mm overbite relationship.  On the mandibular left side, it appears that she is missing her lower first molar with the second and third molar drifted forward into the first and second molar position.  The uvula is mildly enlarged.  The soft palate may be mildly elongated but not too significant.  Faucial pillars appear okay.  Alice always feels that she has stuffiness in her nose and does not have a very clear airway.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged and there appears to be decreased functional nasal airway.  The septum appears deviated off towards the right side with a spur at the base.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  She has been told that she snores.  She has moderate daytime somnolence, but she is not aware of having sleep apnea.  Incisal opening is about 35 mm, but she can only open about 27 mm without significant pain.  Excursive movement is 4 mm to right and 6 mm to the left.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the absence of mandibular right second and third molar, maxillary right first bicuspid replaced with a 3-unit bridge.  Mandibular left first molar of the second and third molars drifted significantly forward and maxillary left first molar and third molar with the second molar shifted forward toward the first molar position.  She has a root canal in the mandibular right first molar.  Condyles appear a little bit flattened anteriorly, but difficult to evaluate.  Sinuses look clear.  

Waters view shows that there is a little deviation in the bony nasal septum.  Turbinates appear somewhat enlarged particularly on the left side.  There appears to be some significant blockage.  According to the right side it actually looks a little bit larger towards the front so it must be a difference at the posterior aspect of the turbinates.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows decreased superior and posterior joint space.  There is flattening on the anterior head of the condyle and there appears to be a little sclerosis there as well.  Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Condyle is flattened a little bit on the anterior surface and there appears to be a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  Articular discs are moderately steep.  Images of left and right joints are compatible with disc displacements.  Open view show fairly good translation of the condyles bilaterally with the left side being greater than the right side.  

Cephalometrically, Alice has a tendency towards a skeletal Class II relationship, but Class I occlusion.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about less than 7 mm at the base of the tongue and 5 mm at the soft palate uvula level.  


ALICE SCHERDER				7/6/05					Page 3


Alice does have fairly prominent styloid processes that seem to extend forward and overlap the posterior border of the mandible.  Alice usually wakes up with pain in the back of the head and down through the neck area.  She has it almost every morning.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class I cuspid relationship on the left side but Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side.
Bilateral posterior crossbites.
Missing mandibular right second and third molar maxillary right first bicuspid (replaced with a bridge.  
Probable first molar with the second and third molars drifted forward into the first and second molar position.  
Missing mandibular left first molar and maxillary left first molar and third molar.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.  
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Severe headaches.
Severe TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain affecting essentially all muscles of the head and neck area. 
Tenderness.
Vertigo.
Sleep disorder, secondary to pain.
Masticatory dysfunction.
High occlusal plane angle. 
Possible cervical pathology.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up space in the left maxilla to equal the size of the bicuspid in the first molar area.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward slightly, down graft it posteriorly and expand.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.  
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 

ALICE SCHERDER				7/6/05					Page 4


Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

Restorative work to replace missing teeth. 

Reevaluate neck pathology to see if intervention is indicated.  
