CLAUDIA SCHEFKE								08/08/2008

Claudia is 15 years old.  Referred by Lou Mercuri, DDS, 2160 S. First Avenue, Maywood, IL 60153.  Claudia is in good health with no major medical problems.  Primary concerns that Claudia has includes the following:

Her bite has changed significantly.
There is limited range of motion of the jaws.
Discs are dislocated bilaterally.
Nocturnal grinding. 
Condylar bone resorption. 

Claudia has been seeing by Dr. Lou Mecuri, who actually referred her here, and she has also been evaluated by Dr. Mark Piper.  
Claudia's problems began when she was about 13 years of age of unknown etiology.  Her joints began clicking about that time, but for the past 2 months she no longer has clicking in her joints.  She has had orthodontics x2.  She had orthodontics the first time from age 9 to 11 and then the second time from age 12 to 13.  The treatment did not hold and her bite has shifted and changed.  At this time, Claudia occludes just on her molar teeth and has an anterior open bite.  The situation is getting slowly but progressively worse.  She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 0, disability at 0.  She is aware of breathing through her mouth when sleeping.  She apparently has no sleep apnea symptoms.  
CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Claudia has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin are fairly well aligned on facial midline.  She may have just some slight increased prominence on the left side of her face as compared to the right side in transverse dimension.  In profile view, she has an obtuse nasal labial angle.  Upper lip supralabrale is slightly posterior to subnasale.  She may have about 3 mm of AP deficiency in the projection of the maxilla.  She may be retruded by probably 12 to 15 mm.   Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  The teeth actually appear to be nicely aligned and leveled.  In her upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She appears to have just a slight reverse of curve of Spee in the upper arch, but it could be just the upper laterals are elevated significantly compared to the incisors and cuspids.  She has a just slight Class II relationship by probably 1 to 2 mm.  She has a slight overjet of about 1 mm.  She has a vertical overbite of probably less than 0.5 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues as best as could be seen appear relatively normal and healthy.  The fascial pillars may be just mildly constricted, but the other structures look fairly normal.  Intranasally, the septum may be deviated just a touch off to the right side.  Turbinates appear moderate in size, particularly the right side appears somewhat enlarged.  Claudia does experience problems with swallowing, and she has had problems with a choking feeling in the past.  She says she feels it is getting a little bit better because she is spending more time trying to chew food and this seems to be helping that situation some.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Incisal opening, however, is limited to 32 mm, but excursion movements are about 5 mm in each direction.  Claudia does have a slight vertical asymmetry in the transverse occlusal plane with the right side being about 1 mm higher than the left side.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars that are unerupted.  All the rest of the teeth are present.  She has a 3 x 3  retainer.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints.  The right side could be just slightly shorter vertically than the left side.  
Waters view shows that the septum is reasonably straight.  Turbinates are moderate in size with the right one being a little bit larger than the left one.  Sinuses, however, appear relatively clear.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic.  There is a little bit of flattening on the anterosuperior aspect of the condylar head and a little bit of peaking posterior and a little bit of anterior beaking.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  The condyle appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit harder to read on these films, but there appears to be a decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately  steep.  On opening, there appears to be restricted translation more so on the right side than the left side.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Claudia has a fairly steep occlusal plane angle.  She has an anterior open bite tendency.  The maxilla and mandible are both retruded.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 6 mm (normal 11 mm), and the base of the tongue measures about 6 to 7 mm (normal 11 mm).  She has a little bit of adenoid tissue remaining in the nasopharyngeal area.  The turbinates appear fairly tall.  She has a tooth size discrepancy of only about 0.6 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Claudia would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ AICR.
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
AP microgenia. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Over angulation of lower incisors. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Partial nasal airway obstruction.
Impacted third molars x4. 
External nasal deformity.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  Presurgical orthodontics option 1.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retraction. 
2.   Presurgical orthodontics option 2.
Extract maxillary second bicuspids and mandibular first bicuspids.
Align and level maxillary arch closing the extraction space and retracting the maxillary incisors, but loosing some posterior anchorage.  
Align and level mandibular arch closing the extraction space and retracting the lower anterior teeth. 
3.   Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and upright the incisors as well as down graft the posterior aspect.
Augmentation genioplasty. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Surgical removal of impacted 3rd molars x4.
External rhinoplasty. 
4.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

Claudia and her father are concerned about nasal dorsal hump and prominence that she has.  We did discuss the possibilities of doing a rhinoplasty at the same time, and they understand this and will make a decision as to whether include that in their treatment.  
