JONATHAN SATTLER								03-29-04

Jonn is 17 years old and referred by Dr. Darrick Nordstrum, 930 Sunny Slope Road, Ste. D4, Hollister, CA.

Patient History

Jonn contracted Lyme disease about four years ago and was on massive amounts of antibiotics and has had no symptom recurrences since then. Jonn did go through a period when he was about 13 or 14 where he had some fainting problems. Jonn felt his bite was good until about the sixth grade, about the age of 12, when his bite started to open. Jon is not aware of clenching or grinding of his teeth. He does have significant nasal airway obstruction. He had ortho from age 8-1/2 to 11 and then again from 13 to about 15-1/2. He takes no medications. No headaches and no TMJ pain. Reviewing old x-rays shows that Jonn has had an open-bite since his initial orthodontic treatment and has stayed fairly consistent, although the maxilla and mandible have probably grown downward and backward some. 

Patient Concerns

Teeth and jaws don’t line up 
Two front teeth are apart

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Jonn has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is probably about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 6 mm. Maxillary midline is about a millimeter off to the left of the facial midline. Jonn has a head postured forward position. Upper lip supralabrale is about 3 or 4 mm posterior to subnasale. Maxilla is posteriorly positioned about 6 to 8 mm. Chin is retruded probably about 20 to 22 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short, although chin-neck angle is moderately well-defined. 

Intraorally, Jonn has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. Posterior teeth appear flattened quite a bit either due to his treatment process or from bruxing. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.

In the upper arch, Jonn has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Has diasthemas around the upper lateral incisors, although they do look a little bit small in size. Molars likewise appear to be flattened. He has a little bit of a Class II cuspid relationship, although the bicuspids are Class I probably due to some spacing between the bicuspids and the cuspids. Just slight Class II cuspid on the left side as well. Open-bite of about 2 mm. Has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is slightly hyperplastic but not too significant. With the soft palate relaxed, there appears to be adequate room from there to the posterior pharyngeal wall area. 

Intranasally, turbinates appear somewhat enlarged, and the tissues over them appear a little bit inflamed. Has a septal spur extending off toward the right side. Appears to be decreased airway passage. The medial crura feet of the lower lateral cartilages appear to flare laterally making the columella relatively wide compared with the nostrils. 

Jonn has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. Joints seem to function very smoothy. Incisal opening is about 53 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 7 mm and to the left 8 mm. Jonn rates his jaw function at 0, diet at 0, disability essentially at 0, and the only complaint he has is he can’t chew with his front teeth.
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex demonstrates the presence of four impacted third molars. All other teeth are present and accounted for. The left sinus appears a little bit cloudy compared to the right side. Has a little mucocele in the left sinus. Condyles appear a little bit flattened and extremely short in vertical dimension. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of abnormal shape to it. Joint space, however, looks fairly good. Articular eminence is moderate in steepness. Vertical height of the condyle from the sigmoid notch to the top of the condyle appears quite short. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is extremely short vertically and has some anterior beaking. A little difference in the shape of the very top part of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Appears to be good joint space. Condyle head and neck appear quite short compared to normal. 

Opening tomograms show fairly good translation in both joints.

Jonn has had some traumas where he has had a couple of concussions and has hit the back of his head a few times as well as hitting his upper jaw and splitting his lip, and there is no history of significant trauma to the joints. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear actually relatively clear except slightly more cloudiness on the left side. A little mucocele is seen on the left side, and there could also be one along the lateral wall on the right side as well. Frontal sinuses are large and clear. Septum appears to be deviated in the bony area and clinically in the cartilage area. Turbinates are moderately enlarged with the right side being larger than the left side with pretty significant obstruction.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows small adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx. Maxilla appears deficient anteroposteriorly and vertically elongated. C-shaped curve to the upper lip is noted. Mandible appears to be AP deficient. Appears to occlude only on his molars. Oropharyngeal airway is significantly decreased with an airway dimension at the base of the tongue of only about 4 mm. At the soft palate it is about 5 mm. There is an anterior open bite of about 2 to 3 mm and an overjet of about 3 to 4 mm. Jonn has a tooth-size discrepancy of 4 mm. 

Jonn also states he has poor stamina when playing sports. He did have a home-based sleep study done, and it showed that he did desaturate down to 88% oxygen saturation when sleeping. Jonn also has daytime somnolence. Jonn usually goes to bet at about 9 o’clock in the evening and doesn’t get up until 7 in the morning. He has very restless sleep and wakes up frequently at night. Interestingly, neither he nor his family is aware of any snoring problems. He usually sleeps on his side or his stomach. He usually wakes up with a dry mouth. 

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Anterior vertical maxillary excess
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
AP microgenia
Apertognathia
Slight Class II cuspid relationship but Class I molar
High occlusal plane angulation
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway of 3 mm (normal 11 mm)
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Multiple diasthemas, upper anterior arch
Accentuated curve of Spee, upper arch
Occluding predominantly on only the first and second molars
Significant tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4 mm
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4
Significant sleep apnea syndrome
Daytime somnolence
Sleep disorder
Hypersomia
Hypertrophied turbinates
Deviated nasal septum
Wide columella base

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJs to be sure joints are healthy and stable

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
Align and level maxillary arch. Close spacing between cuspids and first bicuspids. Retract the incisors a little bit but maintain a millimeter of space around each upper lateral incisor. Align the anterior four teeth in an elevated plane level compared to the posterior teeth. This will require placing a step in the arch wire between the cuspid and lateral incisors. This will be important to prevent extrusion of the incisors and possibly orthodontic instability. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies 
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior six teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly in the front, advance it, and downgraft the posterior aspect as well as level the curve of Spee
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Augmentation genioplasty
Removal of four impacted third molars
HTR implant to anterior mandible
Partial turbinectomies
Nasal septoplasty
Reconstruct columella

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Restorative dentistry to build up the lateral incisors to make them a more normal tooth size


