EMILIE SCHERNIK									01-29-03

Emilie is 14 years old and referred by Dr. George Adams, 3115 W. Parker Road, #538, Plano, TX.

Patient History

Emilie does have major allergy and sinus problems and suffers from sinus problems almost everyday. She previously had been diagnosed with asthma, but it turned out it was more of a vocal cord disorder that she took speech therapy for, and now she only has an asthma problem maybe once a year. The only surgery she has had is tubes in her ears as an infant. She is aware of a seizure problem as an infant. She had seizures up to about the age of 7, and the seizures occurred only once or twice a year and were relatively mild. She has had no seizure problems for about the last 8 years. 

She reports no problems with earaches or vertigo but does get occasional tinnitus. No other joints bother her except her knees on occasion. She has allergies to airborne environmental stuff, and she is also aware of having reactions to cantaloupe, pecans, and bananas. She has no known allergies to jewelry. She is not aware of nocturnal clenching or bruxism.

Her jaw problems in reference to pain and headaches began about one to one-and-a-half years ago of unknown etiology. The only treatment that she has had to date relative to her jaws is she had a maxillary expander in the sixth grade for about a year, and then she had a retainer placed in the lower arch that was recently removed. She gets headaches about every other day that she rates at a level of 4 in the frontal, temporal, and occasional in the posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain at 9. On an average day, her pain is sort of a constant at 4 but can escalate quite a bit higher than that. She rates her jaw function and diet at 4 and disability at 3. 

Current Medications

Singulair 10 mg q.d.
Rhinocort 2 to 4 sprays each nostril
Zyrtec 10 mg q.d. 
Proventil HA
Maxair autohaler 
Foradil IP (rarely)
Sudafed 2 to 4 times per day as needed

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Emilie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Nose is a little bit broad at the tip. Alar bases appear a little bit wide. Upper lip length is about 17 mm. Not much tubercle in the midline. Upper teeth are probably 3 mm above the lip line. Maxillary midline is about a millimeter off to the left. Mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline, although the apices of the teeth are shifted off a little bit toward the left. Chin is just slightly off to the left side a couple of millimeters.
In profile view, with the teeth are apart about 3 mm, she does exhibit some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 to 5 mm. Mandible is actually in fairly good AP balance with just a slight strong prominence to the chin. When Emilie closes into centric occlusion, she is severely overclosed vertically and has probably about a 20 degree nasolabial angle. She has a little bit of a saddle-shaped prominence or deficiency in the nose in the nasofrontal area. 

In the lower arch, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present, although the second molars are not completely erupted in yet. She has a slightly accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch. No particular crowding present. Has thin attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has her permanent teeth back through the first molars erupted in. Second molar is not erupted in yet. Cuspids are blocked out of the arch, and lateral incisors are somewhat lingually inclined. A little bit of space between the upper anterior teeth. In her centric relation, she has bilateral posterior open bites. She has perhaps just a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side and more toward a Class I on the left side. In her centric relation, she shifts to a Class III cuspid end-on relationship bilaterally of about 3 to 4 mm. She has an anterior crossbite, but posterior crossbites have been corrected with the previous maxillary expansion. So in CR, she is basically a Class I cuspid with an anterior crossbite and bilateral posterior open bites. In CO, she is Class III occlusion by 3 to 4 mm anterior crossbite and 6 mm reversed deep bite. She does have a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side. Oropharynx appears clear. Posterior faucial pillars appear to be somewhat posteriorly positioned. Uvula is of moderate size. She also has some significant snoring problems that are there constantly. She does have apneic episodes as observed by her mother. Emilie does state that she feels tired a lot during the day. Mother states, however, she stays up late doing her homework, which could play some role in that condition. 

Intranasally, the septum appears reasonably straight. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged. Base of the columella is somewhat wide. Opening up the nostrils enabled her to breathe a little bit better through her nose but didn’t make any resounding difference for her. Columella base is somewhat wide but may not be obstructive. 

To palpation, she has some moderate discomfort over the temporalis, styloid areas, left SCM, left medial pterygoid area, and a little lesser discomfort over the masseter muscles. She has a glitch in the left TMJ at about 35 m of opening. Right side seemed to function reasonably smoothly. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that she has long condylar heads and necks. Lower second molars are erupting in. Lower third molars are absent. Upper second molars are unerupted, and upper third molars are quite high and developing. Septum has a little bit of curvature to it. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. Appears to have a fluid level in the right maxillary sinus. In the left sinus, it appears there might be something in the sinus cavity itself. Short vertical dimension between the infraorbital rims and the maxillary teeth. Joints looks reasonably good. Has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch. Decreased vertical height of the mandible back in the molar area. 

Waters view shows that the superior part of the maxillary sinuses appear relatively clear as do the frontals and ethmoids. Inferior part of the sinuses are a little bit more difficult to see. Could be some thickening of the mucosa in the right sinus. Septum appears a little bit more deviated in this view, and turbinates appear a little bit larger particularly on the right side. Difference in vertical height of the mandible is seen with the left side being a little bit shorter than the right side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Superior joint space and posterior joint spaces are present. Discs may be thin or maybe could be possibly medially displaced. Articular eminence is relatively shallow particularly for Emilie’s facial morphological type.

Left TMJ tomogram show fairly good condylar morphology, although there is a little bit of beaking anteriorly. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Joint space appears similar to the opposite side. 

Open views show that the condyles do hyperextend anterior to the articular eminences. 

Cephalometric radiograph is taken with the teeth open a little bit, and there is about a 2-mm overbite anteriorly. This demonstrates posterior open bites. Maxilla is deficient vertically and anteroposteriorly. Position of the mandible doesn’t look too bad. She has increased soft tissue thickness in the chin area as compared to the thickness of the lips. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is only about 3 to 3.5 mm. At the base of the tongue, it measures about 9 mm. Forehead area, the skull is prominent, and there is some depression in the nasofrontal area. 

Patient Concerns

Headaches 
TMJ pain and discomfort
Pain through the muscles of the head, face, neck area, and shoulders
Difficulties eating and chewing
Difficulties breathing through the nose
Chronic sinus problems
Snoring
Tiredness during the day
Difficulties sometimes catching her breath while she is sleeping

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Vertical maxillary deficiency
Mandibular prognathism
Bilateral posterior open bites in CR
Anterior crossbite
Class III end-on occlusion
Transverse cant of the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side
Severe crowding, upper anterior arch
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations (correlate this to MRI findings)
Overangulation of maxillary incisors
Low occlusal plane angulation
Hypertrophy of soft palate and uvula
Severe decrease of oropharyngeal airway
Severe snoring
Sleep apnea symptoms including apneic episodes as well as daytime somnolence
External nasal deformity
Headaches 
Severe TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Impacted maxillary third molars x 2
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm plus maxillary incisors are excessively wide labiolingually

Recommended Treatment

Extract maxillary second bicuspids or first bicuspids depending on Dr. Adams’ desires

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Create at least 1.5 mm of spacing around each upper lateral incisor. Try not to retract the maxillary central incisors much as their slight increased angulation that is present now will decrease as the occlusal plane is increased with the double-jaw surgery. Encourage eruption of maxillary second molars
Align and level mandibular arch. Encourage eruption of mandibular second molars

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward, downgraft it anteriorly, increase occlusal plane angle, and correct any transverse width discrepancies that may be present
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to clockwise rotate the posterior aspect of the mandible superiorly
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair (depending on MRI findings)
Surgical removal of impacted maxillary third molars
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies
External nasal reconstruction with grafting
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion