VIRGINIA SCHABACKER								09-13-04

Ginny is 56 years old and referred by Stephen B. Milam, D.D.S, Ph.D., 7703 Floyd Curl Dr., San Antonio, TX  78284.

Patient History

Ginny’s past medical history includes the following:  She has had a previous bout of bilateral viral pneumonia. In 11/1983, she asked an oral surgeon about popping and clicking in her TMJ on the left side. She was having no pain at that time but just popping and clicking. On 11/30/1983, she underwent four first bicuspid extractions and four third molar extractions prior to being orthodontically banded. After these extractions, she started to develop headaches on a daily basis lasting most of the day. On 11/26/1984, she underwent bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies for advancement. She was placed in intermaxillary fixation and had her jaws wired together for about eight weeks. She was then placed in elastic traction for an additional four weeks. When her orthodontic bands were removed, she had crunching sounds in both the right and left temporomandibular joints. She was then evaluated by Dr. Jerry Black, an oral surgeon in Houston, Texas. She had bilateral paresthesia of the mental nerves following that surgery. She had bilateral crepitus in her TMJs. His impressions were that she had anteriorly dislocated TMJ articular discs with possible perforations and osteoarthritic changes. She had bilateral temporomandibular joint arthrograms performed on 08/08/85. The arthrogram revealed bilateral disc dislocations with perforations. She had bilateral temporomandibular joint surgery on 09/10/85 where she had bilateral TMJ discectomies and Proplast Teflon interpositional implants placed. She again began orthodontic treatment at that time with a second orthodontist, who corrected some occlusal disharmonies. However, she continued to develop an anterior open bite and had loss of vertical height of the mandibular condyle likely due to foreign body giant cell reaction from the Proplast Teflon implants. On 07/30/86, Ginny underwent bilateral TMJ total joint reconstruction with Vitek-Kent total joint prostheses that did include Proplast Teflon aligning the mandibular components as well as making up a good portion of the fossa components. She did fairly well symptom-wise until about four years ago when she began to develop discomfort and headaches. She had a CT scan done in 2002 and then another one done in 2003. These CAT scans revealed that the fossa components of the Vitek-Kent total joint prostheses were perforated and the metal condylar stumps had penetrated through the cranial base. In both sides, she had probable foreign body giant cell reaction develop intracranially that subsequently became ossified as she has rather large ossified masses in the middle cranial fossas bilaterally. The right side calcified mass is much larger than the left side. There does not seem to be much change in size between the two CAT scans. This may indicate that the calcified changes are static. She has been evaluated by a neurosurgeon, who likewise feels that the masses should be observed and noted for any enlargement. He did not feel that there was any enlargement at this time and suggested that nothing be done currently. 

Ginny gets occasional earaches, and they are a sharp, piercing kind of pain. She gets some tinnitus and occasional vertigo. The only other joint that really bothers her is her left knee. She has had an adverse reaction to DEMEROL and SULFA. There are no known allergies to jewelry. She is not aware of clenching or bruxing. She rates her daily headaches that are there almost continuously on an average day at a level of 4, and it is like a vice or band around her head including the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. Her headaches can easily escalate about once or so a week to a level of 8. She has to sleep with her head elevated. She tends to sleep on her right side. There is no real differentiation as to the time of day in reference to her pain levels. She has a constant average daily pain level of 4, but this also can escalate to 8. She is not aware of pain directly in the TMJ area itself and rates her TMJ pain at 0. She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 7, and disability at 5. Incisal opening is 34 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 2 mm and to the left 3 mm.
 Current Medications

Ultram 50 mg at 8 a.m., 11 a.m., 2 p.m., and 6 p.m.
Elavil 25 mg q.h.s. 
Patanol eye drops b.i.d.
Acyclovir 400 mg b.i.d. as needed for herpes zoster involvement of the right inferior alveolar nerve. She takes the medication at the onset of her symptoms, and it is well-controlled
Multivitamins
Calcium supplement

Patient Concerns

Headaches
Chronic facial pain
Difficulties eating and chewing
Teeth don’t fit together
Lower jaw appears retruded
Vascular skin changes that developed after the Vitek-Kent prostheses were placed to be more marked on the left side as compared to the right side through the facial areas 

Clinical Examination

She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship. She is missing the four first bicuspids and four third molars. She has a 2-mm anterior open bite. 

To palpation, she has some rather severe pain over the left TMJ and moderate to pain to palpation over the medial pterygoid muscles and masseter muscles. 

Upper lip length is 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1 mm. Mandibular dental midline and chin are shifted about 2 mm off to the left side. She has some moderate crowding, lower anterior arch and a little bit of crowding in the upper arch.  

In frontal view, Ginny has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm to the left. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other. 

In profile view, Ginny has fairly significant retrusion of the maxilla and mandible. Maxilla is probably AP retruded by a good 6 to 8 mm. Mandible is retruded by approximately 18 mm. Chin is retruded by approximately 18 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. She has quite a bit of fullness in the submental area. She probably has about a centimeter between her trachea and her menton area. 

Intraorally, Ginny is missing the lower first bicuspids. Has some moderate crowding, lower anterior arch. Left lateral incisor is blocked out of the arch fairly well. Transverse width of the lower arch is a little bit narrow. Ginny has fairly good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids as well but has the rest of her teeth. She is fairly close to being Class I cuspid on the right side as well as on the left side. She has an anterior open bite of about 1 to 2 mm. On occluding, she hits only on the right second bicuspid, first and second molars and on the left side on the first and second molars. The other teeth are all out of occlusion. Intraorally, the soft tissues appear relatively healthy. Oropharynx appears clear although it was somewhat difficult to see the oropharynx. Uvula a little bit enlarged but not too significant. Soft palate may be just slightly elongated. Faucial pillars may be slightly constricted but not too significantly. Ginny does have somewhat narrow nostrils, but holding the nostrils open, she does not notice any improvement in her breathing abilities. Turbinates are relatively small in size. Nasal septum is deviated just slightly off to the right side, but again she claims no nasal airway obstruction. Luminal valves are somewhat constricted. Ginny does state that she has a lot of tiredness during the day and has had it until her recent taking of the Ultram and Elavil since last week that Dr. Milam placed her on. She is sleeping much better now and feels more rested than she has in yearsand her pain is much better controlled than it was. It is not known if she has any really significant snoring. She has some moderate snoring and moderate daytime somnolence. Ginny does tend to sleep on her right side, and her husband is a really heavy sleeper and is not aware. According to Ginny’s husband, when Ginny does start to snore, it wakes her up, and she changes position, and it stops.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of bilateral Vitek-Kent total joint prostheses. Appears that bilaterally the head of the condyles are through the fossa component and that there is loss of bone at the base of the skull beneath the fossa component. There appears to be some heterotopic bone extending from the sigmoid notch up toward the condylar head on the right side. Sinuses appear clear. Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars. On the left side, the total joint prosthesis is seen, and again there appears to be bone extending up along the anterior and medial side of the mandibular component. There is an interosseous wire in the left ramus area from previous sagittal split. Sinuses appear clear. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows the presence of the Vitek-Kent total joint prosthesis. Appears that there are two screws holding it in place, one through the superior hole, and one through the inferior hole with the middle hole empty. Condylar head appears to extend through the base of the skull. Appears that there is reactive bone around the head of the condyle extending up into the middle cranial fossa. 

Left TMJ tomograms appear very similar to the right side with penetration of the condylar heads up through the base of the skull with reactive bone forming around the prosthesis superior to it in the middle cranial fossa. There are three screws on this side stabilizing the mandibular component. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are all clear and nasal airway appears patent and shows the presence of bilateral Vitek-Kent total joint prostheses. Appears there may not be much bone around the zygomatic arch area. Screws are probably loose and free floating in reactive tissue around the prosthesis. 

Bilateral open tomograms show essentially no forward movement of the prostheses. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the patient has bilateral Vitek-Kent total joint prostheses that appear to have penetrated through the fossa component and through the cranial base. She has a high occlusal plane angle and has an anterior open bite of approximately 2 mm. Maxilla and mandible appear retruded, and she appears to have a Class II skeletal relationship. She demonstrates AP maxillary deficiency, posterior vertical maxillary deficiency, and AP mandibular deficiency. 

Oropharyngeal airway is quite narrow being only about probably 3 to 3.5 mm at the most (normal 11 mm) and at the soft palate level maybe even less than that. 

To palpation, she has a low severe level of pain over the left TMJ. She has moderate pain to palpation over the medial pterygoids and masseter areas being a little bit more so on the right side than the left side in the masseters. 

On opening and closing, she has crackling noises in the left joint. Maximal incisal opening is about 34 mm. Excursive movements to the left are 3 mm and to the right 2 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ failed Vitek-Kent total joint prostheses with Proplast Teflon as part of the material components 
Bilateral cranial-based perforations of the mandibular metal components of the prostheses through the fossa component and through the base of the skull penetrating into the middle cranial fossa
Severe foreign body giant cell reaction occurring extracranially and intracranially with large intracranial masses of calcified reactive tissue
Headaches
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Severe AP mandibular deficiency
Apertognathia 
Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars
Occluding on the right second bicuspids, first and second molars, and on the left first and second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion 
High occlusal plane angulation
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway space of only 3 mm in AP dimension (normal 11 mm)
Sleep apnea symptoms 
Moderate crowding, lower anterior arch
Mild crowding, upper arch
Severe masticatory dysfunction
Snoring
Accentuated curve of Spee

Recommended Treatment

CT scan using TMJ Concepts protocol beginning the scan approximately 5 cm above the TMJ and including the TMJ joints and entire maxilla and mandible

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies if they are required
Align and level mandibular arch. Consider stripping lower anterior teeth removing 1 mm but no more than 2 mm of tooth structure to help from flaring the lower incisors any further forward and to adjust for a very slight tooth-size discrepancy 

Surgery
Removal of bilateral TMJ Vitek-Kent total joint prostheses
Extensive bilateral TMJ and intracranial debridement
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement (approximately 18 mm) with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 6 to 8 mm and downgraft it posteriorly approximately 4 to 5 mm with bone plates and hydroxyapatite grafting
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen) 
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Construction of surgical stabilizing appliances

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Dental models were taken today. On analysis, it demonstrates that she is basically just slight II end-on cuspid relationship. She has an anterior open bite. An accentuated curve of occlusion is present in the upper arch. 
