RACHAEL SAWYER								10/10/05

Rachael is 17 years old, referred by Dr. Farhad Moshiri, 777 S. New Ballas Rd., #305 West, St. Louis, MO 63141.  She does smoke and has done that for 1 to 2 years.  She smokes less than 1 pack per day.  No other medical problems.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Teeth and jaws do not fit together.
She does get pain in her jaws periodically.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Headaches.
Clicking in left jaw joints.
Difficulty breathing through the nose.
Predominately mouth breather particularly when sleeping.

Previous x-rays show that cephalogram taken 2/10/1997, shows she had a skeletal Class III relationship at that time.  She has a slight tendency towards crossbite.  She has a large adenoid mass.  Radiograph taken 7/18/1999, shows that her occlusion was jumped and she had a vertical overbite of about 1 mm but increased angulation of upper incisors and still a slight Class III occlusal relationship.  She also has a slight Class III molar relationship.  Adenoid mass was decreasing.  Today she has a full Class III skeletal relationship that has gotten significantly worse in the degree of Class III relationship.  There is a little bit of adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx area.  Rachael became aware that she was developing some asymmetry in the jaws about 2 years ago.  She has had no trauma to her jaws.  She has had orthodontic treatment for about 5 years.  Etiology of her problems is unknown.  She gets headaches about 1 time per week at a level of 5 in the frontal and temple area.  She on an average day has facial pain and headache of a level maybe around a 2.  This may include some TMJ discomfort.  Jaw function at 6, diet at 1, disability at 3.  

In frontal view, Rachael has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  The right side of the mandible is probably 4 to 5 mm more prominent at the ramus area as compared to the left side and maybe vertically longer by 2 to 3 mm.  There is asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm off to the left and the chin is probably about 5 to 6 mm off to the left.  In profile, maxilla appears deficient by about 4 mm.  Chin may be a little bit deficient by 2 to 3 mm.  Chin-neckline is fairly long and chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Vertical facial dimensions appear fairly well balanced.  Intraorally, Rachael has all of her lower teeth erupted in back through the second molars.  Teeth are fairly well aligned.  Lower incisors are in somewhat of a lingual inclination.  A little bit of spacing between the laterals and the cuspid on the right side.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  The right second molar appears a little bit elevated.  She has full Class III cuspid molar relationship on the right side and a slight Class III cuspid molar relationship on the left side.  She has an anterior crossbite and a left posterior crossbite.  Oropharynx appears clear and the uvula is of normal length as is the soft palate and faucial pillars relatively normal. Tonsils are present but relatively small in size.  Intranasally, turbinates are fairly large and hyperplastic.  
RACHAEL SAWYER			10/10/05				Page 2


The nasoseptum is deviated off towards the left side with significant spur extruding into the left airway.  Holding the left nostril open did improve her airway breathing abilities but holding open the right side did not significantly improve it.  She does have some mild snoring.  She says she is tired during the day and it takes her about 4 hours to really get going.  She is not aware of having any sleep apnea problems.  There is a cant in the transverse occlusal plane with the mandibular right cuspid being 1 mm lower than the left side but in the upper arch, the right cuspid is about 1.5 to 2 mm higher than the left cuspid.  To palpation, she had some high moderate tenderness over the temporalis muscles.  Mild discomfort over the styloid areas, right medial pterygoid and mild tenderness over TMJs, masseters, left medial pterygoid.  There is some crepitation in the right joint but the left one seemed to function reasonably smoothly at this time.   Incisal opening is about 48 mm, excursive movement to the right 8 mm, to the left 5 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Radiographically, Rachael has impacted mandibular third molars.  She has no maxillary third molars.  She is also missing maxillary lateral incisors and has Pronex replacing them.  The sinuses appear reasonably clear.  She has a root canal in maxillary left first molar.  Left joint is difficult to analyze as is the right one and the superior right condylar head and neck, however, appear significantly longer than the left side. 

Waters view shows that the maxillary sinuses do have thickening of the sinus lining probably related to the congestion that she currently has.  The nasoseptum is severely deviated and turbinates appear large and obstructed.  Ethmoid and frontal sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears reasonable in shape.  However, there appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some changes in radiolucency within the condylar head.  It is difficult to see the top of the condyle but there appears to be decreased joint space superior and posterior.  On opening, there is restricted translation particularly in the right joint and a little bit in the left joint as well but with better mobility in the left.

Cephalometric evaluation shows that she has a Class III skeletal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway looks good except she does have some residual adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx with perhaps some slight decreased airway between the inferior turbinates in the adenoid tissues.  This appears to be maxillary deficient and mandibular prognathic.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Right TMJ osteochondroma versus condylar hyperplasia.
Bilateral TMJ articular dislocations.
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.

RACHAEL SAWYER			10/10/05				Page 3



Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and Class III end-on cuspid relationship on the left side.  
Anterior and left posterior crossbite.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasoseptal deviation and spurring.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Impacted mandibular third molars x2.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
TMJ pain.
Missing maxillary lateral incisors.
Overangulation of maxillary incisors.
Slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane.
Alveolar hypoplasia anterior maxilla.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
MRI of left and right TMJs.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Maintain the lateral incisor space that is currently present. 
Align and level mandibular arch.
Reevaluate for active condylar growth on the right side.
Surgery.
Right TMJ condylectomy
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, expand and level transversely.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomy to shift the mandible back on the facial midline and into proper position relative to the maxilla.
Bilateral partial turbinectomies. 
Nasoseptoplasty.
Removal of impacted mandibular third molars x2.
Bilateral bone grafts to maxillary alveolus in the lateral incisor areas. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Osseointegrated implants to bilateral maxillary lateral incisor areas. 
Restorative dentistry to place crowns on the implants. 