LOGAN SAUERWEIN								10-21-02

Logan is 16 years old and is referred by Dr. Al Bishop. 

Patient History

Logan has had a fatty tumor removed from his foot when he was 4 years old but has had no other surgery. He is in good health with no major medical problems. 

Logan’s TMJ problems began about 3 or 4 years ago of unknown etiology. He has been in orthodontics for about 9 to 12 months, and this was begun in Guadalajara, Mexico. They moved back to the states here in June, and nothing much has been done since that time. He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. He gets headaches in the left temporal area at about a level of 7 that occur about once a month and last for about half a day. He rates his TMJ and overall facial pain on an average day at 0, jaw function at 2, and diet and disability at 0. He takes Tylenol or Advil occasionally for the headaches, though he says it doesn’t really help that much. Other joints that bother him include just his knees that make a significant crepitus noise from deep knee bends as he stands up but doesn’t cause him any significant pain or discomfort. Claims no nocturnal clenching or bruxism.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Logan has good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. A little bit of asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 4 mm off to the left side. Lower dental midline and chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other. The vertical height of the mandible on the left side is about 4 to 6 mm longer than the right side.

In profile view, Logan has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose, although the upper lip may be a couple of millimeters AP deficient. Chin is also slightly AP deficient. Chin-neckline is a little bit short. 

Intraorally, Logan has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present. A little lingual inclination on the left side of the bicuspids and first molar. Lower anterior teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled. Appears to be adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch although quite thin around the cuspids. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. In the upper arch, the right cuspid might be about a millimeter posterior to the left cuspid. In the lower arch, it may be fairly symmetric. He has an end-on incisor relationship but has an open bite on the left side all the way back to and including the second molars and begins at about the left lateral incisor. Has a crossbite tendency in the molar area. On the right side, there is a little bit of a buccal crossbite tendency in the cuspid/bicuspid area. Has about a 5 to 6-mm Class III cuspid relationship. On the left side, it is more of a Class I cuspid. Transversely, the maxillary occlusal plane is fairly level. The left side is down about 1.5 to 2 mm compared to the right side in the mandible. Oropharynx appears clear. 

Nasal airway also appears clear, although the turbinates are of moderate size. 

Incisal opening is about 58 mm, excursive movement to the right 6 mm and to the left 8 mm. No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly, although there is a little bit of noise on the right side. Logan feels that he can detect a click in his left joint on opening. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of 4 impacted third molars that are still down in the bone. All other teeth are erupted in. Sinuses look reasonably clear. Nasal airway looks good. Difficult to identify the right condyle. Left condyle appears large. Lower dental midline is noted to be shifted off towards the left side. Has a root canal on the maxillary left first molar. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be relatively normal in anteroposterior dimension. Fossa appears a little bit constricted. Significant depression at the base of the articular eminence probably where the posterior band of the articular disc is located. Articular eminence appears somewhat sclerotic. Posterior open bite is noted on the left side. Decreased posterior joint space. Anterior joint space also may be a little bit thin. Styloid process is present and approaches posterior border of the mandible.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit more difficult to identify the cortical bone on the condylar head. Articular eminence is moderately steep, and there is a depression at the base of the eminence but not quite as prominent as the opposite side. Posterior joint space may be decreased just slightly. Styloid process is evident and extends up to the posterior border of the mandible. 

On opening, translation is good in both joints. On the open views, condyles come anterior to the articular eminence bilaterally. The styloid processes are quite evident further medially. 

Waters view shows that the turbinate on the right side appears to be somewhat obstructive, but the left side looks good. Mandible is deviated off towards the left side. Vertical height of the mandible on the left side is longer than the right side. Sinuses appear clear. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is an end-on incisor relationship and a moderately high occlusal plane angle. There is a posterior open bite on at least one side and an end-on incisor relationship. Turbinate appears fairly tall at the posterior border of the palate but doesn’t extend beyond the posterior border. Logan mainly occludes on his right incisors with even the left teeth essentially being out of occlusion.

Basic Diagnoses

Right TMJ condylar hyperplasia growing in a horizontal vector.
Left TMJ condylar hyperplasia growing in a vertical vector.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations in a medial and anterior direction.
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Transverse maxillary excess.
Slight AP maxillary deficiency.
Class III cuspid relationship on the right side (5 to 6 mm), Class I cuspid on the left side.
Buccal crossbite tendency on the right side.
Occluding only on the right incisors.
All other teeth being out of occlusion, being much worse on the left side as compared to the right side.
Increased vertical height of the mandible on the left side.
Significant tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm.
Slight overangulation of lower incisors.
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4.
Moderate increase in occlusal plane angulation.
History of headaches.

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip maxillary incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 to 3 mm of tooth structure to help compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy.

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, decrease transverse width, and level the transverse and AP occlusal planes.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction and correct the asymmetry.
Possible left mandibular inferior border ostectomy to decrease vertical height of the mandible on that side.
Surgical removal of four bony impacted third molars.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion