LUZ SCHAIBLE									02-20-03

The patient was referred by Dr. William Hang. He only sent records, and I’m doing a workup from the records. I also made a phone call to her on 02/20/03. Luz is 32 years old.

Patient Concerns

The main problems she has are as follows:

Wearing down of her teeth
Extremely short roots particularly in the upper anterior teeth
Headaches 
Teeth don’t fit together well

Patient History

Luz’s headaches began in her teenage years while she had her braces on. She has been to see apparently a number of doctors, and no one has been able to figure out what is causing her headaches. Her headaches got worse in her early 20s. She did have her orthodontics from ages 12 to 15, and the appliances were removed in 1984. She takes Advil Migraine medication but no other meds. She had earaches, tinnitus, and occasional vertigo. She usually wakes up with her headaches in the morning, and that is present almost every morning, and she sometimes gets the headaches in the late evening or at bedtime. Her husband has observed her with nighttime grinding of her teeth. Other joints that bother her include her knees, and she wasn’t sure about her back whether that was muscular or bony. She is allergic to SULFA, and she is lactose intolerant. She cannot wear cheap jewelry.

To palpation, she had no particular tenderness over the temporalis muscles, masseters, or TMJs at this time. In jaw function, she is not aware of any noises in her joints. She has no TMJ pain, and she says her average pain during the day is at about a level of 1. She rates her jaw function at 0, diet at 2, and disability at 0. 

In 1992, she had a thyroidectomy, and in 1996, she had a rhinoplasty.

Basic Diagnoses

Based on the available records that included clinical photographs, lateral cephalogram, Panorex, and dental models, Luz’s diagnoses are as follows:

AP maxillary deficiency
Vertical maxillary deficiency
Class III end-on occlusion
Anterior crossbite
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of at least 2 mm
Extremely short roots, upper anterior teeth
Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
Slightly increased curve of Wilson
Vertical over-closure of the jaws and lips
Missing all four third molars
Root canal on mandibular left first molar and mandibular right central incisor
Slight AP prominence of the mandible due to vertical over-closure
Headaches 
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism
Attrition of the incisal edges of the maxillary four incisors
Possible periapical lesion at the base of the central incisors

Recommended Treatment

Place on Klonopin 0.5 to 1 mg q.h.s. to control nocturnal clenching and bruxism

MRI of left and right TMJs to rule out articular disc dislocations

Evaluate possible lesion at the apex of the central incisors

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip maxillary incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally
Align and level lower arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the tooth-size discrepancy

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and downgraft the maxilla with bone plate stabilization and hydroxyapatite grafting
Consider TMJ treatment if indicated based on MRI findings

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion