ELIZABETH SAXON								11/12/2007

Elizabeth is 27 years old.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Ortho-Tricyclen Lo.
Hydrocodone p.r.n. pain.
Prednisone 20 mg for pain one per day.

Elizabeth's problems began in September of 2007 of unknown etiology.  She began developing pain in the right side of her jaw.  She went to see her dentist on several occasions but they were unable to diagnose anything.  She did try a mouthguard and she does wear that sometimes but she cannot tell if it makes any difference at all.  Other treatment she has had so far includes steroids and a soft diet.  Elizabeth had orthodontics previously from about the age of 14 to 16.  She gets some earaches but no tinnitus and she has had vertigo since September.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and she does it also some during the day.  She rates her headaches at a level of 7 and they occur on the right side in the frontal and temporal area.  She rates her TMJ pain at the worst about a level of 9 but the last three days or so it has been at about a level of 5.  Her average daily pain is a level of 6.  She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 6.  Upper lip length is 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 7 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right side.  The chin is fairly well aligned.  

In profile view, she has some AP maxillary excess and vertical maxillary excess.  The chin may be just slightly retruded maybe 3 to 4 mm.  She has a head postured forward neck position.  Chin-neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars except she is missing upper first bicuspids.  In centric relation she seems to hit primarily on the second molars and the rest of the teeth are pretty much out of occlusion.  She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by maybe 2 to 3 mm.  She has significant wear facets on the cuspid teeth.  She has an overjet of about 1 to 2 mm.  Vertical overbite about 1.5 mm.  It is pretty uncomfortable for her to try and put her right teeth together so she actually hits prematurely on the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged but there still seems to be a passable airway.  She is not aware of snoring.  She has some mild daytime somnolence but is not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  She has a mild sleep disorder now but is due mainly to pain factors.  To palpation, she has some mild to moderate tenderness over the right masseter and right medial pterygoid muscle but none over the TMJ or other areas.  On opening, she has crepitation that is audible on the right joint the left joint functions relatively smoothly.  On excursive movement she can hear a little bit of crepitation in the right side as well.  As she opened, the mandible would deviate to the left side about 3 mm or so.  On opening she does deviate off to the right side about 3 mm.  Maximal opening is 51 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is 6 mm, to the left is 7 mm. 



ELIZABETH SAXON			11/12/2007				Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of mandibular third molars and maxillary first bicuspids.  Maxillary third molars are impacted.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Joints are difficult to evaluate in that view.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that looks a little bit flat on top.  She has decreased anterior joint space.  Articular eminence is quite steep.  Posterior joint space actually looks enlarged compared to the anterior joint space.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit of flattening on the front side.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  However, the joint space seems a little bit better balanced in this joint.  On opening, there is good translation in both joints. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The septum is fairly straight.  The turbinate is fairly enlarged but a very narrow nasal airway.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is a significant decreased airway space.  She also has significant decreased oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue.  At the soft palate level, airway measures about 4.5 mm and at the base of the tongue about 3 mm.  Lower incisors appear significantly over angulated.  She has vertical maxillary excess and a high occlusal plane angle.  The tongue fills a good portion of the oral cavity. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation being worse on the right side than the left side.  
Maxillary AP and vertical hyperplasia. 
Mandibular hyperplasia.
AP microgenia.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Impacted maxillary third molars x2.
TMJ pain. 
 Myofascial pain. 
 Headaches.
 Missing maxillary first bicuspids secondary to previous orthodontics.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications.
a.  Klonopin 1 mg tablet, 1 tablet q.h.s.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. 

ELIZABETH SAXON			11/12/2007				Page 3

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly and posteriorly.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to move it upwards and slightly posteriorly. 
Osseous augmentation genioplasty.
Turbinectomies.
Surgical removal of maxillary impacted third molars.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
