CHASTIDY SCHMIDT								3/23/05
CONTINUATION 

She rates her TMJ pain a level of 8, masseter muscle and posterior neck muscles 6 and shoulders at 3.

She gets daytime somnolence and has difficulty going to sleep.  She has interruptions in her sleep at night at least 2 to 3 times secondary to pain.  She is probably a mouth breather and she chronically feels exhausted.  She has significant difficulties breathing through her nose as well.  Discussed with her MRI findings that show that she has displaced articular disc with the left side being nonreducing and the right side reducing on the MRI.  Her discs are probably still salvageable.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Severe jaw joint pain.
Headaches.
Pain down through the jaw areas and to the neck, shoulder and back.
Difficulty breathing through the nose.
Sleep disruption at night secondary to pain.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Significant daytime somnolence and she constantly feels exhausted.
Close lock problems. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc location.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
High occlusal plan angle.
Vertical inclined mandibular central incisors.
Anterior deep-bite of about 4 to 5 mm. 
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway of only 2.5 to 5 mm (normal 11 mm.)
Daytime somnolence.
Chronic feeling of exhaustion.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Probably mouth breather.
Missing maxillary and mandibular second and third molars.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Tip lower incisors forward to open about a mm space at least around each tooth.  These teeth will be bonded at a later time.

CHASTIDY SCHMIDT				3/23/05			3/23/05


Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning with ligament repair of Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance maxillary forward and downgraft it posteriorly.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction below the occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  

