SHAWN SCHMIDT									04-16-04

Shawn is 16 years old and referred by Dr. George Adams, 2845 Parkwood Blvd., Ste. 100, Plano, TX  75093.

Patient Concerns

His jaws and teeth don’t align and fit together
Has clicking in the jaw joints
Cannot shift his jaws from side-to-side
TMJ pain
Significant difficulties eating and chewing
Difficulties breathing through the nose
Predominantly a mouth breather
Discomfort around the head and neck area
Lack of enamel on teeth

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Shawn has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline mandibular dental midline is shifted a little bit to the left about 2 mm. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other.

In profile view, he has some prominence of the nasal dorsum. Some infraorbital hypoplasia of probably about 4 or 5 mm. Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably a couple of millimeters. Maxilla is probably about 6 to 8 mm retruded. Lower third face appears elongated. Chin actually appears slightly retruded anteroposteriorly. Chin-neckline is short, although chin-neck angle is well-defined. Chin may be retruded as much as 10 to 15 mm. Shawn has some mild lip incompetence of probably about 3 mm. 

Intraorally, Shawn has his lower teeth back through the second molars erupted in. Some crowding, lower anterior arch and significant lingual inclination. Lacking enamel on his teeth. Has some bonding already done particularly in the left posterior quadrant. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva although thin in some areas. In the upper arch, he has his teeth back through the first molars erupted in. Has bonding on most of those teeth already. Has a super Class III cuspid relationship on the left side and a full Class III on the right side. Has an anterior open bite of about 4 mm. Crossbite tendency on the left side and anteriorly. Has a reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch. The only teeth that occlude on the left side are the maxillary second bicuspid and first molar and mandibular first and second molars. On the right side, the right first and second bicuspid and first molar in the upper arch occlude against the second bicuspid, first and second molar in the lower arch. Transverse occlusal plane is fairly level. Maxillary left cuspid is a millimeter posterior to the right cuspid. In the lower arch, the left cuspid is a millimeter anterior to the right cuspid, and this would probably account for the super Class III occlusion on the left side while the mandibular dental midline is shifted slightly to the left. Oropharynx appears clear, and tissues look normal. Has a high palatal vault. Maximal incisal opening is 61 mm. He had no voluntary abilities to go into excursive movements. With hand manipulation by me, I could get maximum of about 1 to 2 mm in each direction. 

Turbinates appear moderately enlarged. Columella is a little bit wide, and nostrils are narrow. Luminal valves are somewhat constricted intranasally. Shawn says that he wakes up with a dry mouth almost every morning. There is no evidence of snoring or sleep apnea type of problems. 
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that there is a significant enamel hypoplasia or dysplasia on most all of the teeth. Has two fairly good size carious lesions on the distal of the mandibular right first molar, mesial aspect of the second molar. He has impacted third molars, and the maxillary second molars are not quite erupted in all the way, although they may be peaking through. Sinuses look relatively clear. Difficult to evaluate the nasal cavity. Condyles are not well-seen. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. Septum has some deviation, and in couple areas there appear to be some septal spurs. Turbinates appear moderate in size but the right one is larger and appears to block off the right nasal airway. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Joint space appears decreased superiorly. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that likewise appears to have fairly reasonable morphology but decreased superior joint space. It is actually difficult to identify the superior aspect of the condyle on these views. 

Open views show good translation of the condyles.

Cephalometrically, Shawn appears to have large turbinates. Maxilla is AP deficient and mandible appears prognathic. He has a skeletal Class III jaw relationship. High occlusal plane angle is present. Oropharyngeal airway is extremely large. Tongue appears relatively small compared to the size of the oral cavity. Lower third face appears quite long vertically. With the teeth in their current situation with some of the upper teeth being already reconstructed and the lower anterior teeth not having undergone any reconstruction yet, there is a reverse tooth-size discrepancy of a little bit less than 2 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations
Rule out bilateral condylar hyperplasia
Anterior vertical maxillary excess
AP maxillary deficiency
Mandibular deviate prognathism
Bilateral infraorbital hypoplasia
Full Class III occlusion on the right side, super Class III occlusion on the left side
High occlusal plane angulation
Generalized severe enamel hypoplasia
Anterior open bite of about 4 mm
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4
Impacted unerupted bilateral maxillary second molars (possible ankylosis)
Reverse curve of occlusion, lower arch
Significant lack of eruption of first and second molars bilaterally at the mandible
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites with the crossbite on the left side worse than the right side
Carious lesions in mandibular right first and second molars
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal septal spurs
Nasal airway obstruction
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Masticatory dysfunction

Recommended Treatment

General dentistry
Eradicate dental caries on the mandibular right distal first molar, mesial second molar
Bonding to all the teeth

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider placing a slight downward step to the molars since the mandibular molars are hypoerupted. Try to extrude the lower incisors a millimeter or two to help decrease the reverse curve of occlusion in the anterior portion of the arch

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors (consider high condylectomies if active condylar hyperplasia is confirmed)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a counterclockwise direction into occlusion
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4
Consider extracting maxillary unerupted second molars x 2
Anterior mandibular horizontal ostectomy
Nasal septoplasty
Rhinoplasty
Consider bilateral infraorbital augmentations

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
 
Final restorative dentistry to build up molars into occlusion and any other restorative work necessary