CAROLYN SCHNEEBECK								 05/17/2006 

Carolyn is 65 years old and referred by Dr. William Hang.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Difficulties with swallowing.
Headaches.
Pain on the right side of the jaws.
Cannot see the upper teeth. 

Her TMJ problems began maybe about 15 to 20 years ago when her joints began to click and pop.  The etiology is unknown.  She has been diagnosed as having polymyalgia rheumatica.  She was treated with prednisone and those symptoms have fairly well cleared.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: 
Estrogen patch.
Advil for headaches and pain. 

She gets earaches on the right side.  No tinnitus but occasional vertigo.  She has no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her neck, shoulders, elbows, wrists, hands, fingers, hips, back, knees and ankles.  She is allergic to mold but not aware of any food allergies.  She does have problems with jewelry particularly in her left ear where she has a tendency to get recurrent infections even when she wears good jewelry.  She is aware of clenching of her teeth at nighttime and during the day as well.  She gets headaches about seven days per week at about a level of 7 in the posterior head area predominately and it could go into the temple area.  She frequently wakes up with headaches and they also are present during the day.   She rates her TMJ pain at 0, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 3, diet at 4, disability at 3.  

In frontal view, Carolyn has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about –5.  Maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline and chin midline are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline.  In profile view, Carolyn has a little bit of AP deficiency in the maxilla of probably about 4 mm.  Chin actually appears to be in fairly good AP position.  Chin-neckline is not real well defined.  Intraorally, Carolyn has all of her second molars.  There is good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  Very minimal crowding in the lower arch.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has a little bit of a diastema between her two incisors.  She has very short vertical crowns on her teeth.  She has crowns on all eight of her molars.  Oropharynx tissue looks reasonably healthy.  The soft palate, uvula and faucial pillars all appear relatively normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged but the septum is relatively straight and there does not appear to be any real significant airway obstruction or maybe just some mild.  There does not appear to be any significant constricture of the luminal valves.  To palpation, she has some moderate tenderness over the right masseter and right TMJ area but no other pain to palpation around the head and neck area.   On opening and closing as well as excursive movements, the joints seem to function reasonably smoothly. 

CAROLYN SCHNEEBECK			05/17/2006			Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars but she does have crowns on the mandibular molars and right second bicuspid.  In the upper arch she has crowns on the upper left molars and right second molar.  She has root canals on the left maxillary second molar, mandibular left first and second molar and right second bicuspid.  The sinuses look clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  The condyles appear relatively normal. 

Waters view shows the septum looks fairly straight.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  There could be a little bit of blockage moreso a little bit on the left side as compared to the right side.  Sinuses appear clear.  Jaws appear fairly symmetric.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit of sclerosis on top.  The joint space looks fairly well balanced.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Condyle is centered in the fossa.  

Right TMJ shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Fairly well balanced joint space around it.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows there is decreased maxillary height.  The maxilla and mandible maybe retruded.  Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway of only about 5 mm at the base of the tongue and maybe just a couple of mm at the soft palate level.  The maxilla and mandible maybe AP deficient.  

Dental model analysis shows that Carolyn has a Class I occlusion with about a 1 mm vertical overbite relationship.  She has a diastema between the maxillary incisors of about 1.5 mm.  She has short crowns in the upper anterior arch with central incisors only being 7.5 mm in length.  

I did have a new lateral cephalometric radiograph taken than shows a better overall bite relationship.  Also, I had it done while she was exhaling and so it shows that the airway space posteriorly at the soft palate level is about 5 mm and at the base of the tongue is closer to 10 to 11.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Vertical maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency, 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Snoring. 
Myofascial pain right masseter area. 
Right TMJ pain. 
Headaches.
Chronic clenching and bruxism. 

CAROLYN SCHNEEBECK			 05/17/2006				Page 3


Possible medial dislocation of the articular disc bilaterally perhaps being a little bit worse on the right side. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications.
Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s. to control clenching and bruxism.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla about 4 to 5 mm and down graft it 5 to 6 mm.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward about 5 to 6 mm.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry and esthetic periodontal surgery to lengthen crowns.
