CARMEN SCHILTZ								10-09-03

Carmen is 48 years old. I saw Carmen in the preanesthesia assessment area. She informed me that she had been in an auto accident on 09/12/03. She was stopped in her car at a light and was hit from behind. It was a rainy day during that time. Immediately following the accident, she felt an aching pain in the neck area and her jaw muscles felt especially tense. She had contacted Dr. Robert Viere’s PA, Linda, and she was told to use ice therapy and ibuprofen over the weekend after the accident. The accident apparently occurred on a Friday afternoon. She did not have any sharp or debilitating pain nor did she have any numbness. She did not go to the emergency room. She did see Dr. Viere at work on 09/17. He apparently reviewed her x-rays of her cervical and upper thorax. He apparently assessed that Carmen had a soft tissue injury. He apparently diagnosed her as having a cervical strain and suggested just following to see if problems cleared or if they got worse. Over the next few weeks, Carmen noticed that she was unable to adjust her bite and her teeth did not fit together correctly. She has noticed that this happens at least a couple of times a week when she first noticed it and has gradually gotten to become more of a problem. 

I did see Carmen in the preoperative assessment area Thursday, 10/09. I assess her jaws and noticed that she has a loud click upon wide opening. She was unaware of having any clicking prior to her accident. She never had any TMJ pain problems or symptoms prior to the 09/12 accident. She does have some discomfort in the TMJ but not too specifically over the muscles. I did not do any measurements of jaw function as I did not have a ruler. I did suggest that Carmen make an appointment to come see me for an indepth evaluation. Carmen does express a fear of having surgery. I did suggest, however, coming for an evaluation to try to determine what problems she might have. I suspect that Carmen does have displaced articular discs in her joints. I suggested obtaining an MRI of the jaw joints and making an appointment with me in my office so that do a thorough examination and have an MRI to help with the diagnostics. 

CARMEN SCHILTZ								02-02-04

TOMOGRAMS:  

Left TMJ tomograms show a condyle that appears to have lost some vertical height. There is some significant anterior beaking present on the condyle. The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa, although there does appear to be intact joint space surrounding the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. A little bit of sclerotic area on the superior aspect of the condyle. Somewhat of a pseudocyst inside the head of the condyle. On opening, there appears to be some restricted translation of the condyle. Appears that there is almost bone on bone contact within the condyle itself. The condyle approaches the inferior aspect of the articular eminence but does not quite get to the tip of it.

Right TMJ tomograms show a condyle with fairly good morphology. Good joint space present vertically anteriorly and fairly normal joint space posteriorly as well. The articular eminence appears a little bit steeper on this side as compared to the opposite side. A little bit of flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. 

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle, and it comes anterior to the articular eminence with good space between the condyle and the articular eminence vertically.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and some restriction of translation
Relatively normal-appearing right TMJ
CARMEN SCHILTZ								09-03-04

Carmen is 49 years old. 

Patient History

Carmen was involved in an MVA on 09/12/03. She was stopped at a stoplight and was struck from behind sustaining an injury probably related to a whiplash kind of injury. She did have initially some pain in her neck and had tingling down through her arm on the right side. She did have some of that condition before the injury, but since then it has gotten somewhat worse. She has for the most part of her life has been in good health and has had nothing serious until the jaw problems developed. She has had previous laparoscopy. She has had hepatitis A but otherwise is in good health. She takes natural thyroid 1 grain daily, and she takes multiple natural supplements and natural anti-inflammatory medications. She takes Inflamar. She uses this as an oral medication as well as a topical ointment for application to the left side of the jaw. If her pain becomes more severe, then she uses Bextra. She also takes the following supplements:  (1) Fish oil; (2) Noni juice; (3) Inflamayx; and (4) Rheumatal.

The primary concerns that Carmen has include the following:

Pain in the left TMJ area
Earaches
Difficulties eating and chewing because this seems to exacerbate the pain levels
The jaws get fatigued even during normal talking

She rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at about 3, jaw function at 5, diet at 5, disability at 4. She does not have any significant problems with headaches. She does get mild earaches, occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo. She does feel she has hearing loss on the left side since the accident. The only other joints that bother her include her neck and her left hip occasionally. She does feel that she probably does clench some at night and may also do that some during the day. I had previously seen Carmen in 10/2003 and just did a cursory examination at that time since I saw her in the preanesthetic assessment area. I also did have an opportunity to evaluate her MRI which was taken on 12/03/03. The MRI shows that she has some arthritis in the left TMJ and articular disc dislocation that is nonreducing and with some significant deformity of the disc itself. The right joint appears relatively normal, although the disc cannot be seen at the most lateral aspect of the joint suggestive of perhaps a little bit of medial displacement of the disc. Otherwise the right joint looks fairly healthy. She went to see Dr. Charles Holt in 02/2004. Dr. Holt did a thorough evaluation on her and made her a bite splint. She wears the splint 24/7 and takes it out only to eat and to brush her teeth. The above ratings and evaluations obtained on Carmen are wearing the splint all the time. Without the splint, her pain significantly is exacerbated. 

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal evaluation and in profile, Carmen has good facial balance. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned with each other. Carmen has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. Upper laterals are blocked out laterally at the mesial aspect bilaterally. Has about a 2.5-mm vertical overbite relationship. She has some very mild crowding, lower anterior arch. She has all of her teeth in the lower arch back through the second molar but has crowns on the first molars and right second molar. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars, but she does have a crown on the maxillary right first and second molars. Oropharynx appears clear. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the left TMJ and milder pain over the rest of the structures on the left side. On the right side, there is no tenderness to palpation. The left joint seems to function relatively smoothly, although the mandible does deviate toward the left side probably about 3 to 4 mm. On opening, there is a little minor glitch on the right side but not very discernible. However, on the closing, could palpate a glitch at about 30 mm of opening. Maximal incisal opening is about 40 mm. She could open about 26 mm without too much discomfort. Excursive movements are about 8 mm in each direction. Excursive movements seem fairly smooth. 
CARMEN SCHILTZ				09-03-04			Page 2

Radiographic Evaluation

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows basically a skeletal Class I relationship and a Class I occlusal relationship. Slightly decreased oropharyngeal airway. Slightly increased occlusal plane angulation. 

Waters view shows the sinuses are clear. Right turbinate appears somewhat enlarged. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa with decreased posterior joint space. Superior joint space may be slightly decreased but not too bad, although it is definitely decreased compared to the opposite side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Some anterior beaking of the condyle. It appears as though the condyle has lost vertical height. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with better morphology than the opposite side. Some slight flattening on the anterior head. Appears to be good joint space around the condyle although slightly decreased posteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Open view shows some restricted translation on the left side where the condyle does not come completely down underneath the articular eminence. On the right side, there is good translation of the mandibular condyle. In the open views, there is a distinct difference in the size of the condyle on the right side as compared to the left side with the left side being diminutive. 

On the Panorex, there is some flattening of the right condylar head. The left condylar head is hard to see because of overlying bone structures. She has a root canal on the mandibular right second molar, and she has a root canal on the anterior tooth on the upper right side. Sinuses look relatively clear. Cannot view the teeth very well as the image did not turn out very well. 

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis  and articular disc dislocation without reduction and with significant deformation
Right TMJ slight dislocation of the disc at the lateral aspect of the joint but in normal position over the majority of the joint area 
Left TMJ pain
Left-sided myofascial pain
Masticatory dysfunction

It appears that the auto accident of 09/12/03 created the problems for Carmen since she had no symptomatology prior to that time. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:  

Continue splint therapy
Medications as required
Consider arthrocentesis or arthroscopy (don’t expect much improvement long-term with either of these)
Surgical reconstruction by one of the following methods:
Articular disc repositioning and ligament repair (disc may be too deformed for this to be successful)
Disc replacement (consider sternoclavicular disc graft)
Reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses