JANET SCHERR									09/12/2008

Janet is 59 years old, referred by Dr. William Hang.  Janet is in good health except for her jaw problems.  Janet’s TMJ problems began she believes when she was about 27 years old when she had clicking and popping in her jaws of unknown etiology.  She developed a closed lock and it took about 6 weeks for that to release.  She was on some anti-inflammatory medicines and muscle relaxers to relieve that problem.  It was until about 2000, as best as Janet can recall, that her bite began to shift and change.  She then switched to Dr. Ross, who has managed her since that time.  Janet has undergone physical therapy for 10 years trying to control her situation.  She has worn a splint from about 2005 to 2008 and this has helped her significantly, although she still has some significant problems.  In the past, she has had equilibrations and also dental reconstruction performed.  The only medication she currently takes is HRT.  

Janet really does not get any headaches.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 8, diet at 6, and disability at 8.  She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss and no other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching or bruxing of her teeth at nighttime.  Janet does wear a night guard at night.  Primary concerns that Janet has includes the following:

Extreme difficulties chewing. 
Her bite is off. 
Requires several visits to physical therapy per week.
Pain and discomfort in the jaws.

Janet states that her physical therapy is very painful for her, although she does find that it is helpful afterwards. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Janet has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is zero.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The nasal tip may be just slightly towards the right side.  The mandibular dental midline is 2 mm off to the left side.  Chin is probably about 5 mm off to the left side.  In profile view, Janet has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  Chin appears retruded and chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not defined.  Intraorally, Janet is missing the mandibular right first molar, has a hemisected tooth that is probably the second molar, and has a bridge that goes from the right first bicuspid to the hemisected remaining root of the second molar including four units.  On the left side, she is missing the left second molar, but the third molar has drifted forward.  She has crowns on the bicuspids and molars.  In the upper arch, she is missing the maxillary right second bicuspid and third molar.  On the left side, she is missing the first bicuspid replaced by a pontic.  She has crowns on all of the posterior teeth plus she has crowns on the maxillary cuspids and left lateral incisor.  She has a full Class II cuspid relationship on the left side and closer to Class I on the right side.  She has an overjet of about 2 mm.  She has about a 1 mm vertical over bite.  She has a tendency towards a buccal cross bite on the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy.  Uvula is moderately elongated.  The soft palate is maybe elongated.  Fascial pillars may be mildly constricted.  Tonsils look relatively normal.  Nasal airway at least anteriorly looks relatively clear.  There is some deviation of the nasal septum as it curves a little bit from side to side, but the airway appears to be open.  To palpation, she has mild to moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters, styloids, SCMs, shoulders, and particularly the TMJs.  She has crepitation in both joints on jaw function.  Maximal opening is 33 mm and she could open to about 23 without significant pain.  Excursion movement to the right about 7 mm, to the left 5 mm.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left maxillary cuspid being about 2 mm higher than the right side. 
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows Janet is missing the mandibular right first molar, has a hemisected tooth that is probably the second molar, and has a bridge that goes from the right first bicuspid to the hemisected remaining root of the second molar including four units.  On the left side, she is missing the left second molar, but the third molar has drifted forward.  She has crowns on the bicuspids and molars.  In the upper arch, she is missing the maxillary right second bicuspid and third molar.  On the left side, she is missing the first bicuspid replaced by a pontic.  She has crowns on all of the posterior teeth plus she has crowns on the maxillary cuspids and left lateral incisor.  She has bilateral TMJ severe arthritis, the left side being worse than the right side with greater loss of condylar volume on the left side as compared to the right side.  The articular eminences look fairly flat.  It is difficult to evaluate the sinuses.    
Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The bony septum appears to be in two pieces with the bottom part rotated significantly off towards the left side and the upper part a little bit off towards the left side.  Turbinates appear moderate in size with the right being larger than the left one.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite arthritic.  There is significant loss of volume vertically and anteroposteriorly.  There is decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  
Right TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes.  The articular eminence on this side is even more shallow than the opposite side.  There is significantly decreased vertical joint space.  On opening, there is actually moderately good translation in both joints.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the mandible appears to be slightly retruded.  There is a decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension from the soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall of only about 4 mm.  At the base of the tongue, it measures about at the most 7 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Janet would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia and asymmetry. 
Maxillary posterior vertical hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Class II occlusion on the left side and closer to Class I on the right side.
Tendency towards buccal cross bite on the right side. 
Missing the mandibular right first molar, has a hemisected tooth that is probably the second molar, and has a bridge that goes from the right first bicuspid to the hemisected remaining root of the second molar including four units.  On the left side, she is missing the left second molar, but the third molar has drifted forward.  She has crowns on the bicuspids and molars.  In the upper arch, she is missing the maxillary right second bicuspid and third molar.  On the left side, she is missing the first bicuspid replaced by a pontic.  She has crowns on all of the posterior teeth plus she has crowns on the maxillary cuspids and left lateral incisor.  
Mild crowding   lower anterior arch. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm.
TMJ pain. 
Myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.    
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 3 mm of tooth structure and retract.
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction, mandibular advancement, and asymmetry correction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect of the maxilla and correct the asymmetry.  
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). 
Bilateral coronoidotomies.
4.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
5.   Restorative dentistry. 

