ALEXANDER SCHLUTER								02/02/2006

Alex is 16 years old and referred by Dr. Peter Holland, 1601 N. Elm St., Denton, TX 76201.  Phone number is 940-387-7717.  Alex had pneumonia in November of 2000.  He had his wisdom teeth removed in December of 2005.  Prior to that, he had his tonsils removed in 1991 and adenoids removed around the same time.  He does have some allergy problems that are basically seasonal.  He does have exercise-induced asthma.  He had jaundice as a newborn.  Alex had pneumonia twice in 2000.  Alex's problems began when he was about 12 years old of unknown etiology.  His jaw started to grow off to one side.  Prior to that he had orthodontics stage I beginning in 1998.  He was placed in full braces from 2003 through 2005.  Apparently the doctor was trying to make compensations to try and keep Alex's teeth together.  He did have his wisdom teeth removed in December of 2005.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Advil 2 to 4 tablets p.r.n. pain.
Albuterol inhaler for his asthma.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Right jaw pops.
Pain in the jaw joints.
Headaches.
Lower jaw becoming progressively more asymmetric.
Difficulties eating and chewing secondary to pain.

He has no problems with earaches.  He gets occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo but no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother him include his right shoulder and left wrist which he can pop in and out of joint.  He has a little bit of discomfort with his wrist but not with his shoulder. He has been diagnosed as having a reverse curvature of the neck.  He is not aware of clenching or grinding at night but says that during the day he will clench some periodically when his neck and jaw joint problems act up.  He gets headaches once or twice a week at about a level of 6 that occur in the frontal and temple areas.  He rates his TMJ pain at 6 on the right side, 5 and the left side.  He rates his average daily pain around the neck at a level of 4.  He rates his jaw function at 5, diet at 5 and disability at 3.  

In frontal view, Alex has fairly reasonable asymmetry in the middle and upper third face.  The lower third face is asymmetric.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 7 mm.  He does have problems with developing cysts particularly in the right side in the submandibular area.  Alex has some orbital dystopia with the left eye being about 2 to 3 mm higher than the right side.  He has increased fullness in his left cheek area probably 6 to 8 mm.  He does have some masseteric hyperplasia in the right side of the jaw.  The nasal tips about 2 mm off towards the right side.  Maxillary dental midline is about 1.5 mm off to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm off to the right side and chin is about 8 to 9 mm off to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline is fairly close although the chin is still off probably 2 to 3 mm compared to the lower incisors.  The anterior body has a greater curvature on the left side and the right side is more flat.  In profile view, the maxilla is retruded by probably about 3 to 4 mm and the chin is back probably 10 to 15 mm.  
ALEXANDER SCHLUTER			02/02/2006				Page 2

Chin-neckline is short though the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  The lower third face appears somewhat elongated compared to the vertical height of the middle third face.  He has lip incompetence of about 6 mm.  Intraorally, Alex has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  The teeth are fairly well aligned and level.  Adequate attached gingiva around the teeth.  The right cuspid is about 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch, Alex has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has significant increased curve of Wilson on the right side and to a lesser degree on the left side.  He has about 2 mm of vertical overbite present.  He has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and Class I end-on by about 2 to 3 mm on the left side.  He has a transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being about 2 mm lower than the right side.  When Alex bites together, he does have some premature contact on the right side of his jaw but he cannot get all the teeth together.  Intraorally, his uvula is moderately hyperplastic.  The soft palate and faucial pillars are normal.  The tonsils also appear normal.  Intranasally, the right turbinate is somewhat hyperplastic, left appears relatively normal.  The septum may be just slightly deviated towards the right side.  There is some airway obstruction on the right side of probably a moderate degree but the left side looks fairly open.  However, the luminal valves are somewhat constricted.  To palpation, he has some minimal tenderness over the TMJs but no where else around the head and neck area.  He has an opening click in the right joint at 35 mm and closing click of about 25 mm.  The left joint functions relatively smoothly.  There is a little bit of a yaw in the maxilla and mandible with them shifted to the left probably a couple of millimeters in the molar area.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars but all the rest of the teeth are present.  The sinuses appear clear.  The turbinates appear large.  The septum appears deviated off towards the left side.  I cannot evaluate the condyles.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses are reasonably clear and he has moderately large frontal sinuses.  The bony septum appears to be deviated a little bit towards the left side.  Turbinates are moderate size but there does appear to be some airway at least back in the bony area.  

Left TMJ tomogram was taken with the teeth apart but it appears that the joint space is vertically and posteriorly decreased or it could just be a very thin articular disc.   

Right TMJ tomogram shows the presence of some arthritic changes or some significant anterior beaking present and decreased vertical and posterior joint spaces.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  It could be indicative of a displaced articular disc.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints with the condyles coming anterior to the articular eminences.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Alex dose in fact have a reverse curvature of the spine in the neck area.  He has a high occlusal plane angle with Class II skeletal relationship.  There is some adenoid tissue remaining in the nasopharynx area.  The airway from the soft palate and base of tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall appears within normal limits. 


ALEXANDER SCHLUTER			02/02/2006				Page 3

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Left TMJ condylar hyperplasia and articular disc medially displaced.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Left side vertical hyperplasia and transverse asymmetry. 
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Class III end-on occlusion on the left, Class I occlusion on the right side.
Posterior yaw with the maxilla and mandible shifted 2 to 3 mm off towards the left side.
Left masseteric hyperplasia.
TMJ pain.
Headaches 
Masticatory dysfunction.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Partial nasal airway obstruction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Left TMJ high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Right TMJ disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly and level transversely.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate it back on the facial midline.
Partial turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
