EMILY SCHLABACH								07/16/2007

Emily is 14 years and 9 months old.  She is referred by Dr. Tonya Washburn and Dr. Mike Steffen.  Emily has also been treated by Dr. Robert Talley, 44836th Ave. N.W., Ste. 103, Norman, OK 73072.

Emily's TMJ problems began when she was about 12 years of age.  She was hurt in a cheerleading accident where someone being held up fell and landed on her head.  Since that time she has had significant TMJ issues.  Her problems got worse and in March 2006 she began splint therapy with Dr. Talley in a forward positioning splint.  She wore this until November 2006 when she did not seem to be improving at all.  Initially the splints did seem to help her.  She had physical therapy from November 2006 to March of 2007.  The physical therapy did help her back and neck some but did not help the TMJ issues.  She has had no other treatment. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Clicking and popping of the jaw joints.
The jaws lock.
Headaches.
Neck pain.
Upper back pain.

She gets occasional earaches but no tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She rates her TMJ at 4, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 5, diet at 4, disability at 2.  She gets daily headaches that occur at about a level of 7 in the right temporal posterior head area and down the left frontal temporal and posterior head area.  She usually has daily pain in the morning but then subsequently turns into headaches.  In the summer of 2006 she did develop viral spinal meningitis.  She seems to have no residual effects associated with the viral spinal meningitis.  Other than the TMJ issues it appears that Emily is in good health.  

In frontal view Emily appears to have reasonably good facial symmetry and balance.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 to 3 mm.  Maxillary dental midline, mandibular dental midline and chin are all fairly reasonably well aligned.  In profile view she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  She may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency.  She is about 10 to 12 mm AP deficient.  Chin-neckline is a little bit short and the chin-neck angle is moderately defined.  In the lower arch, Emily has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth appear nicely aligned and leveled.  She has a high attached labial frenulum.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  A little bit of minor crowding around the lateral incisors.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally being probably 3 mm Class II.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  Intraorally, the uvula and soft palate appear relatively normal in length.  The faucial pillars appear somewhat constricted.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged.  A little bit of deviation of the septal base off to the right side.  There may be some mild nasal airway obstruction.  Emily has no problems with snoring, daytime somnolence or sleep apnea symptoms.  On opening, she has audible clicks and pops in TMJ and about 30 mm of opening and closing click is somewhere around 20 mm.  Joints are quite noisy.  

EMILY SCHLABACH				07/16/2007				Page 2

To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Incisal opening is 48 mm.  Excursive movements are 8 mm in each direction. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of 4 impacted third molars but all the rest of the teeth erupted and in position.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  The right turbinate appears larger than the left turbinate.  The condyles look relatively normal. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  The bony septum at least is straight.  The turbinates appear fairly large with what appears to be some constricture of the airway.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the posterior head and a little bit of peaking at the top of the condyle.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space vertically appears decreased. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little flattening on the superior aspect.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be decreased joint space at the posterior aspect of the joint.  On opening there is fairly good translation of both condyles. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Emily does have some adenoid tissue still remaining in the nasopharynx.  She has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  The mandible appears retruded.  The maxilla maybe slightly retruded as well.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm at the soft palate level and 4 to 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  Lower incisors appear slightly overangulated.  The upper lateral incisors appear small so there is probably a tooth size discrepancy.  However, we do not have models today to do that evaluation.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with late reduction. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
High occlusal plane angle.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 3 to 4 mm (models not available at the time of evaluation.)
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 Hypertrophied adenoid tissue. 
 Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Airway obstruction.




EMILY SCHLABACH			07/16/2007				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up at least 1 mm of spacing around each upper lateral incisor.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth to keep from flaring them any further forward removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure. 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and downgraft it posteriorly. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Augmentation genioplasty 3 to 4 mm (Medpor implant.)
Adenoidectomy.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
