B123
B123 is 15 years old. She is in the 9th grade. She was referred by XXXX.
Patient History
B123 has some allergy problems but otherwise is in good health. B123's problems with her jaw joints may have begun in the past two years of unknown etiology. B123 had her first stage of orthodontics at the age of 6 with a palatal expander. Dr. XXXX started treating B123 1 year and 1 month ago, and he did a palatal expander and then initiated fixed appliances 8 months ago. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. The only joints that really bother her are her fingers in which she has lots of popping and crackling noises. She is allergic to pollen, trees, dogs, cats, etc., and allergic to nickel. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. She gets headaches two times a week at about a level of 3 in the temporal areas bilaterally. They are worse during allergy season. She rates her TMJ pain at 2, average daily pain at 2, jaw function and diet at 4, and disability at 0.

Patient Concerns
Lower jaw is out in front of the upper jaw
She has an underbite with the upper jaw
Current Medications
Allergy shots
Aleve for headaches at times

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B123 has good facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.

In profile view, she has some maxillary AP deficiency. Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably 3 mm. Filling out the upper lip does improve her facial balance. Lower lip is protrusive. Chin is actually in fairly good AP balance, although it may be just slightly deficient. Has a high mandibular plane angle. Chin-neckline looks relatively normal in length, and chin-neck angle is reasonably well-defined.

Intraorally, B123 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Second molars are slightly hypererupted particularly on the left side. Teeth otherwise are fairly well-aligned. Small diasthema between the lower central incisors. Power chain is in place to help close it up. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Increased curve of Wilson is present in the upper arch. She has a Class III cuspid relationship that may be just slightly worse on the left side than the right side. On the left side she is probably 3 mm Class III and on the right side probably 5 mm Class III. She has an anterior open bite of 1 to 2 mm. Has a slight accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Lower midline is shifted about a millimeter off to the left. Transversely, she has fairly good symmetry. Left cuspid may be just about a millimeter posterior to the right cuspid in the lower arch. Upper arch is fairly symmetric. Oropharynx is clear, and tissues all look healthy. Intranasally, turbinates are of moderate size as best I can see in the front but cannot see in the back. She has a very wide columella width, and the nostrils are quite narrow because of the wide columella. Holding open the nostrils, however, could not significantly increase her ability to breathe through her nose. B123 believes that she probably breathes through her mouth during allergy seasons, but otherwise she thinks she breathes through her nose when she sleeps. Dad has not observed her snoring at all.

To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the TMJs and styloid areas. On opening, the left joint is relatively smooth; however, on the right side she has a click at about 30 mm of opening and closing click at probably 20. The closing click is a little bit more obvious than the opening click. Maximal incisal opening is 63 mm. Excursive movements are about 12 mm in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows she probably has a mucous retention cyst perhaps in the left sinus that appears more crowded than the right side. Lower arch shows all of her teeth are erupted through the second molars, and she has impacted third molars. In the upper arch, she has unerupted second and third molars. Difficult to evaluate the condyles, but the right one looks a little bit different than the left one but hard to tell on these radiographs.

Waters view shows the mandibular dental midline is a little bit to the left of the maxillary midline. Sinuses actually appear fairly clear on this view. Right turbinate appears larger than the left turbinate.

Right TMJ tomogram shows significantly decreased joint space and some mild arthritic changes on the head of the condyle. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Decreased posterior and superior joint spaces.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with decreased superior and posterior joint space. No pseudocyst present in the condylar head. Articular eminence is relatively shallow.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles with them coming completely out of the fossa.
Lateral cephalometrically, she has a high occlusal plane angle and high mandibular plane angle. Maxilla appears AP deficient and mandible may be also AP deficient particularly in the chin area. She has vertical asymmetry on the radiograph, but I do not see that clinically.

Dr. XXXX did take a hand-wrist film 2 weeks ago. It shows that the sesamoid bone is calcified but may not be completely calcified just yet.
Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations
AP maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary excess
Mandibular prognathism
Class III end-on occlusion being slightly worse on the right side as compared to the left side
Mandibular dental midline shifted a millimeter to the left
Anterior open bite
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars
Unerupted maxillary second molars with possible ankylosis
TMJ pain
Headaches
Myofascial pain
High occlusal plane angle of 15 degrees (normal 8 degrees)
Slight overangulation of maxillary incisors
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1.5 mm
Slight increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch
Hypertrophied turbinates
Extremely wide columella creating narrow nostrils
Partial nasal airway obstruction

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Try to decrease transverse width in the bicuspid area. Molars appear to have fairly good transverse width to match up with the lowers
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about a millimeter of tooth structure to help compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy. Include the second molars in the arch wire. Try to tip the first molars lingually slightly as they have just a slight reverse curve of Wilson associated with them

Preliminary surgery
Consider uncovering maxillary second molars and see if they can be erupted into occlusion (be careful as they may be ankylosed, in which case it may be of advantage to have the maxillary second molars removed but let the third molars alone for the time being and see if they would eventually erupt into the second molar position)

Continue to monitor growth and development to be sure that mandibular growth is complete
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward, upright the incisors, and correct any residual transverse discrepancy as well as decrease the occlusal plane angle
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back into good occlusion with the maxilla
Removal of four impacted third molars
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies
Reconstruct columella and enlarge nostrils

B123 MRI Scan Evaluation
There is a lot of interference on these MRIs probably due to perhaps some metals in the area.
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears somewhat enlarged and degenerative changes occurred. Decreased joint space vertically. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. The disc appears to be medially displaced.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is smaller than the opposite side. Decreased superior joint space. Difficult to identify discal tissue. Condyle seems to have a little bit better morphology on the superior surface. On the T2 images, the disc appears to be medially and anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows significant interference present. Condyle has fairly good dimension anteroposteriorly with some anterior beaking and flattening of the anterior head with some loss of definition of the cortical bone on the head of the condyle. There is discal tissue seen anterior to the condyle. Decreased superior joint space particularly out laterally. No particular inflammatory response seen within the joint.

On opening, it is difficult to tell, but it appears that the disc may reduce on opening. Difficult to tell because the condyle translates into the area of interference and cannot be well-defined.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is flattened on the anterior aspect with a little divot in the cortical bone and some anterior beaking present. There appears to be some discal tissue anteriorly. Decreased superior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

On opening, it is difficult to tell discal position because of the mild metallic interference, but the condyle appears to translate fairly well.
Impression:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc medially and probably anteriorly displaced.

