ANGELA SCHMITT									01-27-04

Angela is 29 years old and referred by Joao Gonzalves. 

Patient History

She has had a C-section and some right lingual nerve surgery. She had a calf augmentation with silicone implant. Her right lingual nerve apparently was severed when she had her mandibular right wisdom tooth removed. The nerve was repaired, and she says she has fairly good sensation there now. The surgery was done three years ago. The nerve repair was done seven months after the injury. 

Angela’s primary concerns are that she has facial asymmetry and the teeth don’t fit together very well. She has had her braces on for almost two years now. She recently has seen Dr. Michael Arvystas in New York since she and her husband have just moved there two months ago. She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain or discomfort, TMJ noises, earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, she has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Lower third face is asymmetric. Left side of the mandible appears to be slightly longer than the right side by probably about 3 to 4 mm. Chin is shifted off to the right side. Right angle appears a little bit more prominent in a lateral direction as compared to the left side. Upper lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 4 mm. Maxillary midline is shifted to the left at least 2 mm, but mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline or maybe just 0.5 mm off to the left. Chin is just slightly off to the right side maybe a millimeter or two. Actually mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. 

In profile, she has fairly good facial vertical balance. Subnasale may be retruded about 3 mm. Chin may be back maybe about 5 mm. Chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. Chin-neckline appears maybe just slightly short. Overall facial balance is fairly good.

Intraorally, Angela has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Has some spacing between the second bicuspid which has a bracket off and the first molar on the left side. She has all of her teeth back through the second molars in both arches. Has a slightly increased curve of Wilson in the molars on the maxillary right side. Some transverse deficiency in the maxilla. She has an anterior deep bite on the left side of about 2 mm to 2.5 mm, and on the right side in about the cuspid area it approaches almost 0. She has a Class I cuspid relationship on the left side but on the right side is Class III end-on probably a good 4 to 5 mm. The lower arch is fairly symmetric anteroposteriorly, but in the upper arch, the left cuspid is posterior to the right cuspid by probably 2 mm. She has a posterior crossbite on the right side from the first bicuspid through the second molar. In the lower arch, there is just a very slight cant in the occlusal plane where the right side is about 0.5 mm higher than the left side. However, in the upper arch, she has about a 3-mm vertical discrepancy on the right side with the right cuspid higher than the left cuspid. No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. TMJs function smoothly and no evidence of any noises. She seems to have good translation. Incisal opening is 58 mm. Excursive movement to the left is 10 mm and to the right 10 mm. 
Nasal airway looks good  with no evidence of any significant obstruction. Turbinates are moderate in size.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of probably the mandibular left first molar with the second and third molar forward in the second molar position. The other three third molars are absent. She has a root canal in the mandibular right first molar and maxillary left first bicuspid.  Sinuses appear relatively clear. Difficult to determine nasal airway function. The left condyle appears may be slightly larger than the right condyle. Condylar head and neck may just appear slightly longer on the left side as compared to the right side. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of beaking anteriorly. Joint space actually looks fairly good, however. Articular eminence is relatively shallow and short in length. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with good form and shape and good joint space around it. Articular eminence is moderately shallow but a little bit longer on this side as compared to the opposite side. 

Open views show good translation in both joints.

Waters view shows that she has a deviated septum and some spurs on the septum. Turbinates appear moderately large, particularly the right side. Sinuses appear relatively clear. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some slight overangulation of the maxillary incisors but otherwise appears to be fairly close to a skeletal Class I position. May be some slight AP microgenia. Oropharyngeal airway looks very good. Inferior borders of the mandible are fairly close to being at the same vertical level with just about a 1 to 2-mm difference. Occlusal plane shows some differences, particularly in the upper arch as compared to the lower arch. Evaluating the tomograms, there is really no increased vertical dimension of the condyle or mandible on the left side as compared to the right side. There is a little bit of difference in AP position of the teeth, but this may be in part due to the fact that she is missing her lower first molar on the left side, and the second and third molar are tipped forward in to the second molar position, thus, making the molars on the left side look more posteriorly positioned than the right side. It is possible that there could be an ankylosis in the maxillary right second bicuspid as the sound compared to the opposite side is less dull sounding and sounds more crisp than the opposing teeth and also sounds more dense than the cuspid and bicuspid on that same side. 

Angela has a tooth-size discrepancy of about 3 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Maxillary asymmetry with the right side being almost 4 mm shorter vertically as compared to the left side
Vertical asymmetry in the mandible with the right side being about a millimeter to 2 mm higher than the left side
Transverse maxillary deficiency
Right-sided crossbite
Class I cuspid relationship on the left side, Class II cuspid relationship on the right side
Significant cant in the occlusal plane with the maxillary right side being 4 to 5 mm higher than the left side
Transverse cant in the mandible occlusal plane with the right side being about 1 to 2 mm higher than the left side
Possible ankylosis of the maxillary left second bicuspid
Slight vertical asymmetry in the commissures with the left side being about 2 to 3 mm lower than the right side
Slight extrusion of the maxillary right first bicuspid

Recommended Treatment

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. On the right side, place a straight arch wire which should intrude the right first bicuspid some and hopefully extrude the cuspid slightly. Place the bracket on the right lateral incisor at a slightly higher level of about 1 mm to level it off with the centrals and left lateral incisor 
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing a minimum of 2 to 2.5 mm of tooth structure to correct for the significant tooth-size discrepancy. Try to close the space on the left posterior quadrant but do this moving one of the molars at a time so that the teeth from the second bicuspid on forward are not retracted. Can use the second molar to help push the first molar forward. Following completion of getting the first molar forward, then advance the second molar. This should help decrease the probability of developing asymmetry if just normal closing mechanics are used in that area

Surgery
Unilateral right mandibular sagittal split to lengthen the right ramus approximately 2 mm to level the occlusal plane
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to correct the crossbite and downgraft the maxilla on the right side

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
