LYNNE SCHLEPER									09-26-03

Lynne is 42 years old and referred by Dr. Al Bishop. 

Patient Concerns

Earaches, right ear
Swishing, “sea shell” sounds, heartbeat sounds in the left ear. She can’t make this noise unless I stopped as she repositioned her head in a certain way or places a pillow under her neck in a certain way
Headaches 
Pain in the right jaw joint
Difficulty opening the mouth
Difficulty eating and chewing
Inability to sleep at night secondary to pain
Pain down through the jaws and into the neck
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints

Patient History

Lynne’s problems began about 2-1/2 years ago. She fell ice skating and hit her head on the ice sustaining a concussion. She had a CT scan of her head taken at that time, and it showed no intracranial bleeding. She continued to have some significant pain in her neck, and so an MRI was taken, and then she had some steroid injections into her neck approximately two weeks or so after the fall, and this did help her fairly significantly in reference to her neck problems, although she states she still has some carpal tunnel symptoms bilaterally. During the next few months is when she realized that she was having some problems with her jaws or her ears. She did seek help from ENT doctors first, and she has been to see two different doctors. Within a few months, she went into to see Dr. Butch Peede. Dr. Peede make three attempts to make a splint for Lynne, but these all failed as it could not maintain a proper relationship between the jaws and the splint, and it did not help with her pain levels. She has had one subsequent splint that Dr. Bishop has recently made for her, although she has only worn this for about 5 days, and she feels that this is helping her some. She has had massage treatment, but this has not helped her, and she has also had hot and cold therapy, which has not been successful either. One of the ENT doctors placed her on Klonopin and Dyazide. The Klonopin helped her sleep well, but the Dyazide did not help her. One of the doctors diagnosed her as having tinnitus, but she doesn’t have ringing in her ears. She takes Darvocet occasionally and currently takes Klonopin only occasionally as well. She does get right earaches but has no tinnitus, no vertigo, but does have some hearing loss. She is aware of nocturnal clenching. She also clenches during the daytime. She does feel a little bit better if she keeps her jaws apart and postures forward some as it does take some of the stress off of her joints. Other joints that bother her include her neck in the upper part and her right thumb. Lynne gets headaches about two times per week, and they occur predominantly in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area at about a level of 7 on the average. She may have some food allergies as she is aware of a certain cheese that gives her significant headache problems. She rates her TMJ pain at 8, overall pain on an average day at 8, jaw function at 9, diet at 4, and disability at 4. Lynne has had her orthodontic braces on only for two weeks now. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Lynne has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm. Maxillary and mandibular midlines are pretty much on the facial midline. Chin may be just 1 to 2 mm off to the left side. 

In profile view, she has good facial balance. Chin-neckline has a good length, and chin-neck angle is well-defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has a crown on the mandibular left first molar. There is some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has appliances on only the upper teeth at this time. She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has an anterior deep-bite of about 3 to 4 mm. Oropharynx is clear. She claims no problems breathing through her nose. 

To palpation, she has high moderate to severe pain to palpation over the right TMJ but no other pain to palpation around the head and neck area. Joints seem to function fairly smoothly. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Root canal in the mandibular left first molar with a crown on it and root canal in the maxillary right first molar. Sinuses look relatively clear. Turbinates look relatively normal in size. Septum appears straight. Condyles appear somewhat large and almost too large for the fossas. No other significant pathology noted. 

Waters view shows that she has moderate-size turbinates, but it appears that there is some airway there. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Mandible on the left side may be just slightly short vertically compared to the right side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa. She has very steep articular eminences. It is possible that the articular discs may be vertically oriented within the joint. Posterior joint space does seem somewhat decreased. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that actually seems to show fairly good space around the condyle. The condyle appears a little bit more normal in size. Articular eminence is moderately steep although maybe not quite as steep as the opposite side. Difficult to tell if the space is adequate to support the disc or not. 

On opening, there is moderately good translation of both the condyles. It appears there is a slightly decreased joint space on the right side between the condyle and articular eminence and also a little bit decreased on the left side as well.

Cephalometrically, she is skeletal Class I. Oropharyngeal airway appears a little bit decreased, but she gives no history of snoring or other airway problems.

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction
Right TMJ arthritis with probable articular disc reduction, but the disc is much more difficult to identify on this side indicative of possible medial displacement as well (no coronal views were available)
Relative mandibular hyperplasia
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Anterior deep bite
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Right-sided earaches 
History of nocturnal and daytime clenching

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal osteotomies to maintain occlusion and allow the creation of space within the joint to accommodate the disc
If right TMJ disc is nonsalvageable, consider sternoclavicular disc graft to aid in reconstructing the joint.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
