DANIEL SCHOCH									07/14/2006

Daniel is 16-1/2 years old, referred by Dr. Bill Hang.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Unable to close his mouth properly.
Wearing down of teeth.
Jaws and bite are way out of alignment.
Concerned about possible development of future jaw pain.

By history, Daniel had orthodontics done from 1998 to 1999 and had a good bite relationship at that time.  He had his wisdom teeth removed in August of 2005.  That is the only surgery he has undergone.  On final completion of his orthodontics his bite apparently was fairly good.  Since that time he has developed significant problems with his jaw alignment and with his occlusion.  Daniel's growth problem began when he was about 12 or 13 years of age.  Etiology is unknown except that he has an uncle who had a similar problem.  His uncle is his dad's brother and he had surgery to fix his problem a number of years ago.  He also had his lower jaw that overdeveloped and grew off to one side.

In frontal view, Daniel has fairly good facial balance in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 3.5 to 4 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is 4.5 to 5 mm off to the left side.  In fact, the contact between the right central and lateral incisor almost align with his maxillary midline.  Left side of mandibular ramus is probably a good 6 mm more prominent than the right side.  The chin is probably about 7 to 8 mm off to the left.  There is some deficiency in cheek projection of probably about 3 to 4 mm.  He has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip.  Upper lip appears to be retruded by probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded by maybe about 8 to 10 mm but neckline may be just a little bit short though the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  He has a high occlusal plane angle facial type of morphology.   As Daniel postures his mandible towards the right side 5 mm, it improves his facial symmetry except the left angle of the mandible still considerably more prominent than the right side by probably 4 mm yet.  In the left angle of the mandible, Daniel has some moderate masseteric hyperplasia.  When he bites down there is more muscle fullness and mass on the left side as compared to the right angle of the mandible.  Intraorally, Daniel has all of his teeth back through the second molars present.  He has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.  In the lower arch the left cuspid may be about 1 mm to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  In the upper arch he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  Daniel has a total crossbite on the left side and anteriorly.  On the right side he has a tendency towards a crossbite in the lateral incisor, cuspid, first bicuspid but the second bicuspid molars are not in crossbite.  He has an open bite of about 1 mm anteriorly.  He has occlusion primarily on the maxillary second molar, first and second molar and mandibular second bicuspid and molars.  The uvula and soft palate appear relatively normal though the soft palate may be slightly elongated.  Faucial pillars look relatively normal.  Daniel is probably about 3 mm Class III on the left side and super Class III being about 9 mm to 10 mm Class III on the right side.  Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The septum may be a little bit deviated off towards the right side.  There is probably moderate nasal airway obstruction.  
DANIEL SCHOCH				07/14/2006				Page 2


The columella base is wide and the nostrils are quite narrow.  Luminal valves look reasonably good.  Daniel is not aware of any problems with snoring, daytime somnolence or any sleep apnea symptoms.  To palpation, he has no tenderness over the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 60 mm with about 5 mm of excursive movement in each direction.  Joints seem to function smoothly.  No tenderness around the head and neck area.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  It also shows that the maxillary right second molar is completely out of occlusion.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  Difficult to evaluate the condyles and joints.  

Waters view shows the asymmetry in the mandible.  Left angle is more prominent than the right angle.  Significant deviation of the nasal septum with a fairly good size spur going off to the left side of the nose.  Turbinates appear large compared to the available nasal width and they appear to obliterate most of the nasal airway.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows condyle that has some mild arthritic changes.  The joint space looks fairly good.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is probably a little bit of anterior beaking present but difficult to tell on this x-ray.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have a decreased vertical joint space.  The posterior joint space looks normal.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  Condylar head and neck appear elongated compared to the opposite side.  On opening, there is some restricted translation in both joints, a little bit greater on the left side compared to the right side.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph reveals a skeletal and occlusal Class III relationship.  Oral pharyngeal airway actually looks fairly good.  Turbinate extends slightly beyond the hard palate by probably 5 to 6 mm.  Maxilla appears AP deficient and the mandible appears prominent anteroposteriorly although the chin is a little bit weak.  There is a transverse yaw with the maxilla being 2 mm off to the left side.  The mandible is probably 3 to 4 mm off to the left side. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia being worse on the right side than the left side.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Mandibular deviated prognathism. 
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Super Class III occlusion on the right side and Class III occlusion on the left side.
Anterior and left posterior crossbite and on the right side crossbite involving the central through the first bicuspid. 
Increased transverse prominence of the left mandibular angle. 
Nasoseptal spurs.
DANIEL SCHOCH				07/14/2006				Page 3


  Hypertrophied turbinates.
  Wide columella.
  Narrow nostrils.
  Nasal airway obstruction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and repositioning of articular disc with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, expand and move the anterior aspect superiorly.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a counterclockwise rotation and shifting it to the right onto the facial midline.
AP augmentation genioplasty.
Partial turbinectomies.
Nasal septoplasty.
Reconstruction of columella.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
