MALIN SCHORER									6/6/05

Malin is 47 years old, referred by James Baker, DDS and Ross Pope, DO.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Pain down through the jaws, neck, shoulders and head.
Difficulty eating and chewing.

Malin had orthognathic surgery in 1975 by Dr. Niel Glass where apparently she had maxillary osteotomies and a chin procedure done.  Relative to developing joint problems, she first became aware of pain and tightness in the jaws about 1996 of unknown etiology.  In 1997, she had surgery by Dr. Mike Duffy who did bilateral discectomies.  She did fairly well after that for awhile but then developed pain again, and in 2003 she had bilateral arthroscopies by Dr. James Baker.  In addition, Dr. Baker has been injecting her with hyaluronic acid x7.  She has been in splint therapy since 1997.  She had physical therapy after both surgeries.  Currently she is under extended pain management care.  

MEDICATIONS:  
Wellbutrin 450 mg.
Lexapro 20 mg.
Mobic 15 mg.
Trazodone 50 mg.
Fentanyl patch 50 mcg.
Ibuprofen.
Mepergan Fortis (Demerol.)

She is a recovered alcoholic and would like to get off her medications.  

She has no trouble with earaches, rarely gets tinnitus, gets occasional vertigo but does have hearing loss.  Almost all of her other joints give her problems.  She has food allergies to nuts, citrus fruits and potatoes.  She is not away of having significant jewelry problems but she may have a reaction to cheap earrings.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime and also during the day she does clench.  She has a little numbness around the facial jaw area but her hands get numb at times.  When she gets hyaluronic acid injections in her joints, it does take away her pain and it is good for about 3 weeks relative to decreasing her symptoms.  It makes the pain in the back of her head and neck goes away for the most part.  She gets headaches even on the medications at a level of 4 in the temple, posterior head and top of the head area.  On the medications, her TMJ pain is still a level of 4 and overall average daily pain at 4.  Jaw function is at 5, diet at 6, disability at 5.  Without the medications, her pain significantly increases.  She is very tired a lot during the days.  She does tend to sleep fairly well at night.  She does snore at night.  She does have moderate snoring.  She rates her daytime somnolence at a severe level.  We are not sure if there are any sleep apnea problems.  


MALIN SCHORER				6/6/05					Page 2


On frontal view Malin has good facial symmetry and balance.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm.  Maxillary and mandibular chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, she has good vertical and AP facial balance.  Some slight fullness in submental area but chin-neckline looks good and chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.  A little bit of stripping around the lower anterior roots, but the gums for the most part look fairly healthy.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship with a little bit better fit on the left side and just slightly opened on the right side towards the cuspid first bicuspid area.  She has a vertical overbite of about 1 mm.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the TMJs, a little bit over the SCMs but otherwise no tenderness around the head and neck area.  She has significant crepitation in both joints on the right side more prominent than the left side.  Maximal incisal opening is 37 mm but only 25 mm without significant discomfort.  Excursion movement to the right 2 mm and to the left 4 mm.  Intranasally, turbinates are relatively moderate in size.  The septum deviates a little bit off to the left side but it appears that there is no obstruction.  Malin does smoke 1 pack of cigarettes per day and has done that for the past 15 years.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  It shows the root canals in the maxillary left lateral incisor cuspid first molar.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  She appears to have significant arthritis in her joints.  She has wires in the chin area from the previous genioplasty procedure.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows significant arthritis in the lower jaw bone. Probably significantly decreased joint space between the condyle and fossa but difficult to tell on these radiographs.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has lost significant volume.  Anterior beaking is present.  Significant sclerosis is present and significant loss of joint space is present.  On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints with the greater amount of restriction in the left joints compared to the right joint.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear.  She has a septal spur off the left side of the bony septum and it appeases that posteriorly on the right side that there may be a spur as well.  Sinuses otherwise look clear.  

Lateral cephalometric radiographic shows that she has good skeletal Class I relationship and occlusal relationship.  Chin is in good position.  She has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway to the soft palate level measures about 7 mm, at the base of the tongue probably about 8 mm.  
MALIN SCHORER					6/6/05				Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
TMJ pain.
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain.
Masticatory dysfunction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)

Presurgical orthodontics.
Place appliances on maxillary and mandibular arches.  Can use some bonded brackets all the way around.  Include second molars if possible. 

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ condylectomy debridement and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 