ALEXANDRA SCHOLES 								12/17/2010

Lexi is 24 years old, birth date 09/09/1986.  Approximately 8 days ago, she began developing some pain on the right side.  She has a pain that sort of migrates around the right side of her face and jaw area.  She can have continuous pain for as long as several hours and then it will go away for a while.  It is usually worse in the evenings and at night.  She thinks that sometimes when she eats that this also makes it worse.  She has been to see a number of specialists including a dentist, an ENT specialist, a neurologist, and she has been to the ER the past 2 nights, one in New York and then at Presbyterian emergency room here in Dallas.  She has no headaches, no TMJ pain, but her current pain levels get to be about a 9 during the day.  Her jaw function is probably around 6 and her diet is about a 9.  When she gets here severe pain, it is totally debilitating for her.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  The only other joints that bother her are her back.  At one time, they thought that she may have ankylosing spondylitis or arthritis in her back.  She did have iriitis when she was younger.  She thinks she does clench some at nighttime.  Medications she takes include:

Gabapentin 100 mg 3 tablets 3 times per day and they will be increasing that.
Hydrocodone 7.5 mg tablets.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates are moderate in size and the septum looks reasonably straight.  

Coronal view shows large turbinate particularly on the right side, but sinuses are clear.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates are moderate in size and tend to block a good portion of the airway.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that over medially there is good joint space, but out laterally there is significantly decreased joint space and flattening of the lateral head of the condyle.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  Vertical joint space looks good. 

Right TMJ shows that she has a decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint, but in the middle and over medially there is good joint space.  At the lateral aspect of the joint, there is some flattening of the lateral head of the condyle.  Vertical joint space looks good.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle where the lateral pole is lower than the medial pole.  There is significantly decreased lateral joint space with flattening of the lateral head of the condyle.  There is likely indicative of a medially displaced articular disc.  
Right TMJ likewise shows the lateral pole of the condyle lower than the medial pole.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 3 to 4 mm.  There is decreased lateral joint space indicative of likely medial displacement of the articular discs.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a good Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship with a good oropharyngeal airway.  

Lexi has good facial balance frontally and good balance from the profile view.  Occlusion is good Class I with about a 1 mm over bite.  

Basic diagnoses for Lexi would be as follows:

Right-sided trigeminal neuralgia.
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs medially displaced.
Atypical pain in right side of the face and jaws.  Pain is atypical particularly if TMJ is the possible cause.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Continue with gabapentin, increasing dosages to see if pain can be controlled.
Consider TMJ blocks with local anesthesia to see if this has any positive effect on controlling and/or decreasing the pain.
Consider TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair and probably bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies if TMJ problems are confirmed to be the etiology.

The trigeminal neuralgia could possibly be caused by viral or degenerative changes within the nerve.  It seems to be confined predominantly to V2.  If it is viral, it should go away.  There is also the possibility of there being a dental origin as on our x-ray there appears to be a dark spot between the restoration and the tooth structure on the mandibular right second molar.  The tooth is slightly tender when she bites down on a tongue blade, but not real significant.  She does rate her pain levels when they do occur at a level of 8 to 9 and can be quite debilitating for her.  She does not report any TMJ pain nor any significant myofascial pain problems.  She is to contact us if she has severe pain in the evening and, if so, we may be able to arrange for her to come in so that I could inject her joint and assess the effectiveness on the pain.