B124
B124 is 62 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. B124's primary concerns at this time include the following:
Daily headaches that occur usually in the afternoon between 2:00 and 5:00 p.m. Facial numbness after 3:00 p.m. Ear pain, being worse on the left side.
Ringing in the ears.
Difficulty swallowing. Cervical issues particularly involving the disks at C4 and C5.

B124's problems began 13 years ago. B124's current problems began almost 1 year ago when he developed headaches. He has been treated with medications and has had bite splints previously, but has a new one that he got just about 3 weeks ago. B124 feels best in the morning, but moving and activity, particularly talking or other functions, will induce the headaches, although they usually begin between 2:00 and 5:00 in the afternoon. Talking certainly worsens the headache situation.

B124 began having joint problems, particularly degenerative lumbar disks, 13 years ago. He had to quit a lot of his activities because of the pain. He was treated with medications, particularly opiates, but 1 year and 1 month ago, he pretty much had weaned himself off of the opiates. He had a previous bite plate from about age 52 to 57 that he wore basically at night. He usually feels best in the morning. He has had MRIs of the brain and body and everything is okay except for the cervical and lumbar problems. He gets pain in the left ear area particularly in the mornings. He feels he has to move and manipulate his jaws to release the ear canals. B124 gets headaches daily in the afternoon at about a level of 7 that affect the frontal and temporal areas. He does not have any specific TMJ pain, but his average daily pain reaches 7. He rates his jaw function at 3, diet at 1, disability at 7.

He takes the following medications:
Tenormin 50 mg 2 times per day. Aspirin 81 mg 3 times a week.
Verapamil 40 mg 2 times per day.
Temazepam 30 mg q.d.
Amitriptyline 10 mg t.i.d.

B124 used to chew a lot of gum and would do that for a few hours a day. Now he has discontinued that. Other joints that bother him include his back, neck, right shoulder, and his left toes particularly when he swims.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B124 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 26 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about -2. The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all fairly well aligned with each other. In profile view, B124 has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 8 mm at the incisal edge and a good 10-12 mm in the chin. Chin neckline is short. Intraorally, B124 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present. The lower incisors are in lingual inclination. He has heterotopic bone around the outside of his teeth, particularly around the anterior teeth from the cuspid through the incisors. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. B124 has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship, however, the maxillary and mandibular incisors are tipped lingually. He does have an anterior deep bite of about 3-4 mm. B124 has had 2 previous surgeries, one to repair a septal perforation with a temporal muscle flap and the second procedure occurred when he was in college and sustained a left zygomatic orbital fracture. To palpation, B124 has got moderate pain in the temporalis and TMJs and milder pain to the masseters, medial pterygoids, and retromandibular area. On opening, he had a definite click in the left joint at about 10 mm of opening and about 5 mm of closing. In the right joint, it functioned a little bit more smoothly, but occasionally he would have a loud audible pop.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows that B124 is missing the maxillary third molars and the mandibular left third molar, but he does have a mandibular right third molar in place. Sinuses look relatively clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size. It is difficult to evaluate the joints. Coronal views show the sinuses are clear. Inferior turbinates look actually quite large in the posterior aspect of the nasal airway. Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates appear large in the posterior two-thirds of the nasal area. Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that seems to have fairly good morphology with a little bit of anterior beaking in one area. Articular eminence is moderate in inclination and relatively normal in length. Joint space appears fairly well balanced. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Joint space appears fairly balanced. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Left TMJ coronal tomograms show that there is a little extrusion of the lateral pole of the condyle in a lateral direction. There is decreased joint space laterally which could be indicative of a medial displacement of the disc. The mid part of the joint appears to have fairly good joint space. Right TMJ coronal tomogram shows a condyle that has a mild extension of the lateral pole of the condyle. There is decreased lateral joint space indicative of medial displacement of the disc. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B124 has AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency, however, the oropharyngeal airway is reasonably good with an AP dimension of about 9 mm at the soft palate level and about 7 to 8 mm at the base of the tongue. He has a skeletal occlusal Class I jaw relationship, although the incisors are in significant vertical orientation.

Basic diagnoses for B124 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction. Maxillary AP and vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class I occlusion but with an anterior deep bite of 3-4 mm. Attrition of the anterior teeth to the bicuspids. TMJ pain. Headaches. Myofascial pain. Maxillary and mandibular incisors in lingual inclination.

Recommended treatment would be as follows with three treatment options.
Option 1. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain the current mandibular position and occlusion. Option 2. Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Increase inclination of the maxillary incisors. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level mandibular arch. Increase inclination of the lower incisors. Surgery. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward approximately 12 mm.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward approximately 8 mm with a counterclockwise rotation. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. Option 3. Surgery Stage 1.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. Construction of bite splint to protect the occlusion in the joints.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Increase the inclination of the maxillary incisors. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level mandibular arch. Increase the inclination of the lower incisors. Surgery Stage 2.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward 12 mm in a counterclockwise direction. Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 8 mm at the incisal edge with a counterclockwise rotation. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B124 MRI AGE: 63/M
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good shape. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. It is difficult to see the discal tissue within the joint space, but it is possible it may be slightly medially displaced. There is a slight decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm. It appears that there may be some discal remnants in the joint space but difficult to tell. There is slight decreased joint space at the lateral rim of the fossa.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head and with thinning of the cortical bone. Articular disc appears to be in position. Articular eminence has a moderate inclination and is short in height. There may be a little bit of fluid in the posterior-superior joint space. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc appears to translate in a proper position along with the condyle. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit better morphology than the opposite side. The disc appears to be in position. It appears that there is some kind of body at the anterior aspect of the disc sitting directly beneath the articular eminence that looks unusual. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint, the disc may be anteriorly displaced, but the disc tissue is hard to identify at the lateral aspect. There is a little bit of fluid in the posterior-superior joint space. On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyle and the articular disc. The mass at the anterior aspect of the disc remains present.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc in reasonably good position. Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc mainly anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint and perhaps slightly medially displaced as well as has a small mass at the anterior aspect of the disc that appears benign.

