VIRGINIA “GINNY” SCHULTZ							03/08/2010
Ginny is now 56 years old.  I originally saw her in 1991.  She has juvenile rheumatoid arthritis of the TMJs as well as most of her other joints.  Previous workup included reconstruction with total joint prostheses and maxillary osteotomies.  Ginny still has her orthodontic appliances on.  The onset of her JRA was probably during her first decade as her lower jaw became retruded.  When she was about 10 years old, she had orthodontics done for about 4 years and an attempt was made to try to bring the lower jaw forward with elastics.  It was not until in her 30s in approximately 1984 that she was diagnosed officially with JRA (juvenile rheumatoid arthritis).  

Ginny gets headaches at about level of 4 in the frontal and temporal areas and it gives her the feeling that the pain is behind her eyes.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 4, jaw function and diet at 5, disability at 3.  She takes Embrel 50 mg IM each week and she also takes methotrexate but she does not know the dosage.  She has no problems with earaches, gets frequent tinnitus but only occasional vertigo.  Most of her joints are bothersome for her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.   She has some vertical overall dysplasia with the right eye being probably at least 3 mm higher than the left eye.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm and tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm to the left as is the chin.  In profile view, the maxilla appears to be retruded by at least 8 mm and mandible by probably 18-20 mm.  The chin neckline is extremely short and the chin neck angle is defined but quite anteriorly positioned.  Intraorally, Ginny is missing probably the lower first bicuspids, has the rest of her teeth, and has appliances.  The left first molar marginal region is quite elevated.  In upper arch, she is also missing the first bicuspids.  She has a Class II cuspid-molar relationship with an anterior open bite of about 1 to 2 mm.  She has an overjet of probably about 5 or 6 mm.  She has a Class II end-on relationship on the right side with almost a full Class II on the left side.  The oropharyngeal airway is quite difficult to evaluate because of severely retruded lower jaw.  The uvula and soft palate length appear to be relatively normal.  I could not observe the fascial pillars nor the tonsils.  Intranasally, her nasal septum is deviated significantly off to the right side and appears to block most of the airway on that side.  The turbinates may be moderate in size.  The nostrils are somewhat narrow likely related to the retruded jaw.  She probably has a moderate nasal airway obstruction.  She has moderate snoring, moderate daytime somnolence, and may have some moderate sleep apnea issues.  She thinks that she may have a mixture of breathing through her mouth and her nose at the nighttime.  She has moderately severe pain around most of the head and neck area except for her neck muscles.  The incisal opening is 32 mm.  The excursion movements are about 6 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPH EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the third molars, probably mandibular second bicuspids and maxillary first bicuspids.  She has a root canal in the mandibular right first molar.  There may be a little sclerosis around the maxillary molar roots.  She has severe condylar resorption with resorption of the articular eminence.  The condyle is postured way forward and functioning beneath the articular eminences completely out of the fossas.  She has significant antigonial notching.  The septum is deviated significantly off towards the right side.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.    

Coronal view shows the septum is deviated significantly off towards the right side.  The left turbinate is moderately enlarged.  The sinuses appear clear.  

Axial view shows that the septum is deviated off towards the right side and the turbinates appear moderate in size. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that the condyle is very arthritic with virtually no condyle present.  The articular eminence is resorbed.  There is some asymmetry and the condyle is positioned back in the fossa area.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows flattened articular eminence and resorption of most of the condyle.  The condyle is functioning somewhat forward in the fossa.    

Left TMJ coronal view shows that there is severe condylar resorption with a very narrow mesiolateral width of the condyle.  

Right TMJ coronal view likewise shows severe condylar resorption with a very narrow mediolateral width.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has severe retrusion of the mandible and maxilla with a high occlusal plane angle.  She has a silastic chin implant present that has caused some bone resorption but there is also some bone growth around over the top of it.  Oropharyngeal airway measures less than 2 mm at the soft palate level and about at the most 3 mm at the base of the tongue. 

Basic diagnoses for Ginny would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ severe juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. 
Severe AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Class II occlusion. 
Anterior open bite.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of  2 mm (normal AP dimension is 11 mm).
High occlusal plane angle of 26 degrees (normal 8 degrees).
Missing maxillary first bicuspids and mandibular second bicuspids as well as all four third molars.  
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
Sleep apnea. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped 			mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to align the mesial marginal ridge of the 			mandibular first molar as it is significantly elevated at this time. 
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with Concepts total 			joint prostheses.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and down graft it    
                        posteriorly as well as correct for any transverse discrepancies. 
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts. 
	d.	Bilateral mandibular coronoidotomies. 
	e.	Nasal septoplasty.  
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.