MARILYN SCHRAMECK								08-11-04

Marilyn is 53 years old and referred by Dr. James Baker.

Patient History

She has had previous surgeries for tonsillectomy and bilateral mandibular osteotomies. She has had Lasik surgery and also left shoulder arthroscopy. She has cervical spine problems involving both the neck and back. She has some jaw problems, depression, and has problems with nausea and vomiting. Marilyn’s history began in about 1995 when she was involved in a motor vehicle accident. Following that accident is when she had the left shoulder scope and also she had the jaw surgery. She apparently had a torn disc. She had jaw surgery to help with the joint problem and did fairly well after that surgery. She actually did quite well after that surgery. She was then involved in another motor vehicle accident in 09/2000. She developed a lot of neck and back pain and also developed some significant jaw pain as well. Marilyn does get earaches, no tinnitus, and does get some vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her neck, back, and hips. She has an allergy to PENICILLIN.  No known allergies to jewelry. She does have depression. She believes that she does clench and brux at night. She feels that she also has posttraumatic stress syndrome. She gets headaches about every other day at a level of 6, and they begin in the back of her head and migrate forward into the temporal areas. She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 8 but ranges from 5 to 9. Average daily pain is about a level of 6. She rates her jaw function at 8, she rates diet at 7, and disability at 5. Previous treatments that Marilyn has had include the following:
Splint treatment beginning in 1995 through the present time, and she has had at least five splints
Physical therapy beginning in 1995 for two years and then from 09/2000 she has had it almost weekly up to the present time
Bilateral TMJ arthrocentesis approximately two to three times
Hyaluronidase injections x 6 to each TMJ joint
Botox injections into the jaw muscles approximately 9 times

Marilyn states that her pain and jaw dysfunction has gotten significantly worse during the last six months and is becoming intolerable for her. She feels that a major part of her depression is related to the jaw joint problems, although she says there are other personal issues in her life that have contributed to the depression as well. Discussed with her fact that some of the medications, particularly the Wellbutrin, could possibly contribute to some of the muscle dyskinesia problems that she currently has. 

Patient Concerns

Severe TMJ pain
Severe headaches
Severe muscle pains
Uncontrolled muscle movement of the jaws
Difficulties eating and chewing
Does not like the external appearance of the nose

Current Medications
Wellbutrin XL ___mg
Effexor XR 150 mg x 3
Bisoprolol/HCTZ (Ziac) 2.5 mg for blood pressure
Strattera 40 mg x 3
Kadian 30 mg b.i.d. 
Ambien 5 mg 2 or 3 q.h.s. 
Keppra 125 mg

Periodically she will take any of the following medications:
Protonix 40 mg for indigestion
Lidoderm patch 3%
Oxycodone, Percocet, OxyContin, hydrocodone, or Ultracet p.r.n. breakthrough pain
Pherergan for nausea
Zofran for nausea
Butalbital for headache

She also has received the following injections, hyaluronidase and Botox, by Dr. James Baker. Those injections do help her. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Marilyn has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned with each other.

In profile view, Marilyn has some fairly good facial balance. Chin-neckline looks good. She does have a slight head postured forward neck position. 

Intraorally, Marilyn has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship and about a 2-mm anterior overbite relationship. Maximal incisal opening is about 40 mm, but it creates a lot of muscle dyskinesia. Excursive movement to the right is 6 mm and to the left 8 mm but a very jerky and not very smooth progression. 

To palpation, she has moderate pain over the masseters, medial pterygoids, and styloid areas, and high moderate to low severe pain over the TMJs and posterior neck level of 3. She just had a hyaluronidase injection about three weeks ago, and this decreases her pain when she gets these injections. With those injections, there is not an immediate decrease in pain, but over the next few weeks it does seem to improve for her. The injection was actually done on 07/13/04. 

On opening, Marilyn has crepitation in both joints, but she has a pop in the right joint that is audible about 25 mm and closing pop at about 15 mm. 

Turbinates are relatively small in size. Nasal septum is significantly deviated off toward the left side in the mid cartilage area, but anteriorly it is shifted off to the right side. 
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses are clear. She has a lot of root canal treatment involving the mandibular right bicuspids and molars, left molars, maxillary left first molar, and right first molar. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Right condyle appears to have relatively normal anatomy. Left one appears a little flattened on top, and the left condyle appears a little bit larger than the right one. Missing all four third molars.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears sclerotic on the top. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space might be somewhat decreased vertically. A little bit of anterior beaking is present. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is sclerotic with some anterior beaking. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. Significantly decreased vertical joint space. She may have had vertical oblique osteotomies done previously, at least it appears so on the right side but more difficult to tell on the left side. 

On opening, there is restricted translation of the left joint and a little bit greater translation of the right joint. On the left side, there is minimal joint space between the condyle and articular eminence. On the right side, there is some space. Right condyle appears much healthier than the left condyle.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. Nasal septum is significantly deviated. Turbinates are of moderate size. 

Cephalometrically, she is basically a skeletal Class I with a good oropharyngeal airway both at the nasal level, soft palate level, and at the base of the tongue. Some slight vertical asymmetry but not too significant. 

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe deformation and nonsalvageable
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with mid to late reduction
Severe TMJ pain
Severe headaches
Severe myofascial pain
Masticatory dysfunction
Dystonic muscle movements of the jaws
Nasal septal deviation
External nasal deformity

Recommended Treatment

CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)
Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars
Nasal septoplasty
External rhinoplasty