KATTIE SCHUETTE								05/10/2011

Kattie is 18 years old.  Birth date 08/05/1992.  She is referred by Dr. John Gagnon from Wichita, Kansas.  She is currently under orthodontic treatment with Dr. Craig Ratzlaff, West 21st Street North, Wichita, KS.  

As far as Kattie is aware, she has had a retruded jaw all of her life.  She had previous orthodontics from the age of 12 to 14.  At the end of that treatment, she still had an anterior open bite.  In August 2010, she reinitiated orthodontic treatment with Dr. Ratzlaff in preparation for orthognathic surgery.  She also had her wisdom teeth removed in the fall of 2010. 

Kattie has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function at 0, diet at 1, disability at 0.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.   No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing her teeth at nighttime or during the day.  She does have some mild snoring, but no daytime somnolence and she is not aware of any sleep apnea issues.  She does breathe through her mouth at nighttime and also during the day.  The only medication she takes is BCP.

In frontal view, Kattie has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 17 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 7 mm.  The maxillary and mandibular dental midline are pretty much on the facial midline.  The chin may be just slightly to the left side about 2 mm.  In profile view, Kattie has probably 6 to 8 mm of AP maxillary deficiency.  In profile view, the maxilla is retruded 6 to 8 mm and probably closer to 8 mm.  Chin is retruded 25 to 28 mm.  Kattie has a neck postured forward head position. Intraorally, Kattie has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  The lower teeth are over angulated but well aligned.  Her teeth are essentially out to the buccal cortical plate.  She has a high attached labial frenulum.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  Kattie has a Class II occlusion being 4 to 5 mm Class II.  She has an anterior open bite of 2 to 3 mm.  She has a slight accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and slightly reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy, although the soft palate may be just a little bit short anteroposteriorly.  Nasal examination shows that the columella is quite wide and the nostrils are extremely narrow.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderate in size.  Holding her nostrils open with the nasal speculum did make it easier for her to breathe through her nose.  Again her nostrils are extremely narrow.  When Kattie inhales, she has collapse of the lower and upper lateral cartilages on inspiration. To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  The incisal opening is 43 mm and excursion movement to the right is 6 mm and to the left 8 mm.  She still has mamelons still in her lower anterior teeth and her upper teeth as well.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  She may have a mucus retention cyst in the right  sinus but difficult to tell.  The condyles appear somewhat arthritic and appear to have lost some vertical volume.  She has some prominence of the antigonial notch.  The bony septum appears reasonably straight. 

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are actually quite clear.  She has a significant deviated nasal septum off towards the left side and it almost touches against the lateral nasal wall.  The turbinates are hypertrophied particularly the right side.  The anterior aspect of the nose is quite narrow.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates are hyperplastic to a greater extent on the right side as compared to the left side.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears smaller in size than normal and appears to have lost some vertical volume.  There is some anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is increased vertical joint space.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone some resorption.  There is some anterior beaking present.  The vertical joint space is somewhat increased as is the posterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone some morphological changes.  The lateral pole of the condyle is positioned quite inferior to the medial pole.  The condyle appears somewhat narrowed.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost vertical volume.  The lateral pole is lower than the medial pole, but the condyle appears a little bit wider in width than the opposite side.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  There appears to be some decreased joint space particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia with posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.  The mandible is AP underdeveloped.  The lower incisors are over angulated.  The mandible is postured forward which might explain some of the increased joint space in the TMJ imaging.  Here she is closer to a Class I relationship, although clinically she is closer to a Class II occlusal relationship.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  The lower incisors are over angulated.  She has a decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of less than 4 mm at the soft palate level and probably 3 to 4 mm at the base of the tongue as it appears there was some movement of the tongue during the radiographic acquisition.

Basic diagnoses for Kattie would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR) with bilateral articular disc dislocations without reduction.
Maxillary anterior vertical hyperplasia, but AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia. 
AP macrogenia.
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Anterior open bite of about 3 mm.  
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal septal deviation. 
Narrow nostrils and wide columella.
High occlusal plane angulation.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.  
Mouth breather.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 			removing 2 to 3 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size 				discrepancy (3 mm tooth size discrepancy) and retract.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise 			direction.
	d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
	e.	Augmentation genioplasty with Medpor implant.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 