KEVIN SCHOCH 									07/14/2006

Kevin is 14 years old, referred by Dr. William Hang.  The only surgery Kevin has had is a mole removed from his finger.  He takes no medications.  He has had an adverse reaction to Ceclor.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Chin is dropping and receding.
Airway is narrowed.
Unable to breathe through nose and must breathe through the mouth.
Nose being pulled down by the chin.
Snoring.
Daytime tiredness. 

Kevin has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, hearing loss or other joint problems.  He has no problems with headaches, no TMJ pain or myofascial pain around the head and neck area.  Incisal opening is 58 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 8 mm, to the left 7 mm.  Joints seem to function reasonably smooth although there are some significant changes within the joints.  

In frontal view, Kevin has some asymmetry particularly in the nose and perhaps in the jaw area as well.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 5 to 5-1/2 mm.  Maxillary midline is shifted off to the right side about almost 2 mm.  There is some lip incompetence of probably about 7 to 8 mm.  Maxilla is retruded by about 6 mm.  He has a 
C-shaped curve to the upper lip.  Upper lip supralabrale is about even with the subnasale.  Chin is retruded by about 20 to 25 mm.  Chin-neckline is extremely short.  Chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Kevin has a head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, Kevin has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  The teeth are nicely aligned and leveled.  He has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth although it is quite thin in vertical dimension.  Roots are prominent through the labial aspect.  In the upper arch he has all his teeth back through the second molars present.  Kevin has a slight Class II cuspid relationship bilaterally by probably about 2 mm.  He has about ½ mm of vertical overbite relationship.  The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are all relatively normal.  There may be a slight decreased AP dimension between the soft palate and the posterior pharyngeal wall area.  Intranasally, Kevin has a huge septal spur off towards the right side almost totally obliterating the nasal airway.  Cannot see posterior on that side to see if the turbinates enlarged beyond the spur.  In the left nose the turbinate is extremely large and is blocking off a good portion of the airway.  Kevin also has a wide columella and extremely narrow nostrils.  Using a nasal scope, he could breathe a little bit easier through both sides of the nose holding the nostrils open with a little bit more improvement on the right side than the left side.  Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm lower than the right side.  The chin is rotated off towards the right side in the frontal view about 6 mm. 






KEVIN SCHOCH				07/14/2006				Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars impacted.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The condyles appear a little bit arthritic being more so on the right side than the left side. 

Waters view shows severe deviation of the nasal septum off to the right side with a huge septal spur and it almost touches the lateral nasal wall.  The turbinate on the left side appears enlarged below the level of the septal spur and on the right side it almost totally obliterates the nasal airway.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows the condyle appears somewhat arthritic and a decreased joint space.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  

Left TMJ tomograms shows a condyle is siting superior and posterior in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle appears a little bit arthritic.  On opening there is reasonably good translation of both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Kevin has a high occlusal plane angle.  He has anterior vertical maxillary excess and probably posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.  The mandible is AP deficient and AP microgenia.  Oropharyngeal airway shows a large adenoid mass in the nasopharynx area.  The turbinate appears to extend a little bit posterior to the hard palate and the airway space between the posterior aspect of the turbinate and the nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue is only about 3 to 4 mm.  The lateral pharyngeal airway at the base of the soft palate appears more normal, however, the distance from the base of the tongue to the posteropharyngeal wall is decreased but may be due more to tongue posture than actual posterior displacement.  

On the nose, Kevin does have a nasal dorsal hump, although the nose itself is reasonably straight.  His face looks asymmetric mainly because of the mandible and chin are shifted off towards the right side. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations (possible ICR.)
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Maxilla shifted 3 mm to the right.
Mandible shifted 3 mm to the right at the dental midline and 6 mm at the chin.
  Anterior open bite tendency.
  Impacted third molars times four.
  Deviated nasal septum with a large nasal spur.
KEVIN SCHOCH				07/14/2006				Page 3


  Hypertrophied turbinates.
  Major nasal airway obstruction.
  External nasal deformity.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect superior, posterior aspect inferiorly and advance. 
Nasal septoplasty.
Partial inferior turbinectomies.
Nasal pharyngeal adenoidectomy.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars times four.
Augmentation genioplasty with HTR versus Medpor.
External rhinoplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
