CHRISTOPHER SCHOPMEYER							10/22/2007

Chris is 29 years old and referred by Dr. Keith Giffin, Brandon, MS.  Chris is in good health with no major medical problems except for his jaw issues.  He takes Zoloft 50 mg daily.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
On opening, jaw deviates to the left side.
Disc is out of place in the left joint.
Discomfort in the left TMJ.

His options would be to have normal jaw function and elimination of the discomfort.  Chris' problems have been present for awhile.  His wife is aware of clicking and popping for at least four years in Chris' joints which mean it may have been present for longer than that.  When it started causing was in approximately 2006 and then in February of 2007 he developed a closed lock situation.  He has been treated as of February 2007 with a splint.  This splint seems to help release some of the stress and discomfort in the joint.  Chris has really had no other treatment.  He does not have any trouble with headaches.  He rates his TMJ pain on an average day at a level of 2 on the left side, jaw function at 3, diet at 3 and disability at 2.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

In frontal view, Chris has good facial symmetry and balance.  In profile view, Chris has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Chris has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  Some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch with the lower incisors in slight lingual inclination.  He has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch he has all of his teeth back through the second molars present.  Occlusally he has a slight Class III cuspid relationship of about 2 to 3 mm.  He has a crossbite in the left cuspid area.  On the right side he is a little bit closer to Class I but tends to have an open bite most of the way around.  He seems to occlude primarily on his incisor.  He may have some contact in the lingual cusps of the upper second molars and buccal cusps of the lower second molars.  In centric relation, he has just a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side with the buccal crossbite tendency and on the left side he is closer to Class I with a crossbite still in the cuspid area.  Most of his teeth appear to be out of occlusion.  In centric relation he apparently occludes only on the right second molars and all the other teeth are essentially out of occlusion.  He has 0 vertical overbite relationship.  Again, he appears to have an open bite in centric relationship all the way around except for the second molars on the right side.  Chris actually has his third molars in place so it may be actually his third molars that are in occlusion instead of the second molars.  So in centric relation the only teeth that really touch are the third molars on the right side.  Oropharyngeal areas look normal and healthy.  To palpation, there is no tenderness around the head and neck area except for the left TMJ at a level of 2 and the styloid area at a level of 1.  On opening, the mandible deviates to the left about 4 or 5 mm.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm.  Maxillary midline is off the left side about 1 mm.  Nasal tip is about 1 mm off to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline is about 2 to 3 mm off to the left side and the chin is probably 3 to 4 mm.  In profile view, he has fairly good anteroposterior and vertical facial balance.  Transverse occlusal plane is fairly level.   The left side may be about 1 mm short vertically.  Maximal incisal opening is 40 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is 4 mm and to the left is 9 mm.  

CHRISTOPHER SCHOPMEYER 		10/22/2007				Page 2

On the mounted models that Chris brought with him shows that he has an anterior open bite of probably about 33 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 3 mm to the left of the maxillary midline.  He occludes only on the lingual cusps of the upper third molar to the buccal mesial cuspid of the mandibular right third molar.  All the rest of the teeth are out of occlusion.  There is an accentuated curve of Wilson on the left side as compared to the right side in the upper arch.  Tooth size analysis shows a Bolton's difference of 2 mm plus.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth including the third molars erupted in position.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Difficult to evaluate the TMJs.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of sclerosis on the anterior head and a little bit of flattening.  Joint space looks relatively good.  The fossa in one area is extremely thin.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit more arthritic.  Articular eminence is moderately steep in size.  The condyle actually appears to be postured slightly forward in the fossa.  On opening, there is moderate good translation of the right condyle and the left one appears to be in a closed lock situation with limited translation.

Waters view shows that he has a large septal spur off the left side of the septum that seems to impinge on the turbinate on the left side with very little evidence of air passage at the left side of the nose.  The right side looks open.  The sinuses appear relatively clear. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he is postured forward and in centric relation when this x-ray was taken.  Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good.  Turbinates are a little hyperplastic and extend beyond the hard palate.  He has a relatively normal skeletal Class I jaw relationship.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction (closed lock.)
Deviated mandibular prognathism.
Anterior open bite.
Occludes only on the right third molars in centric relation with the rest of the bite open around and through the left third molars.
Left TMJ pain.
Malaligned third molars x4.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.
Crowding of lower anterior arch. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
CHRISTOPHER SCHOPMEYER		    10/22/2007				Page 3

Surgery.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x3.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back on the facial midline and replace into the best occlusal relationship.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
