DEEANN SCHROYER								5/27/05

Deeann is 50-year-old, referred by Dr. Michael Steffen.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Swelling of left TMJ.
Pain of left TMJ.
Left ear pain.
Swollen glands on the left side.
Pain from talking.
Left salivary gland seems irritated.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Difficulties sleeping at night because of pain in the jaw area.
Pain worse in the mornings when she wakes up. 
Pain in neck and shoulders.
Headaches. 

Deeann feels that her joint problems may have began back in her teenage years or at least she had headaches since that time of unknown etiology.  She had some significant jaw trauma in 1991 due to a domestic altercation.  Back in the early 90s she switched her dentist and the new dentist realized that as Deeann opened her jaw that the lower jaw shifted off significantly onto one side.  She was referred to Dr. Mike Steffen.  Dr. Steffen performed orthodontic treatment on Deeann from 1994 through 1997 and made a splint type of retainer for her which she wore from 1997 until about 4 months ago when Dr. Steffen told her she no longer needed to wear it.  She has had some physical therapy in the past but apparently no other treatment for her jaw related problem.  She takes Advil for her headaches.  She has earaches on the left side.  They are a shooting kind of pain but not there all the time.  No tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her left shoulder, left elbow and left hip.  Her pain is worse in the mornings when she wakes up indicative of probable nocturnal clenching.  She is also aware that she clenches during the day.  She likes to sleep on her side but it is difficult for her to do that now because of the pain factors.  Deeann has continuous headaches predominately on the left side that occur in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area at a level of 5 but can escalate to a level of 8.  She has continuous left TMJ pain at about a level of 7.  Eating exacerbates the TMJ pain.  Her average daily pain is a level of 6, jaw function, diet and disability are a level of 5. 

CLINICAL EVALUATION: 
Frontal view shows that Deeann has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Maxillary midline may be just about 1 mm off to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline and chin appear to be pretty much on the facial midline.  Nasal tip may be shifted just a little bit off to the right side as well about 1 mm or 2.  In profile view she may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency probably about 3 to 4 mm and mandibular AP deficiency probably 6 to 8 mm.  Chin-neck line is short and chin-neck angle not well defined.  Intraorally, Deeann has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars.  There is some mild crowding of the anterior arch.  She has crowns on the left second bicuspid, first second molars.  She also has crowns on the mandibular right second bicuspid and molars.  In the maxilla, she also has crowns on her molars and the left second bicuspid. 
DEEANN SCHROYER			5/27/05				Page 2


In the upper arch she is missing probably second bicuspid on the right side and on the left side she is missing the second molar and it appears that all four third molars are absent.  She is basically a Class I cuspid occlusion on the right side and Class II end-on cuspid on the left side by probably a couple of millimeters.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear pretty much normal.  Intranasally, the septum looks acceptable.  Left turbinate appears enlarged with a somewhat decreased airway.  The right side turbinate appears a little bit smaller in size at least anteriorly.  Deeann gives no real significant history of snoring.  She is moderately tired during the day particularly after lunch.  She is not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  To palpation, Deeann had a little severe discomfort over the left TMJ at a level of 8, styloid area 3 and SCM 4.  Incisal opening is about 45 mm and she can get to 40 mm without too much pain.  Excursion movements about 4 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:  
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Maxillary left second molar, maxillary right second bicuspid.  She has crowns bilaterally on the second bicuspid and both molars in the upper arch on all the molars and left second bicuspid.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Left condyle shows significant arthritic changes with erosion on the head of the condyle.  Right condyle looks relatively normal. 

Waters view show that the sinuses are clear.  Bony septum is relatively straight.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle and a little bit of anterior beaking.  The condyle is postured forward and not in centric relation and will be redone.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes and appears to have lost some vertical dimension.  There is some anterior beaking present. Condyle is also postured forward and will need to be re-shot.  On opening, there is moderately good translation being a little bit better on the right side as compared to the left side.  Decreased joint space vertically on the left side.  Closed tomograms in centric relation in the right joint show very good chondral morphology and good joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Left TMJ tomogram in centric relation shows that the joint space actually looks reasonably good in the cuts available but there is significant evidence of arthritis within the joint.  Articular eminence is fairly steep and perhaps slightly steeper than the opposite side.  Slight decreased dimension between the sigmoid notch and the articular eminence on the left side as compared to the right side.  
DEEANN SCHOYER		5/27/05					Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Left TMJ reactive arthritis.
Left TMJ pain.
Left-sided headaches.
Left ear pain.
Myofascial pain to the neck and shoulders.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Nocturnal and daytime and clenching.  

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
MRI of left and right TMJ (to be done 5/27/05.)

CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)

Medications.
Klonopin to control nocturnal clenching and bruxism.
Advil 3 to 4 tablets 3 to 4 times per day as an anti-inflammatory agent and analgesic.
Consider antibiotic (Levaquin, Zithromax etc) to treat reactive arthritis. 

Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.

Surgery.
Left TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Left TMJ fat graft (harvest from abdomen.)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 