ALLISON SCHULZ									02-28-03

Allie is 16 years old and referred by Dr. Jim Compton, 4610 N. Garfield St., Ste. A9, Midland, TX  79705.

Patient History

Alliefirst developed headache problems in about 1994 when the family moved from Casper, Wyoming, to Midland, Texas. She has been aware of having clicking and popping in her jaw joints just for the past two weeks. She had initial orthodontic work done in 1997 and then had full braces for two years, which were removed in the summer of 2002 and replaced in the fall. 

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, nor hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include mainly her hips, but she is a dancer. She has environmental allergies and at one time was diagnosed as having an allergy to corn products. She has trouble wearing jewelry, particularly in reference to cheap earrings that tend to bother her.

Current Medications

Allegra D
Tylenol

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Allie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline. 

In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Chin appears retruded probably approximately 8 mm. Chin-neckline is short, and chin-neck angle is very obtuse. As Allie postures her mandible forward toward a Class I occlusion, it significantly improves her facial profile and improves the chin-neckline and chin-neck angle. 

Intraorally, Allie has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. High attached labial frenulum.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. In CR, she has a Class II cuspid relationship and about a 7 to 8-mm overjet relationship. As she postures her mandible forward into a Class I position, She may have a little bit of a transverse maxillary deficiency.

Intranasally, the nasal septum is deviated significantly off towards the right side. Right turbinate is moderate in size. Left turbinate is quite large, but the airway is a little bit more adequate on the left side because of the significant deviation of the septum off toward the right side. The turbinates don’t seem to be particularly inflamed. Oropharynx appears clear, and tonsils are of moderate size but not inflamed. In centric relation, she has about a 3-mm vertical overbite relationship, and she does have a tendency toward cross-bites posteriorly in a Class I position.

To palpation, she has some mild tenderness of the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, styloids, and posterior neck area. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly, although as she opens up fairly wide, she’ll have sort of a popping type noise as her condyles come anterior to the articular eminences. Incisal opening is 60 mm. Excursive movements are 12 mm to the right and 13 mm to the left. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses look relatively clear. Nasal airway looks reasonably good, although the left turbinate is larger than the right side. Third molars are absent. All other teeth are present. Condyles look as though they are fairly well formed. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit of anterior beaking. Joint space may be a little bit narrowed vertically posteriorly but may be okay. Articular eminence is fairly long and moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit of flattening anteriorly and maybe a little bit of beaking present. Articular eminence is much steeper on this side. Appears to be decreased joint space posteriorly and maybe a little bit vertically. Appearance given is that the disc may be in a vertical orientation in the joint space. 

Opening views show that the condyles translate well anterior to the articular eminences with what appears to be actual hypermobility.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are all clear. Septum may be deviated off to the right side in the bony area, but cartilage can’t be seen. Left turbinate appears larger than the right turbinate, although there does appear that there is some airway passage bilaterally.

Cephalometrically, it appears she has a little bit of a high occlusal plane angle and a skeletal Class II relationship. Maxillary incisors may be a little bit overangulated. Oropharyngeal airway looks adequate.

Tooth-size analysis shows that there is no significant discrepancy.

Basic Diagnoses

AP mandibular deficiency
Transverse maxillary deficiency
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations
Full Class II occlusion
Overangulation of the maxillary incisors
Deviated nasal septum secondary to previous trauma
Hypertrophied left turbinate
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
History of asthma
Multiple allergies

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJs

Presurgical orthodontics
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Maintain maxillary laterally incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots distally
Continue to align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Consider bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repairs with Mitek anchors if MRIs verify that the discs are displaced
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla and upright the incisors
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible approximately 8 mm
Nasoseptoplasty
Left inferior turbinectomy

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion