JENNIFER SCOTT-CHRISTENSON						10/19/2007

Jennifer is 35 years old and referred by Dr. David Dann, 18370 Burbank Blvd., #711, Tarzana, CA 71356 and also by Dr. Kenneth Nyman, 5525 Etiwanda Ave., Tarzana, CA 91356 and Dr. William Hang.   The only previous surgery she has had was removal of her wisdom teeth in 1997.  

Jennifer’s problems began when she was about 15 years old of unknown etiology.  She had a little bit of clicking and was developing discomfort in her joints.  The situation got progressively worse overtime.  About the age of 20 to 32 years, she underwent splint therapy with 4 different splints but she did not find them helpful.  In fact, she feels that they probably made her pain worse.  She also had had acupuncture, massage and physical therapy.  She went to the Cedar Sinai Hospital Pain Institute and was treated there with no improvement.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:  
Prenatal vitamins.
Darvocet 100, three to four per week. 
Zoloft 25 me every other day.
Valium 10 mg about once a week.
Advil, three to five times per week.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Crackling and popping in the joints.
Periodic closed lock situation in the right joint.
Depression caused by the chronic pain.

Her objectives are to improve her quality of life and eliminate the pain and constant crackling noises in her joints.  She wants to start a family soon and wants to be over her current situation.  Jennifer gets headaches that occur most prominently behind the left eye and in the back of the head area.  She rates the intensity at about a level of 8.  She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 8, average daily pain 7, jaw function 8, diet at 6 and disability at 6.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss and no other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

In frontal view, Jennifer has fairly good facial symmetry.  The left side of the mandible appears a little bit shorter vertically than the right side which would correlate to the MRI findings.  Upper lip length is 24 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is shifted just about 1 mm to the left and mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm to the right.  Chin maybe just slightly to the left side.  In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of just maybe 2 mm.  Chin is slightly AP deficient by maybe about 6 mm.  Intraorally, Jennifer has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has space between the left first bicuspid and cuspid.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She is Class II end-on on the right side by probably 4 to 5 mm and Class I on the left side.  
JENNIFER SCOTT-CHRISTENSON	10/19/2007				Page 2

Mandibular right cuspid is about 1 mm to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch, the left cuspid may be about 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  Slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1.5 mm higher than the right side.  She has and anterior deep bite of about 3.5 mm.  To palpation, she has high moderate pain in the masseters, TMJs, styloid area, SCMs, posterior neck and low severe pain in the shoulders as well as milder pain of the temporalis and medial pterygoids.  Maximal incisal opening is 48 mm but only about 20 mm without pain and discomfort.  Excursive movements are about 6 mm in each direction.  On opening, she has crepitus in both joints with the left side being a little bit louder than the right.  She occasionally gets a loud audible pop in the right TMJ and it occurred during the MRI but at the evaluation the disc on the right was displaced and non-reducing.  The oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Radiographically, the left one was enlarged but clinically the right one appears to be enlarged more than the left one.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  There may be mild nasal airway obstruction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the presence of a root canal in the maxillary right central incisor.  All four third molars are absent.  The condyles appear arthritic particularly on the left side.  The left condyle has lost some vertical height compared to the right side.  The left sinus appears a little bit cloudy compared to the right side.  Styloid processes are calcified and elongated.  

Waters view shows that the left sinus appears just slightly cloudy compared to the right side.  The left nasal airway appears blocked compared the right side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears quite arthritic.  Articular eminence is excessively long in length and moderate in inclination.  The condyle appears short vertically.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears quite arthritic but longer in length although there does appear to be some loss of vertical condylar volume.  Articular eminence is moderately steep and significantly sorter in length compared to the opposite side.  On opening, there is some restricted translation in both joints.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is mild AP deficiency in the maxilla and mandible.  There is significant vertical asymmetry at the occlusal plane level and also at the inferior border of the mandible with the left side being shorter than the right side.  The soft palate appears somewhat elongated.  The oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue about 8 to 9 mm. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with a non-salvageable disc on the left side.
Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
JENNIFER SCOTT-CHRISTENSON	10/19/2007				Page 3

Class I cuspid relationship on the left side.
Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side.
Hypertrophied soft palate. 
Snoring. 
  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Treatment option 1:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.   
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
Postsurgical physical therapy if necessary.
Treatment option 2:
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP.)
Postsurgical physical therapy if necessary.

