LAUREN RALLO SCHWARZ							02-06-04

Lauren is 24 years old. Her surgery was 1-1/2 years ago on 07/11/02 and included bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses, multiple maxillary osteotomies with bone plates and HA grafting, and turbinectomies. She had been doing fairly well until about two months ago when she started to develop significant pain problems around the left side of the head and neck area. There is no specific etiological factor that initiated the problem. Lauren does have longstanding GI problems and prior to her surgery was diagnosed with an ulcer and H. pylori. She was diagnosed two years prior to her surgery with the H. pylori ulceration. Following treatment of that, her stomach did settle down somewhat. She is continuing to have problems all along with her GI system, but it slowly seems to be elevating in associated problems. Her current diagnosis is severe gastritis. She does get some numbness in her hands with the left side being worse than the right side. This seems to occur later in the day particularly after she has done a lot of typing. The numbness does not seem to affect her shoulders or arms but mainly from just above the wrists down to the hands. Sometimes it will occur even without typing. If she gets a sinus infection, then she may follow with an ear infection, and she gets ear infections on just the left side about three times per year. Prior to the surgery, she did have a severe Pseudomonas infection of her left ear that was treated. She has had an increase in the ear infections since surgery. The left side of her face turns red on occasion and can be warm to the touch. Those changes of redness and warmth to the touch occurs on a daily basis. These changes did occur prior to those last two months, but since the last two months, it has increased in occurrence. She states she does get some drainage from her left ear but usually associated only with the left ear infections. 

Clinical Examination

Examination today shows that both ears are clear and look quite healthy. No evidence of inflammation, drainage, or granulation tissue in either ear. 

Lauren currently takes the following medications:
Yasmin
AcipHex
Compazine p.r.n. nausea
Darvocet p.r.n. pain

She gets left earaches, occasional left tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss. Lauren gets headaches about four times per week predominantly in the left temporal area. She gets TMJ pain on the left side only that averages about a level of 7 but can escalate to 9. She gets headaches in the left temporal area at a level of 8. She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 2, and disability at 4. Maximal incisal opening is 41 mm and 35 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movements are about 2 mm in each direction. Occlusion looks very stable. When she bites, she feels that both sides touch at the same time. She is not aware of nocturnal clenching or bruxism. Lauren usually feels it best in the morning when she wakes up. However, her current job requires her to talk at least 6 hours per day, and it is toward the end of the day that she develops her significant headache problems.

To palpation, she has high moderate to low severe tenderness over the left TMJ, left styloid area, high moderate tenderness over the left medial pterygoid, and moderate tenderness over the masseter and temporalis on the left side.

Lauren believes that she may chew more on the left side than the right side. Lauren feels that the pain problems on the left side seem to be generated more from talking than from eating. By palpation, I really cannot palpate any lymph node involvement to any significance. She has previously tried Celebrex, but that did not agree with her. We had her on Vioxx after the surgery, and she was able to tolerate that. When Lauren gets the redness and warm feeling in the left side of her face, this usually begins in the afternoon, and she goes home and ices herself, and this seems to make it dissipate. This phenomenon lasts for about an hour generally, but that includes her treatment. She does feel that it does come and go throughout the day, but she does have this one episode that is more significant in the afternoon.
LAUREN RALLO SCHWARZ		02-06-04					Page 2


Radiographic evaluation shows the presence of the mandibular prostheses. Screws all appear to be in place and intact. Fossa components are both present and appear to be in place and intact. Joint space is noted which would be the presence of the polyethylene bilaterally. She has four bone plates in the upper jaw, and all appear to be in position, and all screws seem to be in good position. Synthetic bone grafts are seen on the left side.

Right TMJ shows the prosthesis appears to be in place and intact. No evidence of any significant heterotopic bone around the prosthesis. Good joint space where the polyethylene is located and is normal. 

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows a prosthesis that appears to be in good position, and all bone screws seem to be well-seated. The fossa component appears to be in place and appears to be well adapted to the bone structures. Could be just a small area of calcification anterior to the head of the condyle but not too significant. 

Cephalometrically, Lauren appears to have good facial balance and symmetry. 

Basic Diagnoses

Myositis of the left temporalis, masseter, and medial pterygoid muscles
Left TMJ inflammation
Left TMJ pain
Left earache 
Occasional tinnitus 
Left-sided earache 
Periodic daily bouts of redness and warm feeling on the left side
GI problems (current diagnosis severe gastritis)
Occasional ear infections (approximately three times per year)
Headaches that occur about four times per week in the left temporal area
Predominant left-sided chewing

 Recommended Treatment

Try to chew on the right side instead of the left

Vioxx 25 mg tablet, disp. 30, 1 tablet q.d. 

Consider an appointment with Dr. Duane Keller for splint construction and perhaps physical therapy 

Test for food allergies or other environmental allergic responses. This also could be contributing to the GI problems

If no resolution, consider tomographic assessment of the jaw areas