B125
B125 is 16 years old. Referred by XXXX. His orthodontist is Dr. XXXX.
According to B125's parents, it first became obvious there was a problem with the jaw when he was 13 of unknown etiology. He has had four sets of braces put on his teeth, the first one from ages 8 to 9, and then they were replaced by another orthodontist from age 9 to 10, and then another orthodontist placed appliances from ages 10 to 13, he is currently on his fourth set of braces which he received two years ago. He takes no medications. He has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. The only other joints that bother him are his ankles. He is not aware of clenching or bruxism. He has no problems with headaches, no TMJ pain, no myofascial pain. He rates jaw function, diet, and disability at 0.

In frontal view, B125 has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline may be just about 1 mm off to the left side. The chin is pretty much on the facial midline. B125 does have a head postured forward neck position. The maxilla is about at least probably 6 to 8 mm AP deficient and chin is about 35 mm AP deficient. The chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is moderately well defined. Intraorally, B125 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present. The teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and level. He has very thin attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch, although it may be adequate. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars present. He has an accentuated curve of speech in the upper arch. He has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship being a little bit more worse on the left side than the right side. He has an anterior open bite of about 1 mm. The maxilla appears to be over expanded slightly. The maxilla on the right side is up about 1 mm compared to the left side. Oropharyngeal tissues looks reasonably healthy. The soft palate may be a little bit elongated and the fascial pillars are somewhat constricted. Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the left side anteriorly. The turbinates are probably mild to moderate in size. He probably has some airway obstruction at least on the left side. He does problems of a nasal dorsal hump. The maximal incisal opening is 36 mm, excursion movement to the right 7 mm, and to the left 6 mm. To palpation, he just has some mild tenderness over the right retromandibular area, but all other areas are free of discomfort.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and a root canal in the mandibular right first molar. The condyles appear to have undergone severe condylar resorption.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that there is severe condylar resorption with essentially most of the head of the condyle is gone. Additionally, the articular eminence is resorbed away as well.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe condylar resorption. The articular eminence is also gone. In both joints, the fossa is extremely flat.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe condylar resorption. The joint space is somewhat increased that could be indicative of a reactive pannus present within the joint. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe condylar resorption. The joint space is somewhat increased that could be indicative of a reactive pannus present within the joint. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.

The coronal views show that the left turbinate appears enlarged. There may be a septal spur off to the left side. The left sinus appears fairly clear, although there is some thickening of the sinus membrane. The right maxillary sinus appears to be fairly full of fluid and material. The right maxillary sinus has significant fluid in it and may be compatible with a history of a recent cold.

Axial view shows that the bony septum is actually reasonably straight. The left turbinate appears enlarged and appears to block most of the airway, although the right side appears to be more reasonable in size. There are some areas of thickening of the sinus membrane in the left maxillary sinus that could compatible with mucous retention cyst or resolving sinusitis. The right joint is pretty much full of material.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B125 has a retruded maxilla and mandible. The vertical height of the ramus is extremely short. He has a very high occlusal plane angle and a skeletal Class II jaw relationship, but his mandible is actually postured forward in this radiograph. He has a large adenoid mass in his nasopharyngeal area. The oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 mm at the adenoid mass area, about 9 mm at the soft palate level, and along the base of the tongue less than 3 mm in the lower area.

Dental model analysis shows that the maxilla has been over expanded compared to the width of the mandible. There is maybe a slight tooth size discrepancy of probably at least a couple of millimeters. The mandible appears a little bit transverse deficient.

Basic diagnoses for B125 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Large nasopharyngeal adenoid mass.
Sleep apnea.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Sleep study.
2. Consider rheumatological workup.
3. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Try to narrow the upper arch as it is excessively wide. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Try to widen the lower arch a little bit to be more compatible with the upper arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.
4. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
5. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction using TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies. e.	Bilateral partial turbinectomies. f.	Medpor implant to anterior mandible. g.	Adenoidectomy.
6. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B125 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with severe condylar resorption. There appears to be some reactive tissue over the top of the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. There is decreased vertical joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has also had significant condylar resorption present. The lateral rim of the fossa is very flat. There may be some reactive tissue in the joint. There is decreased vertical joint space.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe resorption. There appears to be a pannus in the joint area. The disc is present and may be in reasonable position but significantly degenerated. The articular eminence is essentially gone.

The left side likewise shows a condyle with severe degenerative changes. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced on this side. It appears that there may be a reactive pannus within the joint. The articular eminence is totally resorbed. On opening, there appears to be moderate translation of both joints, but with significant restriction.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with destruction of the articular discs, presence of a reactive pannus, and loss of the articular eminences. MRI imaging is compatible with JRA or a similar connective tissue autoimmune disease process.

