LAUREN SCORZAFAVE								02/02/2007

Lauren is 17 years old and is referred by David J. Dattilo, DDS, 320 E. North Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15212.  Lauren became aware of having some difficulties with her jaws at about the age of 15.  She, however, had been in orthodontic treatment since about the age of 8 years old.  In June of 2005, she underwent surgery for a mandibular advancement.  At 6 months a relapse was already noted.  She had her orthodontic appliances removed in about October of 2005 and then shortly after that the relapse was noted and it has gotten progressively worse for her.  Lauren takes no medications.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo.  No other joints bother her except she does have some bunions on her toes but they do not bother her.  No known allergies and no problems wearing jewelry.  She does not clench or brux to her knowledge.  She gets headaches maybe two times a week at about a level of 2 that occur predominately in the frontal and near the anterior temple area.  She gets just an occasional pain in her TMJs at about a level of 2 predominately on the right side.  Otherwise, on a daily basis she has no facial pain or headache problems.  She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 0.  

In frontal view, Lauren has some asymmetry in the nasal structures.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm on the left and 4 mm on the right.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Nasal tip is off to the left side probably about 3 mm.  Chin is deviated off to the left side probably about 2 to 3 mm but lower midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Actually in her centric relation the lower dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left and the chin is probably about 4 to 5 mm off to the left.  In profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of about 3 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded by approximately 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not well defined.  As Lauren postures her mandible forward as far as she can it significantly improves her facial profile.  Intraorally, Lauren has all of her teeth from the second molars.  The transverse width of the arch is somewhat narrow.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer.  She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  There is some minor crowding in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, Lauren has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has some accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.  Perhaps a slight accentuated curve of Wilson in the posterior arch.  In centric relation she hits a little bit prematurely on the right side in the second molar area but then as she bites down harder the left side also comes in contact.  It appears that the molars touch together in her centric relation.  There is some transverse deficiency in the maxillary arch as well.  She has a Class II end-on occlusion being worse on the left side as compared to the right side.  She is probably a 5 to 6 mm Class II on the left and probably 3 to 4 mm Class II on the right.  She has about a 2 mm anterior open bite.  As Lauren postures her mandible forward in a Class I position, she has adequate maxillary width.  Intraorally, the oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  The uvula is mildly enlarged.  Soft palate and faucial pillars look normal.  Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the left side.  Septum is deviated off to the right side.  It appears that she probably has mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction.  The condyle is a little bit wide and nostrils are a little bit narrow particularly on the left side.  She does relate that she does snore.  However, she is not aware of any daytime somnolence except for when she does not go to bed early.  She is not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  To palpation, Lauren has some very minimal tenderness over the masseter muscles in the styloid areas.  She actually has no tenderness over the TMJs.  Joints function smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 49 mm.  

Excursive movements are about 7 to 8 mm in each direction.  She has some decreased sensation to the right lower lip and chin area.  This occurred following the previous surgery.


LAUREN SCORZAFAVE			02/02/2007				Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of bone plates in the mandible bilaterally from the previous sagittal split osteotomies.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Difficult to evaluate the nasal airway.  Both TMJs show severe condylar resorption vertically and anteroposteriorly.  Condyles appear to be postured on the articular eminences.  Maxillary incisors have significantly foreshortened the roots.  In fact, the crown length is actually longer than the root system.  This also could be true in the lower anterior arch although the angulation of the lower teeth obscures some of the ability to tell the root length. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  Frontal sinuses are large.  Nasal septum is a little bit off to the right side in bony area.  Turbinates appears moderately enlarged.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the condylar heads are essentially gone from resorption.  Condyles are postured forward in the fossa probably about 4 mm and are sitting on the inferior posterior aspect of the articular eminence.  There is probably only about 5 mm of vertical height left above the sigmoid notch.  Bone plate is seen in the left sagittal split area.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also is pretty much resorbed away.  Condyle is sitting a little bit forward in the fossa probably about 3 mm.  Articular eminence is a little bit flattened.  Condyle is functioning on the posterior slope of the articular eminence.  The bone plate is seen in the left mandibular sagittal split area.  On opening, there is actually fairly good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Lauren has some anterior vertical maxillary excess.  Mandible is AP retruded.  She has a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship.  She has anterior open bite.  She has a significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway of only about maybe 3.5 mm at the base of the soft palate (normal 11 mm.)  Airway at the base of the tongue, however, is closer to about 9 mm.  She has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  Turbinates extend posterior to the hard palate probably about 4 to 5 mm.  She has a little bit of adenoid tissue still remaining in the nasopharynx but not too much.   

Dental model analysis shows that Lauren has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Transverse width of both maxillary and mandibular is quite narrow.  She does have a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  She has a significantly accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.  The incisor and cuspids are elevated relative to the bicuspids and first molar.  Second molars are also elevated due to the abnormal occlusion which she currently has.  She does have a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1.5 to 2 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. 
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia.
Class II occlusion.
Anterior open bite.
Occluding only on the molar teeth.
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.
LAUREN SCORZAFAVE			02/02/2007				Page 3

 Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Deviated nasal septum.
 Nasal airway obstruction.
 Snoring.
 High occlusal plane angle.
 Severe resorption on maxillary and mandibular incisors.
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.
 Mild crowding of lower anterior arch.
 External nasal deformity. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Blood tests.
ANA.
Rheumatoid factor.
Coralline.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch in two occlusal plane levels.  Align the 4 incisors at a higher level than the posterior teeth and extrude the cuspids 1 to 2 mm to level them with the posterior teeth.  Place brackets on all the teeth but do not incorporate the second molars in the archwire.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.  Place brackets on all the teeth but do not incorporate the second molars in the archwire. 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, move the anterior aspect superiorly, correct the transverse cant in the occlusion and correct the curve of Spee.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Augmentation genioplasty.
Bilateral partial nasal turbinectomies.
Nasal septoplasty.
External rhinoplasty. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
