KEELAN SCOTT								11/10/2011

Keelan is 28 years old, birth date 08/24/1983.  Referred by Dr. Larry Polson, Craniofacial Pain Associates in Bedford, TX.  

Keelan’s primary concerns are as follows:

His jaw feels out of place.
Jaw pain.
Bite is off.
Difficulties talking.

Keelan’s problems began approximately a little over a year ago.  He received a hockey injury in June 2010 where he got hit in the face and jaw area with a helmeted head.  His jaw pains began to escalate by October 2010.  Since then, he has had 3 splints.  The first one was an upper splint.  He subsequently had two more splints build on the lower constructed by Dr. Polson.  Keelan gets headaches about once a week in the posterior head area at a level of 3.  He rates his TMJ pain at 4 predominantly on the right side.  Average daily pain is 3, jaw function at 5, disability at 6.  He gets right-sided earaches, no tinnitus, occasional vertigo.  Other joints that bother him are his shoulders and his knees.  He is aware of clenching at night.  The only medication he currently takes is a muscle relaxer at night and he is not sure what specific medication it is.  

In frontal view, Keelan has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 0.  The maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Keelan has some retrusion of the maxilla by about 3 to 4 mm and the mandible appears to be retruded by probably 8 to 10 mm.  The chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, Keelan has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth look fairly well aligned.  He has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  He has a 1 mm anterior deep bite.  To palpation, he has high moderate pain over the right masseter, milder pain over the right retromandibular area, right shoulder and mild tenderness over the TMJs, right medial pterygoid, right posterior neck.  He has moderate pain over the right shoulder.  The joints seem to function relatively smoothly, but he does translate and pops over the articular eminence bilaterally.  The incisal opening is 64 mm.  The excursion movements are 9 mm in each direction.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy.  

RADIOGRAPH evaluation.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  He is missing the maxillary right central incisor and has an osteointegrated implant replacing that tooth.  He lost that tooth in the hockey injury.  He has a root canal on the left central incisor.  The right condyle appears a little bit larger than the left condyle and the condylar heads and necks are somewhat elongated.  The sinuses look reasonably clear.  
Coronal view shows the septum is fairly straight in the bony area.  Sinuses appear clear.  Left turbinate appears significantly enlarged.  

Axial view shows that the septum has some deviation in it.  The left turbinate is quite large and appears to touch against the septum.  Sinuses appear clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is slightly smaller in size compared to the opposite side.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space.  There is decreased posterior and posterosuperior space behind the condyle.  The articular eminence is fairly steep and almost at a 90 degree angle.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  There is increased anterior joint space.  The articular eminence is relatively short in length and not quite as steep as the opposite side.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width.  There is slight decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 to 5 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with reasonably good morphology.  There is decreased lateral joint space with the lateral rim curving inferiorly probably at least 5 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows he has a skeletal Class I jaw relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 9 mm at both the base of the tongue and at the soft palate level.  He has a Class I skeletal and dental relationship.  

If Keelan sleeps on his back, his jaws feel pretty good in the morning.  If he sleeps on his side, this can cause some aggravation and some discomfort in the mornings.  

Basic diagnoses for Keelan is as follows:

Right TMJ medially displaced articular discs.
Left TMJ slightly anteriorly displaced discs (asymptomatic).
Right mandibular hyperplasia. 
Right TMJ pain. 
Headaches predominantly in the right side.
Myofascial pain predominantly in the right side. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Place appliances on the upper arch. 
	b.	Place appliances on the lower arch. 
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor.
	b.	Right mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy with rigid fixation.
	c.	Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars if orthodontic 				appliances are not used.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 