TIMOTHY SCOTT									09-17-03

Tim is 25 years old and referred by attorney Kevin Glasheen, 1007 13th Street, Lubbock, TX 79401.

Patient History

Tim was involved in an oil field accident on 12/09/02. He sustained a forearm fracture which was treated with plates and had a shattered chin and right jaw. He had a lot of teeth that were fractured and has had multiple dental repairs beginning in 05/2003 and is still ongoing. He currently takes ibuprofen for pain. Dr. John St. Clair from Lubbock was treating Tim for his TMJ problems using a bite splint. As previously mentioned, Tim’s problems began on 12/09/02 with the drilling field accident. His chin was shattered, and he had multiple fractured teeth and dentoalveolus. On approximately 12/10 or 12/12/02, he had a reduction of his dentoalveolar and mandibular fractures with the application of rigid fixation. He developed some joint problems, and in 07/2003, Dr. John St. Clair made a bite splint for him, which he still uses. The splint has helped some and has decreased his pain particularly at night when he is sleeping. He is not aware of any trouble with earaches, tinnitus, gets some vertigo, but no hearing loss. No other joints bother him. He is aware of clenching at nighttime. He rates his TMJ pain at a level of 8 on the left and 5 on the right. He rates overall level of facial pain and headaches at a level of 5. He rates jaw function at 6, diet and disability at 5. He gets headaches about three times a week that usually range around a level of 6 in the temporal areas but can escalate to 8 to 9 at times. The only medication he takes is ibuprofen.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Timothy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry in the middle face and down except in his chin area where he has some vertical disharmony with the right side being deficient and perhaps absence of bone as compared to the left side. With the tissues filled back out, he could have fairly good symmetry down there once again. Maxillary and mandibular midlines are pretty well-aligned with each other. Chin midline is off to the left side probably about 3 or 4 mm. 

In profile, Tim has fairly good facial balance.

Intraorally, he is missing the mandibular right first molar, third molar, mandibular left second bicuspid, and perhaps first and second molars. Actually, the tooth on the mandibular left side might be a second molar, so he is missing the first molar and second bicuspid. He has four bone plates in the mandible and 17 screws. He has root canals in all four remaining molars in each arch. He has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. On the left side, none of the molars touch, but on the right side, some of the posterior teeth touch. Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level. Has some attrition of some of his lower anterior teeth. Some of this may be some equilibrations done because some of his teeth had some fractures, and they were smoothed down. 

To palpation, he has some moderate tenderness of the temporalis muscles, styloid areas, and milder tenderness over the left medial pterygoid and moderate discomfort over the left TMJ.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four bone plates in the mandible with 17 screws. All four last molars in each quadrant have root canals on them. Sinuses look reasonably clear. Condyles look reasonably good. Turbinates look reasonably good. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with good morphology. Moderately shallow articular eminence. Good joint space superiorly and posteriorly.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some anterior beaking. Appears to be decreased posterior joint space but superiorly and anteriorly look fairly good. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Opening views show good translation of both joints with it being greater on the left side than the right side. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are all fairly clear. 

Cephalometrically, he is basically a skeletal Class I position. Oropharyngeal airway is about 9 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at thebase of the tounge.

Tim has also been seen by Joehassin Cordero, an otolaryngologist that does head and neck surgery (806-743-4115, 3502 9th Street, Ste. 410, Lubbock, TX  79415). He is associated with Texas Tech Medical Center, Dept. of Surgery/ENT. Dr. Cordero did the original reparative surgery and has offered to reconstruct Tim’s chin if Tim decides he wants to have that done.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and medial displacement of the articular discs (to be confirmed by radiologist report)
Mandibular hyperplasia (if it is required to place the discs back in position, the mandible and occlusion will be displaced forward)
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Chin deformity secondary to previous injury
Continuity defect in the anterior mandible area secondary to previous trauma
Presence of four bone plates in the chin area with a total of 17 screws
Missing teeth
No posterior vertical occlusal stop on the left side

Recommended Treatment

Medications
Klonopin 1 mg tablets, disp. 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x 1
Celebrex 200 mg, disp. 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.d., refill x 1

Surgery
Possible bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors if it is concerned discs are displaced on the MRI
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to allow the condyles and proximal segments of the ramus to come downward and forward to make room for the articular discs
Removal of four bone plates and 17 screws from the anterior aspect of the mandible
Reconstruction of chin with hydroxyapatite grafting
