ELLIE SCHWEYHER								06-11-03

Ellie is now 65 years old. We had previously done surgery on her with the first operation being on 09/18/86 where I did bilateral TMJ disc repositionings and arthoplasties. On 05/02/87, we repeated surgery on the right TMJ with an arthroplasty and placement of a dermal graft. She did come back in 1994, and at that time she was having a little bit of aggravation in the joint area but nothing really significant. It has only been in the last two months that her condition has gotten significantly worse. Currently Ellie takes the following medications:

Premarin 0.90 mg 
Vicodin occasionally
Keflex, which she just started last week for her gums

She gets earaches on the right side, has no tinnitus, but gets vertigo she feels is related to the right side. Other joints that bother her include her right hip and her knees. She does get leg cramps at night particularly, although she can get them other times at well. She has a low energy level. She is very much aware of clenching at nighttime, and she will find herself clenching at work when she is particularly under a lot of stress. She drinks one cup of coffee per day or about 10 cups per week. She drinks less than one cup/glass of tea per day. She has minimal intake of chocolate and sugars. She gets headaches two to three times a weeks that average about a level of 7 and occur predominantly in the right frontal and temporal area but can go over to the left side at a level of 5 in the frontal and temporal area. The headaches can get to a level of 10. She rates her current TMJ pain at about a level of 10. Her overall facial pain for the last two weeks has been at 10 but prior to that was at a level of 6. She rates her jaw function and diet at 6 and disability at 5. Incisal opening is 32 mm. Excursive movements are 1.5 mm in each direction. On opening, she has a glitch in the left TMJ at about 10 to 15 mm of opening that occurs most of the time when she opens. The right joint seems to function fairly smoothly. To palpation, she has high moderate to severe pain on the right side involving the masseter, medial pterygoid, TMJ, and styloid area. Left side is clear and free of any tenderness. She does take multiple vitamins, and the particular onesshe takes is called a Stresstab, and it has extra iron levels in it.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses are clear. She has some perio problems around the mandibular right second molar and has a bifurcation involvement. Right condyle appears small and appears that there is anterior beaking present. On the left joint, the condyle is larger and evidence of the wire fixation there is seen. May be some osteophytic formation in this joint as well.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is fairly small in size and appears to have lost vertical and anteroposterior dimension. Osteophytes are present coming off the top. May be some rough bone also up in the fossa as well. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Pseudocyst in the head of the condyle.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has good posterior joint space and vertical space may be adequate. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Could be some rough bone in the eminence area as well as on the anterior aspect of the condylar head. Wire fixation is seen on the posterior head of the condyle.

Cephalometrically, the teeth and jaws appear to have remained in a very stable position. Oropharyngeal airway looks good.

BASIC DIAGNOSIS:

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis
Severe TMJ pain	
Severe headaches
myofascial pain


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:

CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomy, debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Fat grafts to bilateral TMJs (harvest from abdomen)
Application of arch bars
