LEIGH SCOTT									06/25/2007

Leigh is 48 years old, referred by Dr. David Curtis in Corpus Christie and Dr. Richard Ingraham.  Leigh has had a number of previous surgeries but nothing to the jaw joints. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Jaws pop and lock a lot.
Pain without medications. 
Locks when she has her mouth open a lot but can lock open or closed.
Overbite getting worse.

Her primary objective is to stop the pain and discomfort that she has.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Clarinex. 
Zyrtec.
Singular.
Multivitamins.
OsteoBiFlex Triple.
Bromelain. 
L-lysine.

She started orthodontic treatment in October of 2006 with placement of lower appliances.  She got her upper appliances in January of 2007.   She was under splint therapy in 2006.  The splint did help her.  But when she would take it off, her pain would get significantly worse once again.  Leigh's problems began in about mid 1996.  She was having some endodontic work down when her jaw became locked where she could not open it or close it.  Etiology was unknown.  She had splint therapy in 2006 which did help her significantly.  Again, she had her braces placed in October of 2006 on the lower jaw and January of 2007 on the upper jaw.   In the 90s everytime she went for dental work, she would be placed on Valium to avoid the locking problem.  Leigh gets headaches at about a level of 3 in the temple area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 6, diet at 7, disability at 7.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her right shoulder and her right knee.  She is allergic to penicillin, aspirin, erythromycin, sulfa drugs and Tequin.   She also has some problems tolerating cheap earrings.  She is aware of clenching and occasional bruxism at nighttime but not during the day.  She feels her problems began about mid 1960s.  Etiology is unknown but one of the initial dislocations occurred while she was having endodontic work done.  She has had a Prolo injection done bilaterally by Dr. David Curtis but this was of no benefit to her.  

In frontal view, Leigh has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Leigh may have some slight AP maxillary deficiency maybe 2 to 3 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded about 10 to 12 mm.  Chin-neckline is short without definition of the chin-neck angle.  

LEIGH SCOTT				06/25/2007				Page 2

Intraorally, Leigh has her lower anterior teeth from first bicuspid through first bicuspid and probably her third molar is in place with crowns on them.  She is missing the second bicuspids, first and second molars.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a crown on the maxillary right first molar.  She has crowns on the two third molars and bottom arch.  She has a Class II cuspid relationship.  She has about a 4 mm anterior deep bite relationship.  Oropharyngeal area looks as though the tissues are healthy with normal uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars.  Tonsils are normal in size and shape.  Intranasally, the septum may be deviated just slightly to the right side.  Turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  She has moderate snoring and some moderate daytime somnolence.  She is not aware of sleep apnea problems.  She does to sleep well at night and tosses and turns quite a bit.  She sometimes wakes up because of the snoring.  On opening, she has a definite pop in both joints with about 10 mm of opening and closing clicks bilaterally at 5 mm.  To palpation she has some mild tenderness over the masseters, TMJs and styloid areas.  Incisal opening is about 50 mm and she can open to about 40 without significant discomfort.  Excursive movements are about 8 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of maxillary third molars, mandibular, probably second bicuspid, first and second molars and probably the third molars are in the second molar position with crowns on them.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Right condyle appears a little bit flat with some superior peaking whereas the left one looks a little bit more normal in shape.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The bony septum appears relatively straight.  The left turbinate may be a little bit large compared to the right side.  Frontal sinus is quite large but appears clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of sclerosis on top.  It has a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it.  Articular eminence is quite steep.  The condyle is positioned against the posterior wall of the fossa with an increased anterior joint space indicative of a vertically oriented anteriorly displaced articular disc.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle may have a little bit better shape on this side.  Articular eminence is quite steep.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned towards the posterior wall.  Increased anterior joint space compatible with anteriorly displaced articular disc in a vertical orientation.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles with appropriate space between the condyle and the articular eminence.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted with an airway dimension of less than 5 mm at the soft palate level and probably about 8 mm at the bases of the tongue.  She has a skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship.



LEIGH SCOTT				06/25/2007				Page 3

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
AP maxillary deficiency.
Slight maxillary transverse deficiency. 
Class II end-on occlusion.
Missing bilateral mandibular second bicuspids, first and second molars with the third molar in the second molar position. 
Accentuated curve of occlusion in lower arch.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 to 4 mm (normal dimension 11 mm.)
TMJ pain.
 Headaches. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Open up 1 mm of space between each maxillary lateral incisor and cuspid. 
Continue to align and level the mandibular arch.
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward 10 to 12 mm. 
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and expand it.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Surgery stage 2.
Bone grafts to mandibular body areas in preparation for osseointegrated implants.
Surgery stage 3.
Placement of osseointegrated implants in the lower arch.
Restorative dentistry to refine occlusion. 
