JODIE SCHUTT									12/30/2005

Jodie is referred by Dr. Duane Keller.  She is 15 years old.  On January 29, 2004, Jodie sustained a head injury.  She sustained this in a sledding accident.  She was knocked unconscious for about 20 minutes.   

MEDICATIONS
Tramadol 50 mg three times per week on the average.
Nortriptyline 10 mg q.h.s.
Methocarbamol (Flexeril) 10 mg 2 times per day.
Tetracycline 500 mg daily for an eye stye.
Propranolol 10 mg 2 times per day for headaches. 
Lexapro 10 mg daily.

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  She has been diagnosed recently as having scoliosis.  On the previous MRI of the neck, she has a C5-6 relationship as previously described but she says recently they have also told her that she has a C2-3 rotation.  In her hips, she has some problems with the right side being a little bit worse than the left side.  She has some problems with her left knee and left ankle that has been identified as a tendonitis that affects the left knee, calf and ankle.  She has no known allergies.  No problems wearing jewelry.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night and during the day she does clench.  She gets headaches constantly in the temple area at a level of 5.  These can escalate to 8 or 9.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, facial pain and headache at 8, jaw function at 5, diet at 4, disability at 7.  In frontal view, Jodie has good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 2 to 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left.  The chin is on the facial midline.  In profile view, Jodie has good facial symmetry and balance.  Intraorally, Jodie has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch.  The lateral incisors are in lingual inclination and particularly the left cuspid is a little bit blocked out labially but not too bad.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  She has accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a crown on the maxillary left first molar.  She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship bilaterally.  She has anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  In centric relation the only way the teeth appear to touch or that Jodie can perceive to touch are the maxillary lateral incisors and lower cuspids bilaterally.  The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear relatively normal.  To palpation she has rather severe pain over the TMJs, styloid areas, shoulders, high moderate in the SCMs, temporalis, masseter muscles and moderate discomfort in the posterior neck area.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth and 4 third molars which are impacted.  She has a crown on the maxillary left first molar and no root canal.  The sinuses look clear.  The turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  The condyle is a little bit difficult to evaluate.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  The bony septum appears straight.  It appears that that there is an adequate nasal airway. 

JODIE SCHUTT				12/30/2005				Page 2


Left TMJ tomogram shows some flattening on the head of the condyle.  Increased vertical joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Posterior joint space appears relatively normal.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some moderate anterior beaking but difficult to tell.  Difficult to find superior cortex.  The joint space appears a little bit more narrow vertically but the posterior joint space appears fairly good.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles.  The condyle is coming forward underneath the articular eminence.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is good oropharyngeal airway.  Basically a skeletal Class I relationship very close to a Class I occlusal relationship.  It appears that there are posterior open bites present.  

Following her accident where she was knocked unconscious, Jodie apparently had some significant problems and still continues to have problems with reading.  She can see the words but they do not register in her mind.  This continues to be a problem even today for her.  In March 2004 she was rotating her neck and developed severe dizziness and within 2 days was in a wheelchair.  Apparently there has been no known diagnosis for this occurrence.  Apparently the neurologist who was treating her at that time attributed it to some residual brain swelling that she had and he placed her on some steroids and physical therapy.  She was in a wheelchair for about 2 to 3 months then progressed to crutches.  She has redeveloped her coordination and she is able to play volleyball and do dance activities.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
History of closed-head injury, January 29, 2004. 
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and medial dislocation of the articular disc.
Relative mandibular hyperplasia. 
Bilateral posterior open bites of 1 to 2 mm.  
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Severe headaches.
Impacted third molars x4.
History of nocturnal clenching and bruxism and daytime clenching. 
Cervical pathology. 
Scoliosis. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Medications.
Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s.
Celebrex 200 mg tablets 1 tablet daily. 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.


JODIE SCHUTT				12/30/2005				Page 3


Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization to establish Class I occlusion.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
Continue evaluation and appropriate treatment for the neck pathology. 
