MCKENZIE SCOTT									11-22-04

McKenzie is 12 years old and referred by Dr. David Linderman, 6881 S. Holly Circle, Englewood, CO  80112. 

Patient History

She has had some previous surgery where she had a growth on her eyelid removed at the age of 3 years. She broke her nose at 8 years in a tennis accident, and she had her wisdom teeth removed on 08/15/04. 

McKenzie had a history of headaches that lasted for about a year that began about three years ago. She was doing a lot of swimming at that time. They increased her water intake, and her headaches decreased and went away. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She has NO KNOWN ALLERGIES. Not aware of any problems with jewelry. She is a swimmer, tennis player, and a volleyball player. 

She has no problems with headaches, no TMJ pain, and no myofascial pain problems. She rates her jaw function at 2, diet at 2, and disability at 0. 

The onset of her joint problems began somewhere around the age of 9 years of unknown etiology. At age 10, she had a palatal expander, and she had that appliance in for two years, and then she has had 8 months of orthodontics so far. She takes no medications. 

McKenzie usually needs to sleep 11 or 12 hours a night. She tosses and turns a lot during her sleep.

Patient Concerns

Retruded lower jaw
Mouth breathing particularly when sleeping
Snoring

Clinical Examination

McKenzie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline. 

In profile view, McKenzie has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm. Upper lip supralabrale is just slightly posterior to subnasale. Chin is back approximately 20 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short, and there is no definition with the chin-neck angle. 

Intraorally, she has her teeth back through the first molars erupted in. She has some moderate crowding, lower anterior arch. Frenulum is attached high. In the upper arch, she has teeth erupted back through the first molars. She has a significantly increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch. She is end-on Class II cuspid relationship being probably about 3 to 4 mm Class II. She has a 0 vertical overbite. She occludes predominantly on her first molars. The rest of the teeth are essentially out of occlusion. Uvula looks relatively normal. Soft palate may be a little bit elongated. Difficult to see the uvula because of the downward rotation and upward positioning of the posterior aspect of the mandible. Tissues look relatively normal. 

McKenzie has had a history of a previously fractured nose and did require surgery to fix it. Intranasally, the turbinates are of moderate size. Septum looks relatively straight. 

McKenzie has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. Joints function relatively smoothly. Incisal opening is 36 mm. Excursive movements are about 4 mm in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. She has good formation of all of her sinuses. Septum has some slight deviation to it. Turbinates are moderately enlarged.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the condyles have lost considerable volume. The articular eminence is essentially gone. The condyle is postured way forward in the fossa probably being 5 to 6 mm anteriorly positioned. 

Right TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle that has lost a considerable amount of volume. The condyle is postured on the articular eminence and, therefore, postured forward probably about a good 5 to 6 mm. Articular eminence is very shallow although not quite as flat as the opposite side.

On opening, there is minimal translation forward. 

Panorex shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. The second molars are unerupted. The third molars are absent. Extreme loss of condylar head and neck. Sinuses look clear. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is severe posterior vertical maxillary deficiency, significant AP mandibular deficiency, and severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of probably less than 2 mm. This is at the base of the tongue as well as along the soft palate. Extremely high occlusal plane angle is present. The roots of the maxillary teeth are well above the palatal plane by at least 8 mm just at the first molar level. Turbinates appear to extend beyond the hard palate. She has a little bit of adenoid tissue left. 

Dental model analysis shows that there is a significant accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Significantly increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch. In the mandibular arch, there is moderate crowding, lower anterior arch. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis with the articular discs in position but with a reactive pannus surrounding them, and the condyles positioned significantly forward in the fossa
Severe AP mandibular deficiency
Severe posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Class II occlusion 
High occlusal plane angle
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway
Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
Accentuated curve of Wilson, upper arch
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about a millimeter
Overangulation of lower incisors 
Crowding, lower anterior arch
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction
Mouth breather
Masticatory dysfunction

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch at two occlusal plane levels, aligning the four incisors at an elevated plane:
Segment 1:  Left cuspid through first molar
Segment 2:  Left lateral incisor through right lateral incisor
Segment 3:  Right cuspid through right first molar
Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for   interdental osteotomies. You can place a compensating step in the arch wire. This orthodontic maneuver would be very helpful so that we could segmentalize the maxilla at surgery and correct the accentuated curve of occlusion that she currently has in the upper arch
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the tooth-size discrepancy and to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward

CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it posteriorly as well as correct any transverse problems and decrease the accentuated curve of Wilson
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Fat grafts to bilateral TMJs (harvested from abdomen or buttock)
Partial turbinectomies
HTR implant to mandible

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 