ALBERT SEYMOUR								03/14/2006

Albert is 79 years old and is referred by Dr. Alfred DiStefano, 906 W. Randol Mill Road, Arlington, TX 76012.  The primary reason Albert has been referred to me is for evaluation of his dysfunctional speech problem.  He has to speak in a whisper and has lost his voice quality he had prior to the onset of his current situation.  

Albert was diagnosed with leukemia approximately 13 years ago.  He has had ongoing treatment for that since that time.  On November 13, 2004, Albert was hospitalized and was in the hospital for 51 days for treatment of his leukemia.  Apparently it got pretty bad.  In fact, they had a no stat program for him.  They apparently game him quite a few drugs which I do not have a record of what they were.  Prior to this hospital admission, his voice quality was okay and normal.  For about 20 days he was on nonlucent.  He could not talk or hear.  He is hearing impaired anyway and wears hearing aids.  This is a genetic problem as both his parents were hard of hearing as well.  However, he did regain his hearing of over what it was during this initial time period.  However, he started to have speech difficulties during the end of November over approximately 2 weeks into whatever medicine treatment he was receiving at the time.  His speech has not improved since then.  He was finally discharged from the hospital in January of 2005.  

The only other significance in reference to speech problems was that he had a stroke about 4 years ago and had a very transient loss of his speech that he was able to regain almost by the time that the paramedics came to take him to the hospital.  But since the time of the stroke, he has had difficulties with comprehension.  This also is a problem genetically in his family.  Both of his parents, his older brother and some uncles I believe suffered from dementia as they went into their later 70s.  In August of 2005 Albert was readmitted to the hospital because of bleeding problems and anemia.  He had almost 2 full blood transfusions.  He was having bleeding from his bladder and they finally identified a cancer tumor and removed his right kidney and part of his bladder.  During his admission of November 2004, he was not intubated.  He was on extensive oxygen treatment, however.  Albert did have a tracheostomy performed in 1973 following an auto accident where he almost died.  He had to have part of his lung removed at that time.  They had to do a tracheostomy in the elevator on the way to the operating room in order to save his life.  He had rheumatic fever as a child but this does not seem to have created any problem for him.  Albert states that when he gets out in the wind that this makes his speech worse.  He says his friends could understand him and tell him not to worry about it but other people he does not know asks him what is wrong with his voice.  

He has basically a Class I occlusal relationship.  Teeth are in reasonably good shape.  His soft palate moves reasonably well.  He has minimal velopharyngeal incompetency.  Nasopharyngoscopy was performed.  It shows that the soft palate does elevate and move well.  There could be some slight incompetence but nothing real significant and not enough to create the changes in the voice that he is experiencing.  The vocal cords could be visualized well and appear to function reasonably well and appear to close during speech.  However, he does have significant speech dysfunction problem.
ALBERT SEYMOUR 			03/14/2006				Page 2


In the past he has had an adverse reaction to Benadryl that apparently made him extremely hyper and uncontrollable in the hospital.  They were giving it to try and quiet him down but he had just the opposite effect.  Morphine helped him settle down more during his long hospitalization stay.  During that stay, he was diagnosed as having aviary TB and was placed on some TB medication in the hospital that his wife states "almost killed him."  They finally found out it was not a contagious form of TB and discontinued the treatment.  

I believe that one of the medications given to him for his leukemia or for his TB treatment has created an irreversible toxic neurological injury.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Dysphonia.
Possible toxic injury to the laryngeal nerves.  This pathology may be irreversible. 

RECOMMENDATIONS:   Referral to Dr. Larry Weprin (otolaryngologist) for diagnostic and treatment considerations. 