KATHERYN SCENTERFITT						

Katheryn is 43 years old and is a self-referral.  Besides her TMJ surgery she has had a herniated disc surgery and a rhizotomy.  She has been diagnosed as having fibromyalgia.  She has had shoulder impingement surgery.  She was diagnosed as having arthritis.  She has had a neck fusion and right shoulder surgery.  She has had a hysterectomy and tonsillectomy.  She has had numerous steroid injections, but steroid injections for the most part have been for the neck and back problems.  Dr. Harley Richards, oral surgeon in Florida, did multiple injections into the jaw and neck muscles.

Katheryn's problems began in 1990 when she was involved in a motor vehicle accident.  She was stopped at a stoplight and was struck from behind sustaining a whiplash injury.  It took about 6 months when she was essentially bedridden before it was identified that her problems were likely due to her jaw joints.  In 1990 and 1991 she had bilateral TMJ arthroscopies performed by Dr. Harley Richards.  In 1992, she had the bilateral arthroscopies repeated again and then had discectomies performed.  Her pain got worse and in 1998, she saw Dr. Thomas Boland and in 1998, he placed bilateral Christensen prostheses.  She continued to have some pain apparently particularly on the left side and in 1999 was taken back to surgery and had the left side realigned.  

Other treatments that she has had include the multiple injections done in the early 1990s around the jaws, jaw joints and muscles.  She had orthodontics for 3-1/2 years in the early 1990s.  She has worn splints on and off since about 1990.  She had 4 years of physical therapy.  None of these modalities have been able to eliminate her current severe pain problems. 

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: 
Cymbalta 60 mg q.h.s.
Zanaflex 4 mg 2 tablets q.i.d.
Gabitril 4 mg t.i.d.
Spironolactone 50 mg daily.
Indocin 25 mg t.i.d.
Klonopin 0.5 mg t.i.d.
Kadian 40 mg b.i.d.
Imitrex 100 mg p.r.n. 
Benadryl.
 Allegra D.
 Vitamin C.
 Laxatives.

Katheryn has constant severe earaches but has no vertigo or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her knees, neck, back, right hip and right shoulder.

She is allergic to morphine.  She is sensitive to cheap jewelry but tolerates gold well.  She is not aware of any problems clenching or bruxing.  She has altered sensation in her cheeks but facial nerves are intact.


KATHERYN SCENTERFITT		03/07/2007				Page 2

She rates her TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain at 10, jaw function at 4, diet at 7, disability at 10.  She is essentially about 80 to 90% bedridden at this time.  She has constant headaches at a level of 7 through the frontal, temporal and posterior head area.  

In frontal view, Katheryn has good facial symmetry and balance.  In profile view, she has good facial balance.  Intraorally, she is missing mandibular molar but has 2nd and 3rd molars drifted forward.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Basically a Class I cuspid.  Bilateral posterior crossbite in the molar area.  In the frontal view, Katheryn does have a little bit of increased fullness on the right side of the face as compared to the left side in the cheek area.  Oropharyngeal areas look as though there are healthy tissues there.  The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are all within normal limits.  She has anterior deep bite of 2 mm.  Katheryn has no nasal airway breathing problems.  She has moderate snoring and moderate daytime somnolence but that could in part be due to the medications.  She is not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated to the left side anteriorly causing some constriction of the nostril but inside the nose it is deviated significantly off towards the right side.  Turbinates are moderately normal in size and therefore she appears as though she has adequate nasal airway with just some moderate constricture of the left nares.  To palpation, Katheryn has severe pain over the posterior neck and shoulder areas, high moderate pain over the masseters, TMJs, styloid areas and moderate over the medial pterygoids and SCMs.  Maximal incisal opening is 37 mm but excursive movements are less than 1 mm.  As Katheryn functions her jaw she hears rubbing noises in her joints and clicking noise particularly on the left side.  

About 3 years ago, Kathy heard a loud pop in the right joint.  She saw Dr. Frank Dolwick who took a Panorex and he really did not see anything and recommended no treatment at that time.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of a left second bicuspid first molar and on the right side the third molar and second bicuspid and upper third molars are absent.  In the right arch it is difficult to tell if it is the first molar or the third molar that is absent.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  She has bilateral TMJ Christensen prostheses in place.  The left condyle appears to be postured forward in the fossa but the right one appears more centered.  

Waters view shows the presence of bilateral Christensen prostheses with metal fossas and metal condyles.  There appears to be 5 screws holding the right prosthesis ramus component in place and there could be as many as 6 screws on the left side.  The right side seems to be centered in the fossa but the left side appears that it may be postured forward in the fossa.  The nasal septum in the bony area is deviated off towards the left side.  Sinuses appear reasonably clear.  The face appears relatively symmetric.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows condyle appears to be positioned in the fossa.  Cannot identify any areas of fracture but could possibly be present by history.  



KATHERYN SCENTERFITT		03/07/2007				Page 3

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle component appears to be positioned anterior in the fossa.  There appears to be probably 6 screws in the left ramus prosthesis and 5 in the right ramus prosthesis.  On opening, the left prosthesis seems to translate forward some and the right one appears to be more rotational.  Opening is actually reasonably good.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows basically a skeletal and occlusal Class I position.  The prostheses are present bilaterally.  I see virtually no airway passage.  It could be that she was swallowing when the x-ray was taken.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ failed Christensen total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ metalosis.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Significant masticatory dysfunction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
CT scans of jaws and jaw joints.
Surgery.
Removal of bilateral failed Christensen total joint prostheses.
Extensive debridement of bilateral TMJs.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Application of arch bars.
Physical therapy as necessary to rehabilitate the jaw structures. 

I did review with her and her husband the potential risks and complications and answered all the questions that they had at this time.  They understand.  Everything from nerve injuries, bleeding problems, infection, malocclusion etc.  She does have severe neck and shoulder pain.  I explained to her and her husband I did not know how much of the pain would be resolved with fixing the joint prostheses.  It is possible the pain could be coming more from the cervical area but hopefully she would have improvement.