LAURIE JO SEFTON								06/29/2009

The patient presents for a new consultation.  I last saw her in April 2008 and prior to that in 2005.  Her maxillary surgery from the last surgery has done very well.  She says that she believes that she had body image psychosis or a similar term to that where she is fixated on her appearance and actually she made herself worse by demanding all of her surgeries.  Her concerns at this time include:

She would like her cheeks augmented. 
She wants her chin shortened vertically. 
She wants her mandibular angles augmented.
She wants the roll in her lower lip reduced.
She wants her lower teeth hidden or covered so not so much shows as she feels this is what makes her look the most hideous.

I told her I did not to shorten her chin vertically as this would put her way out of balance because the lower height of the mandible now is less than normal and her upper lip is slightly longer in length.  I did tell her that we could augment her angles of her mandible, but I was not in favor of augmenting her cheeks.  The prominent roll in her lower lip could be reduced.  The lower lip could be re-suspended to try to get better elevation and coverage of her lower teeth.  

She has an appointment with Dr. Bill Carpenter tomorrow.   She is seeing him about further lip surgery as he has done quite a bit of work on her already.  She also is going to have a tummy tuck done and breast work done as well.  We can probably do it all at the same time.  I will be approaching her jaws from an extra-oral approach to place the implants at the angle of the mandible, but at the chin area that will be an intraoral procedure.  I will have to consult with Dr. Carpenter to see if he is willing to do the procedures all in one stage.  He may prefer to stage them.  

Radiographically, she is doing well.  Her sinus appear relatively clear despite that she has smoked for many years and has had numerous maxillary osteotomies performed and has huge Interpore 200 block implants.  She says she quit smoking 1-1/2 years ago and is doing well.  She apparently is not clenching like she was before and that was probably initiated by some of her psychiatric medications that she was on.  

At this time her diagnoses from my standpoint would be:

Hypoplasia of mandibular angles.
Lower lip ptosis and malposition of mentalis muscles.
Lip incompetence.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

CT scan of jaws and jaw joints. 
Construct 3-D model of jaws.
Construct angle implants.
Surgery 
Bilateral reconstruction of mandibular angles with Medpor implants.
Reconstruct mentalis muscles with transosseous suspension sutures.
Consider filling out roll in lower lip.

These are the procedures that I feel I could help her with.  She is to keep me informed of her progress. 