ANA SOPHIA SERRANO								03/26/2008

Ana Sophia is 19 years old.  Referred by Dr. Rodolfo Villalobos, Ave. Palmas 754-1105, Lomos Chapultepec, C.P., 11000   Ana Sophia is good health with no major medical problems. She has noticed that her lower jaw is becoming more asymmetric.  She had orthodontics from the age of 12 to 14.  At the completion of orthodontics, her lower dental midline was out of alignment slightly at that time.  However, it was at 14 when she noticed her lower jaw began to shift more towards the left side.  She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain, etc.  Her primary concerns are: 
Jaw line is unaligned. 
Teeth do not fit together properly. 
Clicking in the jaw joints.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Ana Sophia has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  She does have asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is zero.  Maxillary midline is a little bit off to the left side about 1 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is 6 mm off to the left.  Chin is about 10 mm off to the left side.  In profile view, Ana Sophia has fairly good facial balance vertically and anteroposteriorly.  She has a good chin neckline.  Maxilla appears to be retruded about 3 mm and chin may be retruded about 5 mm.  Intraorally, Ana Sophia has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars.  There is some minimal crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She appears to have good attached gingiva, although the labial frenulum is attached relatively high.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars present.  She has a Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by probably at least 2 mm and on the left side she is Class III by about 2 to 3 mm.  She has zero vertical overbite.  She has a crossbite on the right side extending from the left lateral incisor back to about the first molar, although the first molar itself appears to be out of crossbite.  She has about 0.5 mm of vertical overbite with the front teeth.  Oropharyngeal tissues look fairly healthy.  She has some significant constricture of the fascial pillars.  Septum is fairly straight.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged, but she states that she breathes predominantly through her nose when she sleeps.  To palpation, Ana Sophia has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Incisal opening is 55 mm, excursion movements about 6 mm in each direction. On opening, she has a glitch in the left joint at about 35 mm.  On the right side, she has a pop noise, but I believes it involves the condyle coming over the articular eminence and not particularly related to a disc issue.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Right ramus and condylar neck appear longer and wider as compared to the opposite side.  The left side appears somewhat arthritic.  She appears to have a large pseudocyst in the left condylar head.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  
Waters view shows that she has hair extensions in place.  Sinuses appear relatively clear, although the right one is smaller than the left one.  Turbinates appear fairly large and appear to fill most of the available nasal airway.  Bony septum is reasonably straight.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that may have a slight anterior beaking.  The condylar head and neck appears a little elongated.  There appears to be decreased joint space.  It appears the articular eminence is relatively shallow.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears perhaps a little bit arthritic.  There is a pseudocyst in the head.  Joint space appears somewhat narrow vertically and posteriorly.  Articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has what appears to be a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway, however, looks very narrow with an AP dimension of only about 2 to 3 mm at the soft palate level and about 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  
On additional questioning, Ana Sophia does state she gets headaches about once or twice a week in the temporal areas that can elevate to a level of 7.  
The basic diagnoses for Ana Sophia would be as follows:
Right mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.  
Deviated mandibular prognathism off towards to the left side. 
AP maxillary deficiency.
Slight AP mandibular deficiency.  
Class III end-on occlusion on the right side.  Class II end-on occlusion on the left side.  
Mandibular midline shifted 6 mm to the left of the facial midline and chin shifted 10 mm to the left of the facial midline.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 2 mm lower than the left side in the first bicuspid area.
Crossbite on the left side.
Headaches.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm AP dimension (normal 11 mm).

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
MRI of left and right TMJ.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery. 
Right TMJ high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back onto the facial midline.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla slightly, upright the incisors, and transversely AP level the occlusal planes.
Consider partial reduction turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 