JESSICA STORMY SENGER							09/17/2007

Stormy is now 30 years old.  We previously did surgery on December 17, 2002, involving bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors and bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies.  She did very well until 2006 when she began developing pain in her joints and also clicking and popping as well.  She gets headaches about two times per week in the temporal and posterior head area at about a level of 5.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 4, diet at 6, disability at 3.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Celebrex 200 mg daily.
Ultram ER 300 mg daily.
Hydrocodone 7.5 mg 1 to 5 tablets per day.
Hydrocortisone 10 mg daily which she takes for congenital adrenal dysfunction.

She gets earaches when she has sinus problems. No tinnitus but she is having significant problems with vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her knees, hands and fingers.  She is aware that when she develops her pain that she clenches during the day.  To palpation she has some mild tenderness over the masseters, medial pterygoids and styloid areas.  On opening, she has a pop in the right joint about 15 mm and a closing pop at 10 mm.  On the left side when she opens she has an audible crackling crepitus type of noise.  She has a Class I occlusion with about 3 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Incisal opening is about 16 mm where she is comfortable.  Maximal opening is only about 34 mm.  Maximal incisal opening is 34 mm but only about 16 without significant pain.  Excursive movement to the right about 8 mm and to the left about 6 mm.

Stormy reports significant problems with vertigo that have increased during the past month.  It effects her at work interfering with her abilities to carry on her normal performance.  She is being managed by a pain specialist at this time.  The pain significantly effects her abilities to eat and chew and to carry on her normal life activities.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of Mitek anchors in the TMJ area.  There are four bone screws in each mandibular ramus area.  There are four bone plates in the maxilla and some HA grafts there as well. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows that there appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space and a little sclerosis on the top of the condyle.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows there appears to be some slight posterior decreased joint space but the vertical joint space seems good.  Articular eminence is moderate in steepness.  A little sclerosis in the head of the condyle.  Mitek anchor is present.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a good Class I skeletal relationship and adequate oropharyngeal airway.

STORMY SENGER				09/17/2007				Page 2


BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Left TMJ arthritis with articular disc in position but heterotopic bone formation overlying the lateral aspect of the condyle.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated with reduction.
Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
CT scans of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Application of maxillary mandibular arch bars.