SANDRA SEAL									12-29-03

Sandy is 21 years old.

Patient History

She had her tonsils removed at the age of 8 years and has had no other surgery. She is in good health with no major medical problems. She takes Nordette 1 per day. She has had previous orthodonics with Dr. Pat Brady.
 
She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, but does get occasional vertigo. The only other joints that give her any problem at all are her knees, and that is not of any great significance. She does give a history of nocturnal bruxism. She has undergone orthodontic treatment and finished when she was about 14 years old. The occlusion was fairly tight at that time, but over the years it has changed to its current situation. Sandy gets headaches only about once every two weeks that she relates to tension. In reference to her headaches, currently they occur about once every two weeks, but earlier in the semester they were more significant, and, in fact, she called her dad thinking she had a brain tumor. Currently she rates her headaches at about a level of 4 when they do occur in the frontal, temporal, and sometimes posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain at about a level of 6, daily pain at a level of 2, jaw function at 5, diet at 4, and disability at 1. 

Sandy is not really sure when her jaw problems began, but she became aware of the clicking and popping about three years ago because she used to show off to people her clicking and popping joints. There is no known etiology for the onset of the joint problem.

Patient Concerns

TMJ pain
Joint occasionally locks
Bruxism
Bite changing
Difficulty biting particularly with the front teeth

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Sandy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is just a little bit to the right side about 0.5 mm Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other.

In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probable about 3 to 4 mm. Maxilla appears to be probably about 6 mm AP deficient. Chin is approximately 15 mm AP deficient. Chin-neck angle is not well-defined. Chin-neck length appears short. 

Intraorally, Sandy has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. She has a 3 x 3 retainer. She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth, although the full crowns are exposed, and the roots may be just slightly exposed on the anterior four teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Has about a 2-mm open bite. She occludes only on her first and second molars with the rest of the teeth being out of occlusion. She has a Class II end-on occlusion, being Class II by about 4 to 5 mm. Transversely, the occlusal plane appears fairly level. Right cuspid could be about 0.5 mm lower than the left cuspid. 

Intranasally, turbinates appear somewhat enlarged and a little bit boggy. She says she has been having some allergies lately. 

Intraorally, oropharynx appears clear and without any evidence of pathology. Maximal incisal opening is about 51 mm. She can open to 33 mm without any significant discomfort. Excursive movement to the right is 9 mm and to the left 10 mm. In opening, she has some definite clicking and popping in her joints and fairly close to sounding almost like crepitation, but she feels it is more like clicking or popping. Occurs a little bit earlier on the left side as compared to the right side, and occurs at about 30 mm on the left, 35 on the right, and on closing, 20 mm on the left and 25 mm on the right. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. The rest of the teeth are present. Roots on the central incisors appear a little bit short in both the upper and lower arch. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear relatively moderate in size. Left TMJ is not on the radiograph, but the right one looks relatively normal. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little sclerosis on the top of it. Decreased posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Could be a little bit of anterior beaking on the condyle. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle again that looks a little bit sclerotic with some anterior beaking. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Posterior joint space may be slightly decreased but difficult to tell. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles with the right side actually translating a little bit further forward than the left side. In the open view, the condyles appear to have a little bit better morphology, although both show flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. Turbinates appear fairly large and seem to fill most of the nasal airway. Mandibular angle on the right side appears a little bit longer vertically than the left side, but it could be possibly just due to some slight rotation of the head. 

Cephalometrically, Sandy appears to have some AP maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia. She does have the anterior open bite and slight Class II skeletal relationship. Appears to occlude only on her molars with the other teeth being out of occlusion. A little bit of vertical discrepancy at the inferior border of the mandible, although at the occlusal surface the level seems fairly good. 

Sandy has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 2 mm in the anterior six teeth. She also has about a 0.5-mm tooth-size discrepancy in the second bicuspid area with the upper second bicuspids being quite a bit smaller than the lower second bicuspids. Lining up the teeth in a good Class I cuspid relationship leaves Sandy in almost an end-on incisor relationship which goes along with the tooth-size discrepancy. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with late reduction and significant deformation of the articular discs
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Class II occlusion
Anterior open bite of 2 mm
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Occluding only on the first and second molars bilaterally 
Nocturnal bruxism
Occasional vertigo
Slight overangulation of the lower incisors
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm
High occlusal plane angulation of 16 degrees (normal 8 degrees)

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to provide room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch. Remove the 3 x 3 retainer. Strip lower anterior teeth, removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure and retract to help correct for the tooth-size discrepancy 

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla and level the occlusal plane
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

I did discuss in detail with Dr. Seals and his daughter that her TMJ problems have been present for much longer than four years, so the prognosis is much more guarded in reference to performing the surgery. We did discuss at length the possibilities that if the disc repositioning procedures do not hold up that total joint prostheses could be indicated down the line. If surgery is not done, and she develops symptoms later on, total joint prostheses may also be required. They fully understand these factors. I answered all the questions that Dr. Seal and Sandy had today. I will refer her to Dr. Michael Arvystas in New York to do the presurgical orthodontics.