ARIEL SHAPIRO									8/24/05

Ariel is 18 years old and is referred by Phil Weinberg.  I actually did surgery on Mr. Weinberg about 20 years ago.  The only surgery that Ariel has had so far was that she had her wisdom teeth extracted.  Ariel is in good health with no major medical problems.  She takes no medications and has no known allergies.  She has had previous orthodontics by Dr. Victor Sandes.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Headaches.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
TMJ pain.
Muscle pain to the head and neck area.
Retruded lower jaw.

Other joints that bother include her right elbow and her left hip pops.  She does get earaches with the left side greater than the right side.  She has no tinnitus but does have problems with vertigo.  No hearing loss is present.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth particularly at nighttime.   Ariel and her dad give a history of a fall that occurred around the age of 2 where Ariel struck her chin on the edge of a wood frame of a bunk bed.  She had some scar tissue that developed from that injury.  Ariel's problems may have begun as early as the age of 5 years.  She had clicking and popping in her joints at that time.  About 5 years ago, the clicking and popping stopped.  She was involved in a motor vehicle accident where she was struck from behind in October of 2003.  This exacerbated her problems fairly significantly.  She has had chiropractic treatment.  She had orthodontics from the age of 11 to 13.  Ariel gets headaches about 5 days a week and she wakes up with a headache usually.  They are a level of 6 and affect primarily the temple areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain, 6, jaw function 4, diet at 5, and disability at 4.  She gets occasional numbness in the left cheek area.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the temporalis masseters, left medial pterygoid, left styloid area, left SCM, left posterior neck and mild tenderness over the left shoulder and right medial pterygoid area.  Maximal incisal opening for Ariel is 46 mm, but only about 18 mm without having pain and discomfort.  Excursive movement to the right 4 mm, to the left 5 mm.  On opening, she has some fine crepitation in both joints with the right side being a little bit worse than the left side.  In frontal view, Ariel has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -2 to -3 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline but mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left side.  Chin is probably about 4 mm or so off to the left side.  In the profile view, upper lip supralabrale is probably at least 5 mm posterior to subnasale.  Maxilla is probably pretty close to 6 to 8 mm AP deficient and chin is about 15 mm AP deficient.  Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not real well defined.  A little bit of fullness in the submental area.  Intraorally, Ariel has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars present.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  Teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and level.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars as well.  In centric relation she is basically a Class I cuspid relationship bilaterally with just a slight Class III cuspid tendency on the right side.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 2 to 3 mm higher as compared to the right side.  The mandibular occlusal plane has a greater cant to it as the right cuspid is about 3 to 4 mm lower than the left cuspid.  
ARIEL SHAPIRO 				8/24/05				Page 2


Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side.  The left turbinate is significantly enlarged but there maybe a passable airway because of the deviation of the nasal septum.  On the right side, the turbinate is moderately enlarged but not nearly to the size as the left turbinate.  Ariel is not aware of whether she snores or not but apparently a few years ago when she and her sister shared the same room her sister said that she did snore.  She has moderate daytime somnolence.  She is not aware if she has any sleep apnea problems or not but she does wake up a lot at night and apparently has restless sleep.  She also requires a lot more sleep than her siblings do.  As Ariel bites her teeth together, she does have initial contact on the left side before the right side touches.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION  
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars but the presence of the rest of the teeth.  There appears to be significant arthritic changes in the condyles particularly on the left side with a significant loss of vertical dimension much more so than on the right side.  Sinuses look equal in lucency.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  There is what appears to be a huge septal spur coming off the left side of the septum over into the turbinate on the right side.  On the left side there may also be a septal spur coming off.  The turbinates appear to help most of the airway space.  The bony septum appears to be deviated.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have lost volume and is fairly short from the sigmoid to the top of the condyle.  There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There seems to be some irregularities even in the articular eminence.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows decreased superior and posterior joint space although the posterior joint space is not as decreased as the opposite side.  Articular eminence has moderate inclination to it.  The condyle appears arthritic as the opposite side.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle so they come down beneath the articular eminences.  Both condyles appear arthritic.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is a distinct difference in the vertical heights of the left side and the right side of the inferior borders and occlusions with the left side being shorter vertically.  There is a high-occlusal plane angulation.  The maxilla and mandible appear to be AP deficient.  Unfortunately, Ariel was postured forward a little bit with her occlusion that was not in maximum intercuspation.  The joint space is decreased with the distance from the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall being about 7 mm from the base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall also about 6.5 to 7 mm.
ARIEL SHAPIRO 				8/24/05				Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
Severe mandibular hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
High-occlusal plane angulation.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Masticatory dysfunction.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Earaches.
Vertigo.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Sleep apnea symptoms.
Significant daytime somnolence.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being at least 3 mm higher than the right side. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement (13 mm) with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla 8 mm and down graft it posteriorly approximately 7 mm.  
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Possible nasoseptoplasty if clinically large septal spurs are confirmed.
4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 