SARAH SHEAT									06/18/2007

Sarah is 24 years old and is referred by Dr. Duane Keller.  When Sarah was 13 years old she was involved in a motor vehicle accident and she sustained a blow to the mandible.  She sustained bilateral subcondylar fractures and a right parasymphysis fracture.  In September of 1996, approximately the 22nd or so, she was treated with a closed reduction by Dr. Muntz.  She has actually done fairly well until she began developing pain and problems about 2 years ago.  She currently gets occasional popping in her jaw joints that can create severe pain for her.  She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 8 when the joint is popping.  On an average day, however, she usually has no real significant pain.  She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 4 and disability at 0.  She does not have problems with headaches.  The only medication she takes currently is birth control pills.  She has no problems with earaches tinnitus or vertigo and no other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing. She did have orthodontic treatment for about 18 months after her fractures. 

In frontal view, Sarah has some increased fullness on the left side of her face compared to the right side by probably 2 to 3 mm mainly in the masseter muscle area.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Tooth to lip relationship is almost 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 3 to 4 mm off to the right side.  Chin is fairly close to being on the facial profile.  In profile the maxilla may be a little bit deficient by 1 to 2 mm.  The chin appears to be retruded by about 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is very short although the chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined.  The lower third face appears somewhat elongated.  Intraorally, she is missing the right cuspid.  The left lateral incisor is pulled back into the cuspid position.  She has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth.  She is basically a Class I cuspid on the left side and using the right mandibular lateral incisor as a cuspid.  She is Class I on the right side.  She has a little bit of an overjet of about 2 to 3 mm.  She has adequate attached gingiva.  On opening, the right TMJ totally dislocates and subluxates anterior the articular eminence but reduces readily.  She does not have any pain particularly on this side.  Her pain is primarily on the left side.  On the left side the joint functions relatively smoothly but as she opens her mandible deviates significantly towards the left side probably 5 to 6 mm.  She has about 2 mm vertical overbite relationship.  The oropharyngeal area looks good and the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars appear relatively normal.  Cannot visualize tonsils.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side but then shifts over to the right side at the very anterior aspect.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  On the left side, because of a deviated septum, it appears that there may be more airway obstruction on that side than the right side.  She has a significant transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 3 mm lower than the left side in both the maxillary and mandibular arches.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Mandibular right cuspid is gone.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Right mandibular condyle appears to be postured forward somewhat in the fossa.

Left TMJ condyle is anteriorly dislocated in front of the articular eminence.  The condyle is peaked at the top.
SARAH SHEAT				06/18/2007				Page 2

Waters view shows that the nasal septum has some deviation in it.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  There is significant asymmetry to the mandible angle areas.  The left side is foreshortened.  There is a wire in the mandibular right parasymphysis area.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is postured forward in the fossa with an increased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle with some anterior beaking present.  On opening, there is very good translation of that condyle becoming completely anterior to the articular eminence  

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle is severely displaced forward and probably medially.  It is functioning anterior to the articular eminence.  Condyle is almost 20 mm anterior to its normal position. The ramus looks exceptionally foreshortened on this side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Sarah has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  There is a vertical difference between the teeth on the right side and the left side and a definite vertical discrepancy at the angle areas where the left angle is almost 14 mm higher than the angle on the right side.  Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat decreased with distance from the soft palate to posteropharyngeal wall of about 5 mm and at the base of the tongue the posteropharyngeal wall of about 6 mm.  There is a large wire at the inferior border of the mandible on the left side.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Postsurgery for bilateral mandibular subcondylar fractures and right parasymphysis fracture (injury in 09/1996.)
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 3 mm higher than the right side.
Left TMJ severe arthritis and condyle displaced anterior to the articular eminence.  
Right mandibular condylar dislocation with displaced and degenerated articular disc.
Missing mandibular right cuspid.
Mandibular anterior teeth shifted to the right so that the right mandibular lateral incisor is now functioning as the cuspid.  Thus, there are only 3 designated incisors. 
 High occlusal plane angle.
 Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Partial nasal airway obstruction. 
 Snoring.
 Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 TMJ pain.




SARAH SHEAT				06/18/2007				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch. 
CAT scans of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction, mandibular advancement, and transverse leveling of the occlusal plane with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to downgraft the posterior aspect and level the transverse arch.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Augmentation genioplasty. 
Inferior turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
