TREVOR SEARLE									03/10/2010

Trevor is 17 years old and referred by Dr. Scott Franklin, 1910 W. 35th Street #B, Austin, Texas 78703.  Trevor’s primary concerns are:

Lower jaw is overgrown.
Teeth do not fit together.
Popping in his ears when he talks or yawns.
Mild headaches.
Mild TMJ discomfort.

Trevor became aware of his lower jaw overgrowing at about the age of 13.  He has had no treatment to date.  He has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo.  Other joints that bother him include his knees.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  He has some daytime tiredness and is a mouth breather at night when he sleeps.  Trevor rates his headaches at 2, TMJ pain at 2, average daily pain at 1, jaw function at 0, diet at 2, disability at 1.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Trevor has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry but he does have some slight increased fullness in the left mandibular ramus masseter muscle area.  Upper lip length is 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is zero.  The maxillary dental midline is about 1 mm to the right and chin is about 2 mm to the right.  There is a cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 to 1.5 mm higher than the left side.  In profile view, Trevor has a little bit of AP deficiency in the maxilla of probably 3-4 mm.  The chin is actually slightly AP deficient by probably 5 to 6 mm.  He does have some prominence of the nasal dorsum.  Intraorally, Trevor has all of his lower teeth erupted back through the second molars.  There is some mild crowding of the lower anterior teeth and slightly high level inclination of the lower anteriors.  He does have good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, Trevor has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has a full Class III cuspid relationship and an anterior and left-sided posterior cross bite.  The right side is out of cross bite.  He has a reverse deep bite of about 0.5 mm.   Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  

Trevor had a septoplasty done about 3 or 4 months ago.  He can breathe through his nose a bit easier now than before that procedure.  Currently, his right nostril internally is a little bit smaller than the left.  This is partly due to the nasal septum is deviated off towards the right side now at its base.  This narrows the nostril on the right side compared to the right side.  When I held the right nostril open with a nasal scope, he could breathe significantly easier through that side.  When I opened up the left side, he did not notice as significant a change.  To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the right retromandibular area, but no other pain to palpation around the head and neck.  On opening, the joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  On excursion, it seemed like there was a little bit of a glitch in the left joint, but this may be due to just thin discs.  On opening, you could hear popping noises in his joints as though decreasing altitude in an airplane, but I could not palpate any definitive click related to a disc displacement.  The maximal incisal opening was 60 mm, excursion movement in each direction about 7 mm.  Trevor has a slight transverse yaw on the maxilla and mandible, maybe 2 mm in the mandible and 1 mm plus in the maxilla.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of three impacted third molars, the two mandible third molars bilaterally, and maxillary left third molar.  The right third molar is absent.  No significant pathology observed.  

Coronal view shows a significantly enlarged left nasal turbinate.  The sinuses appear clear.  The right turbinate appears more normal in size.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum appears reasonably straight and certainly at the very anterior aspect it is deviated off towards the right side.  The left turbinate appears enlarged and appears to be blocking the airway on that side.  

Left TMJ sagittal views show a condylar head and neck that appear somewhat elongated.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow.  The joint space is thin.  

Right TMJ likewise shows what appears to be a somewhat elongated condylar head and neck.  The joint space seems a little bit thicker on this side and the condyle is a little bit more anteriorly postured in the fossa compared to the opposite side.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has relatively good mediolateral width.  There appears to be some decreased joint space superiorly.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  The joint space appears a little bit thicker than the opposite side.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway appears normal.  

Basic diagnoses for Trevor would be as follows:

Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia. 
Mandibular prognathism.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
Class III occlusion.
Anterior and left posterior cross bite.
Impacted mandibular third molars and maxillary left third molar.
Hypertrophied right nasal turbinate.
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Crowding on lower anterior arch.
Headaches.
Rule out possible TMJ articular disc dislocations.
External nasal deformity.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots 			distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch. 
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament 			repair with Mitek anchors.
	b.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies. 
	d.	Right nasal partial turbinectomy.
	e.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x3. 
	f.	External rhinoplasty.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 