TAMARA SHARP									01-13-03

Tamara is 51 years old and referred by Dr. Roger Nofsinger, 609 Maitland Ave., Altamonte Springs, FL  32701.

Patient History

Tamara had orthodontics in 1965 including extraction of four premolars and was treated in about 15 months. This was done at Indiana University Dental School. She wore a retainer for over 10 years. In 1990, she pursued repeat orthodontics because her teeth are getting more crowded, but because of root resorption was discouraged from doing this. In December of 2000, she did start orthodontics again and had the remaining lower two premolars extracted. On November 27, 2001, she had surgery done to advance the lower jaw approximately 14 mm, widen the upper jaw, and extract the upper wisdom teeth. Apparently during surgery, there was an unfavorable sagittal split which occurred on the left side that was stabilized with some bone plates. Initially after surgery, Tamara noted that here facial symmetry was fairly good but then within just a few months developed some significant facial asymmetry, with the maxilla and mandible being tipped off toward the left side with loss of vertical height on that side. 

Patient Concerns

The primary concerns that Tamara has at this time include the following:
Facial asymmetry
Bite does not fit together well at all
Protruding screws
Jaw line is significantly unbalanced from the left side to the right side
Noises in the jaw joints
Nocturnal clenching
A little bleeding from her nose on occasion when she blows her nose
Feeling of drainage from her nose periodically on the left side where she actually gets drainage out through her nose and feels like it is coming from the eye area
Chronic sinusitis
Partial numbness in the lower lip and a little bit of decreased feeling in the upper lip but a feeling of constant stinging
Speech affected

Tamara has no particular problems with headaches. She rates occasional TMJ pain at a level of 4 and overall pain at about 4, jaw function at 7, diet at 6, and disability at 5. 

Current Medications

Alesse
Baby aspirin
Multivitamins
Calcium supplement

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Tamara has some facial asymmetry with the right side of her face being a little bit more full than the left side. Upper lip length is about 24 mm with an upper tooth to lip relationship of 0. Maxillary dental midline is off to the left side about a millimeter. Nasal tip is off to the left side about 2 mm. Mandibular dental midline also is about a millimeter off to the left side. Chin is probably about 6 mm off toward the left side.

In profile view, she may have just a little bit of AP deficiency in the maxilla, maybe 2 to 3 mm but not too significant. Has a high mandibular occlusal plane angle facial morphology. Chin may be retruded about 6 to 8 mm. Chin-neckline is a little bit shortened. Chin-neck angle is not too well defined.

Intraorally, she is missing all four bicuspids in the lower arch. Other teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled. There is some alveolar bone between the central incisors. Has all three molars on both sides. In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids but has the rest of the teeth back through the second molars present. Fairly close to having a Class I cuspid relationship on the left side and maybe a slight Class II on the right side but fairly close to Class I. She has about 1.5 mm of anterior over bite. Occludes only on the left teeth, and the right teeth appear to be in an open bite situation except for maybe the second molar on that side. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is a little bit elongated. Posterior faucial pillars are posteriorly positioned in the oropharynx.

Intranasally there is a significant nasal septal deviation off toward the right side. The right turbinate as best I can see it appears to be moderate in size. Left turbinate appears enlarged, but there is a good airway space on the left side because of the deviation of the septum over toward the right. 

To palpation, she has some mild tenderness of the TMJs and left styloid area.

On opening, there appears to be some crepitation in both TMJs. On excursive movements, which are somewhat limited, there were some clicking kind of noises noted. Incisal opening is about 45 mm and excursive movement to the right 4 mm and to the left 3 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows evidence of previous surgery. On the left ramus area, there are two bone plates, a 3-hole plate more superiorly and a 4-hole double-T plate toward the inferior border plus a screw in the ascending ramus and a bone plate in the posterior body area with four screws in it. On the right side, there is a bone plate and a single bone screw toward the inferior border. Both condyles appear to have significant osteoarthritic changes, particularly on the left side, and the left side looks like it has lost a lot of vertical height. In the maxilla, there are five bone plates. 

On the left side, there are two bone plates, one with six screws anteriorly, and then in the buttress area, there is a plate with four screws. On the right side, there is an anterior plate with four screws and a posterior plate in the buttress area with four screws. In addition, there is an additional bone screw in the right side through the maxilla, and then anteriorly between the lateral and cuspid, there is a 3-hole bone plate with two screws in. There is also a palatal bone plate present, but I only see screws on one side of the plate and not on the other side. The incisor roots in both quadrants and also in the lower arch the cuspid roots are extremely short in length. Molars in the lower arch also appear to be somewhat foreshortened compared to normal. In the upper arch, bicuspids and the left cuspid appear to have foreshortened roots. Sinuses particularly on the right side appear a little bit cloudy and could be a little mucous retention cyst in that right sinus. Difficult to evaluate the airway. The styloid processes are enlarged and elongated extending down below the inferior border of the mandible on both sides. 

Waters view shows the significant facial asymmetry. Also demonstrates the deviation of the nasal septum off toward the left side. Turbinates don’t look too bad on this view. Sinuses actually look relatively clear, although the right one is a little bit more cloudy than the left one, and there could possibly be a little mucocele in that sinus. Ethmoids and frontal sinuses look okay. Significant difference in vertical height is noted with the left side being much shorter than the right side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Appears to be significant loss of vertical height. The sigmoid notch is only about 3 mm from the articular eminence. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Significantly decreased joint space superiorly and posteriorly. Bone plates previously described are readily seen. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a decreased vertical and posterior joint space. Increased anterior joint space is present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Significantly greater distance from the sigmoid notch to the articular eminence on this side as compared to the opposite side. Entire length of the ramus and condyle is much greater on the right side as compared to the left side.

On open views, there is limited translation bilaterally. The significant arthritis is observed in both joints. 

Cephalometrically, significant vertical asymmetry is noted particularly at the occlusal plane level. Oropharyngeal airway is quite good. Chin is moderately prominent compared to the position of the teeth. There is a moderately inclined occlusal plane angle.

By history, Tamara states that she had a dislocated condyle on the left side when she was about 16 years of age, but it did reduce. Since that time, maybe another dozen times she has had dislocation. Before her first surgery, she was aware of having some occasional clicking in the left jaw but not on the right side.



Basic Diagnoses

Left vertical mandibular deficiency
Left vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Slight AP maxillary deficiency
Significant increased fullness in the right side of the face compared to the left side
Posterior aspect of the maxilla rotated off to the right side
Mandible rotated slightly off to the right side
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 4 mm higher than the right side
Missing all four lower bicuspids and maxillary first bicuspids
Open bite on the right side
Severe root resorption on maxillary and mandibular anterior teeth
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with severe degenerative changes and significant condylar resorption present on the left side
Severe nasal deviation
Numerous bone plates and bone screws to maxilla and mandible

Recommended Treatment

Testing at the environmental center to rule out hypersensitivities to the materials in the total joint prostheses

Presurgical orthodontics
Continue to align and level maxillary arch
Continue to align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, meniscectomies, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to downgraft the left side and rotate the posterior aspect toward the left
Fat graft to bilateral TMJs
Nasal septoplasty

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

TAMARA AND HER HUSBAND TOOK THE MRI FILMS WITH THEM.