MELINDA SHOCKLEY								05-14-04

Melinda is 53 years old and will be 54 next week. No problems with earaches, tinnitus, and gets occasional vertigo. She gets headaches at about a level of 5 in the temporal area that occur about four times per week. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, and this is more prominent when she tries to eat. Overall pain on an average day is about a level of 5, jaw function at 7, diet at 7, and disability at 7. She takes ibuprofen, Combipatch (hormones), Rebif (for MS), Nu-Lev, Benefiber, and Gas-X. She has no other joint problems. She has severe difficulty chewing. She has developed significant GI problems since I last saw her secondary to inability to chew her food properly. Her GI problems can cause her severe abdominal pain to where she can’t even stand up. She had a colonoscopy done recently, and it was okay, and there is no other aggravating problem from that evaluation. She does have MS. It is very difficult for her to chew since she occludes only on her second molars on the left side. All other teeth are out of occlusion. She breathes through her mouth predominantly. She has severe snoring problems. She may have some apneic episodes as she does tend to hold her breath at times. She does suffer from depression primarily related to the fact that she has all these pain factors and has been unable to proceed on with her treatment. To palpation, she has some moderate tenderness over the TMJs but none through the rest of the head and neck area. Maximum incisal opening is 32 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 8 mm and to the left 5 mm. She has crepitus in both joints with it being worse on the left side as compared to the right side. She is missing the maxillary cuspids, and, therefore, her first bicuspids will function as the cuspids, and she, therefore, is in a Class III cuspid relationship. She has an openbite of about 3 mm. Today her left turbinate is relatively small, and her airway is actually better on the left side even though the septum is deviated a little bit off toward the left. The right turbinate is enlarged today and looks a little bit more inflamed. However, Melinda feels that she can breathe better through the right side than the left side, so where may be more of an obstruction posteriorly in the nasal airway. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Right TMJ tomograms show that it appears the arthritis is worse than it was on 04/02/01. Appears to be a little bit more extrusion of the condyle posteriorly and may be decreased posterior joint space posteriorly in the radiographs taken 05/14/04 as compared to 04/02/01. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows significant osteoarthritic changes in the joint with anterior beaking and a pseudocyst in the condylar head. Significantly decreased joint space. This joint is so bad there are not a whole bunch of radiographic changes between the 05/14/04 x-ray and the 04/02/01. There is essentially bone on bone function in this joint, thus, the greater amount of crepitation on the left side as compared to the right side. 

Impression:
	Generalized advanced arthritis in the TMJs