MELODY SHEPHERD									06-30-04

Melody is 15 years old and referred by Dr. Al Bishop, 3001 Brown Trail, #101, Hurst, TX  76021.

Patient History

She had a pilonidal cyst removed in 11/2003. Melody is in good health with no major medical problems. She takes no medications and is not aware of any allergy problems. No other joint problems. No known allergies. No known problems wearing jewelry. 

Her problems began about the age of 5 or at least it was noted that the lower jaw was out in front of the upper jaw. Dr. Tony Viazis treated her for about 8 months with a facemask technique to try to advance the maxilla forward. Apparently initially it seemed to be working fairly well, but by the time the facemask was removed and impressions were taken for a retainer, relapse had already occurred. The problem with the jaw alignment is unknown as far as the etiology. She has really had no other treatment except for that facemask treatment for the jaw concerns. She has no problems with headaches. Rates her TMJ pain at 5, overall pain at 6, jaw function, diet, and disability at 0. Melody had previously seen Dr. Bishop in ’98 but just about a month or two ago she reinitiated seeing Dr. Bishop.

Patient Concerns

Teeth and jaws don’t fit together well at all
Difficulties eating and chewing
Pain in the jaws
Has significant problems with ringing in her ears
Gets occasional earaches
Gets occasional vertigo

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Melody has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Some asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0. Maxillary midline appears to be about a millimeter off to the right side. Mandibular dental midline is about 4 mm off to the left side. Chin is about 6 mm off to the left side. When Melody closes her jaws all the way, she appears to be vertically over-closed.

In profile, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm. Chin is a little bit strong by maybe about 4 mm or so. Chin-neckline is fairly long but with it sloped down toward the base of the neck. No really defined chin-neckline. When she bites down into maximum occlusion, the mandible appears quite strong, and chin appears strong by probably 6 to 8 mm. She has a slight C-shaped curve to the upper lip.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch. Lower incisors appear to be in lingual inclination. Some spacing between the right first and second bicuspids. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has a super Class III occlusion on the right side and a full Class III malocclusion on the left side. She has an anterior left posterior crossbite. She has a reverse deepbite of about 5 mm. Transverse cant of the maxilla at the cuspid area is fairly level. Mandible, however, is down 1 to 2 mm on the right side compared to the maxilla. Right eye might be a couple of millimeters higher than the left one. Oropharynx appears clear, and the tissues appear healthy and relatively normal. She has her tonsils present, but they are relatively small.

Intranasally, she has a moderately hypertrophied turbinate on the left side, but it is up high with what appears to be good clearance beneath it. Does approach the septum but doesn’t quite touch it. On the right side, the turbinate appears a little bit more normal in size. Maximum incisal opening is 65 mm, 54 mm without significant pain or discomfort. Excursive movements to the right are about 8 mm and to the left 5 mm. Joints seem to function smoothly. Some mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles but no other tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses appear relatively clear. She has four impacted third molars. All the other teeth are in place. Airway looks reasonable, although the left side is decreased in the airway passage compared to the right side. Difficult to evaluate both condyles. Some minor areas of calcification in the mandibular arch beneath the first bicuspid. A couple of areas of calcification up between the maxillary central incisors and the left central and lateral incisors.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. Left side of the nose appears pretty much obliterated, although she has a good airway on the right side. Left angle of the mandible is lower than the right angle of the mandible. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be slightly posteriorly positioned in the fossa with decreased superior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. Condylar head and neck appear long in length.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Decreased superior joint space. Articular eminence is moderate in size. 

On opening, there is good translation of both jaw joints. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows she has a good airway. She has a Class III skeletal relationship. There is a Bolton’s difference of almost 3 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

Deviate mandibular prognathism
Rule out condylar hyperplasia, right side worse than left side
Bilateral TMJ posterior displacement of the articular discs
Maxillary AP hypoplasia
Super Class III occlusion on the right side and Class III occlusion on the left side
Anterior and left posterior crossbite
Reverse deep bite of 5 mm
Accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 to 2 mm lower than the left side
Mandibular dental midline 4 mm off to the left, chin 6 mm off to the left
TMJ pain
Mild myofascial pain
Tinnitus
Earaches
Vertigo
Masticatory dysfunction
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Open about a millimeter of space around each upper lateral incisor and close the diasthema between the centrals and between the cuspids and first bicuspids. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies if they are required
Align and level mandibular arch. Try to intrude lower anterior six teeth 1 to 2 mm if possible. Consider stripping lower anterior teeth removing about 1.5 of tooth structure but probably no more to keep from flaring the lower teeth excessively forward

Evaluate for disproportionate growth and condylar hyperplasia

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Consider possible high condylectomies if active condylar hyperplasia is verified
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate mandible back on the facial midline, level the transverse occlusal plane, and move it posteriorly
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward, upright the anterior segment, and maximize occlusal fit

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
