MELODY SHIPLEY									02-17-03

Melody is 16 years old and referred by Michael Steffen, DDS, 1601 S. Blvd., Edmond, OK  73013.

Patient History

At birth, Melody had a central line that was placed and then later on had some plastic closure to correct the scar. Melody was premature at birth, approximately six weeks, and had some airway distress problems. When Melody was four years old, she fell and hit her chin and had about four or five stitches in her chin area. She did see Dr. Robert Talley. At that time, she was locking and popping. Dr. Talley made a splint for her. They then moved to Houston and saw a TMJ specialist there, who made a different kind of splint. Dr. Steffen has had Melody in orthodontic appliances since January 29, 2002. Melody has had previous splint therapy by Dr. Talley and had a splint made by the TMJ specialist in Houston but lost it within the first month and never went back. She saw an orthodontist in Houston for two appointments but never followed through with treatment. Dr. King also has made a splint for Melody, and then, of course, she is under orthodontic treatment with Dr. Steffen currently. 

She has had two oral surgery consultations already, one with Dr. Steve Sullivan. Dr. Sullivan has recommended apparently doing TMJ surgery to put the disc back in place with a Mitek anchor and coming back six months later and doing some jaw surgery. Dr. Baker suggested doing only jaw surgery and ignoring the joints. They are here for a third opinion.

Melody’s TMJ problems began at about the age of 11 of unknown etiology. As mentioned above, she has had some extensive splint therapy treatment and the orthodontics. She had her third molars removed on December 26, 2002, by Dr. Jim Baker. She has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, no vertigo, and no other joints bother her. She may have some nocturnal clenching and bruxism as it is sort of inherent in the family. She rates headaches that occur about two or three times per week at a level of 7 in the frontal and temporal area. She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 4, diet at 6, and disability at 3. 

Primary Concerns 
Her primary concerns are as follows:

TMJ pain
headaches
Pain in jaw muscles
Popping in jaw joints
Severe snoring
Earaches
Difficulty eating and chewing

Current Medications

Minocycline 100 mg b.i.d. 
Tazorac 0.1% ointment at bedtime

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Melody has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are fairly well on the facial midline. Chin may deviate just slightly to the left about a millimeter or so.

In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose. May be just slight AP deficiency in the maxilla maybe 1 to 2 mm. Chin appears to be probably 8 to 10 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is a little bit short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined. 

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. In centric relation, she has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally. She has an anterior open bite of probably 1 to 2 mm. Has an overjet of about 3 mm. Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level. Oropharynx appears clear, and soft palate and uvula look relatively normal. 

Intranasally, turbinate on the right side appears a little bit large, and on the left side, it appears a little bit more normal. Airway looks reasonably good. Columella is somewhat wide. The nostrils are slightly constricted but not too significantly. Luminal valves are a little bit constricted. Holding her nostrils open significantly improved her ability to breathe through her nose. 

Maximal incisal opening is 46 mm, but the comfort zone is only to about 25 mm. Excursive movements are 8 mm to the right and 9 mm to the left. On opening, she would occasionally have a definite pop in the right joint with the disc going back into position at about 35 mm of opening and a closing click at 25. This click, however, was not always there. Left joint seemed to function reasonably smoothly. To palpation, she had some moderate tenderness over the masseters and high moderate over the TMJs and high moderate to severe over the styloid areas. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses are clear. Turbinates appear quite large, more so on the left side than the right side. All four third molars are absent. The condyles look somewhat abnormal with evidence of osseous changes being present. The condylar head and neck appear longer in length on the right side than the left side. The left side shows what appears to be some significant flattening on the anterior aspect of the condyle. No other significant pathology is noted or seen.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. The septum appears fairly straight. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. Does appear relatively symmetric.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a hockey stick shape to it. Condyle appears narrow anteroposteriorly. A little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Increased anterior joint space, and the superior and posterior joint spaces are probably a little bit smaller than normal. This may have been affected somewhat with jaw position and/or previous splint therapy. Condylar neck appears thin and somewhat elongated.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite small anteroposteriorly compared to the size of the fossa. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present. The condylar neck looks quite narrow. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Condyle may be a little bit more centered in the joint as compared to the other side, although the superior joint may be slightly decreased. 
Opening views show good translation of the condyles bilaterally, both going beyond the articular eminence. The left articular eminence is significantly steeper than the right side.

Cephalometrically, the mandible appears to be in a skeletal Class II position and is fairly significantly retruded. Oropharyngeal airway appears narrow with the airway being only about 3 mm at the soft palate level and about 4 mm at the base of the tongue. Neither Melody or her family are aware of her snoring when she sleeps. She does sleep predominantly on her side and is uncomfortable trying to sleep on her back. She does have some adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx that is still present. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption with articular disc dislocations without reduction on the left side and an occasional reduction on the right side
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Slight AP maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency 
Class II end-on occlusion 
Anterior open bite
In centric relation, occludes predominantly on the molars with the rest of the teeth essentially being out of occlusion
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 to 4 mm (normal 11 mm)
Ear pain
Severe snoring

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Continue to align and level maxillary arch
Continue to align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Multiple maxillary osteotomies with bone plate stabilization and hydroxyapatite grafting
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies for counterclockwise rotation and advancement

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
