ALLISON SHEFFIELD								07/21/2008

Allison is 15 years old.  Referred by Nathaniel Ritter, DDS, 72 Remick Blvd., Springboro, OH 45066.  Allison is in good health with no major medical problems.  She takes no medications.  Her primary concerns are as follows:

Anterior open bite.
Difficulties biting and chewing some foods. 
Difficulties breathing through the nose.
Predominantly a mouth breather particularly at night.  

Allison has had previous orthodontics for phase 1 from July 2001 to November 2002.  At the completion of that treatment, her jaws were in good alignment and she had an anterior vertical overbite.  Since that time, she has developed into a Class II open bite.  She has had no other treatment to date.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Allison has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21  mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm.  The maxillary midline may be off to the right side by about 1 mm.  The mandibular dental midline may be off to the left side about 1 mm.  The chin is fairly close to being on the midline.  Allison has almost 10 mm of lip incompetence.  Allison has a head postured forward and neck position.  She has some prominence in nasal dorsum.  She has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 to 5 mm.  Chin is retruded probably about 15 to 18 mm.  The chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not defined.   Back in frontal view, the right mandibular ramus may be 3 to 4 mm more lateral than the left one.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth erupted in including her third molars, although the left one is partially soft tissue impacted, but the right one is pretty much in.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She actually has a Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally being about 1 to 2 mm Class III on the left side and closer to 5 to 6 mm Class III on the right side.  The right cuspid in the lower arch may be forward 1 to 2 mm.  Transversely, the arch appears somewhat narrow in the bicuspid and first molar area.  There is some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch with the cuspids blocked labially onto the arch.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.  There is a slight increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch as well.  Anteroposteriorly, the upper arch appears fairly symmetric in the cuspid area.  The right cuspid may be about 1 mm lower than the left cuspid.  She has about a 2 mm anterior open bite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates are fairly large particularly on the left side where it appears to be touching the septum.  The nostrils are moderately narrow.  Luminal valves may be moderately constricted.  No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is about 52 mm.  Excursion movements are 8 mm in each direction.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of all of the teeth with the lower third molars erupting in and the upper ones probably getting close the erupting in as well.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  It is difficult to evaluate the condyles.  
Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The bony nasal septum is relatively straight.  The turbinates are enlarged particularly in the left side with what appears to be a significantly constricted  nasal airway.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows that a condyle that has reasonably good morphology.  Joint space may be slightly decreased vertically.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that may have some flattening on the posterior head.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be decreased vertical and posterior joint space.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both joints. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Allison has a high occlusal plane angle, anterior open bite, elongated anterior mandible, adenoid in the posterior pharyngeal area with a significantly decreased airway at the nasal aspect and a somewhat decreased oropharyngeal airway.  Oropharyngeal airway up at the posterior aspect of the nose measures about 3 to 4 mm adjacent to the adenoid mass.  The posterior pharyngeal wall of the airway measures about 5 to 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 6 to 7 mm at the base of the tongue. 

Basic diagnoses for Allison includes the following:    

Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR). 
AP mandibular deficiency.  
AP maxillary deficiency.  
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency, but slightly anterior maxillary excess.
High occlusal plane angle.
Class III occlusion on the right side, slight Class III on the left side. 
Anterior open bite. 
Crowding of the lower anterior arch. 
Anterior mandibular vertical access and AP microgenia.
Malaligned third molars. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasopharyngeal adenoid hyperplasia. 
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Place a step in the archwire so that the 4 incisors are aligned in an elevated occlusal plane level compared to the posterior teeth so that these teeth are not extruded.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to expand the bicuspids and first molars some.  Consider slenderizing the lower anterior teeth to keep from flaring them too far forward. 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla forward in the front and down posteriorly as well as correcting any transverse discrepancies that may be present.  
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance it vertically and decrease the chin.
Bilateral partial turbinectomies. 
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy. 
3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
