VERONICA SHEA								12/12/2011

Veronica is 48 years old, birth date 08/29/1963.  She is referred by Dr. Lang in Elmhurst, IL.

Veronica believes her jaw joint problems began sometime in her 20s of unknown etiology.  She had orthodontics at the age of 14 for about 1 year.  She has had no other treatment for her jaw or TMJ issues.  Currents symptoms include headaches at a level of 5 that occur predominantly just in the right frontal area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 8, diet at 5, disability at 5.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, gets occasional vertigo, but no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her shoulders, elbows, and she does have a bulging disk in her neck.  She is allergic to PENICILLIN.  She has no known allergies to jewelry.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  She does have severe snoring, moderate daytime somnolence, and she has moderate sleep apnea.  She breathes predominantly through her mouth when she sleeps and also breathes a lot through her mouth during the day as well.  She has probably a moderate sleep disorder as well. 

Medications:

Celexa 20 mg.
Temazepam 20 mg.  

She has been taking the Celexa and Temazepam for 19 years.  These medications have significantly decreased and controlled her pain levels.   Veronica was diagnosed with fibromyalgia in 1992.  She has had her head tremor or twitching for a long time also. 

In frontal view, Veronica has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  There is slight increased prominence on the right side compared to the left side by probably 3 to 4 mm.  Within the past 6 months, she has had some filler put in around her chin implant which she received the chin implant in 1982.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm to the right and the chin is probably about 3 to 4 mm to the right.  Veronica does have a head tremor and this is worsened with caffeine.  She did have some caffeine today which has affected her somewhat.  Intraorally, Veronica has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has adequate attached gingiva, although somewhat thin around the central incisors.  She probably has a good 5 to 6 mm of crowding in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally, being about 3 mm Class II.  The maxillary left lateral incisor is blocked out of the arch slightly.  She has just a slight over jet of about 1 to 2 mm.  She does have about  2 mm of vertical overbite.  The maxilla is fairly flat transversely.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy and relatively normal, except the fascial pillars appear a little bit constricted but cannot tell if that was in her relaxed position or not.  There could be some constricture with the fascial pillars.  Could not observe the tonsils.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated significantly off towards the right side anteriorly and the cartilaginous portion seems to block most of the airway.  Nostrils and columella appear relatively normal.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the masseter muscles, medial pterygoids, shoulders, right TMJ, and milder tenderness over the left TMJ.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  The maxillary incisal opening is 38 mm, but opening without pain and discomfort only 13 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is about 10 mm and to the left 3 mm, although it was difficult for her to perceive how to do those movements easily.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and she is missing the mandibular right second bicuspid and has an implant replacement.  She has crowns on all of the molar teeth except for the right first molar.  She has root canals on the mandibular left first molar and on the maxillary left second bicuspid.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  The turbinates appear fairly large.  

Axial view shows that the septum is deviated off towards the right side and turbinates are enlarged and appear to block a good portion of the functional airway.  The sinus lining on the right side may be slightly increased in thickness.  Also on the floor of the left sinus, there is some slight increased thickness of the sinus membrane.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that she has had significant resorption of the articular eminence.  The eminence is quite flat.  The condylar head has been resorbed way and is flat and broad in an anteroposterior dimension.  The condyle is functioning beneath the remnants of the articular eminence.  There appears to be bone deposition posterior to the condyle extending from the posterior fossa wall.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe resorption.  Likewise, the articular eminence has resorbed away the condyle is functioning forward where the articular eminence used to be and appears to have formed a new fossa anterior.  There is significantly decreased vertical joint space.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is extremely narrow and sitting at the lateral aspect of the fossa with a significantly decreased lateral joint space.  It appears in some areas there could be a bone-on-bone contact.  However, in the mid part of the fossa, there is increased soft tissue thickness in parts of the joint area.  The condyle is very narrow and probably about a third of normal width. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe resorption, although the head is slightly wider in width.  There is a medial osteophytic extension of the condyle that appears to articulate in the depth of the fossa.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  There is significantly decreased vertical joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Veronica has a maxilla that is AP deficient as well as posterior vertically deficient.  The mandibular is significantly AP deficient.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  She appears to have a 2 mm overjet relationship.  She has an oropharyngeal airway of less than 2 mm at the soft palate level and probably about 4 mm at the base of the tongue.  She has probably a Silastic chin implant in place that augments the chin probably about 8 mm.  She has a high occlusal plane angulation.

Basic diagnoses for Veronica would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis compatible with rheumatoid arthritis. 
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion. 
High occlusal plane angle of 31 degrees (normal equals 8 degrees).
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Moderate crowding of the mandibular anterior arch. 
Mild crowding of maxillary anterior arch.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal septal deviation..
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Periodontal defect lower anterior arch.
Sleep apnea. 
Oversized Silastic chin implant.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Periodontal evaluation and grafting of lower anterior arch.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 			removing at least 3 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower 			incisors too far forward.  Consider some expansion of the mandibular 
arch.  
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a 				counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 		direction.  
	c.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
	d.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).  
	e.	Bilateral partial turbinectomies.  
	f.	Nasal septoplasty.
	g.	Remove excessively large Silastic chin implant.
	h.	Place small Medpor chin implant.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 	