HANNA SHOCKLEY								07-29-02

Hanna is 18 years old.

Patient History

She developed TMJ problems about one year of unknown etiology. 

She has some earache problems, some tinnitus, but no vertigo. No other joints besides the TMJs cause her any problems. She gets headaches about three to four times per week in the frontal and temporal area that she registers about a level of 5, TMJ pain at 8, overall pain at 7, TMJ function at 4, diet and disability at 1.

Current Medications

Currently she takes the following medications:

BCP.
Ibuprofen.
Zantac.

Patient Concerns

Primary concerns that Hanna has include the following:

TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Hanna has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are shifted about a millimeter off to the left side.

In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency, probably about 3 to 4 mm. AP position of the chin appears fairly good. Chin-neckline is fairly normal in length, although the chin-neck angle is just moderately defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Has a 3 x 3 retainer, lower anterior arch. She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship bilaterally. She has an anterior open bite of about 1.5 mm. Open bite is mainly associated with the cuspids on forward.

On opening, she has a very distinct click at 20 mm in the left joint, and on the right side as she starts to open, at about 10 mm, there is a more subtle pop. On closing on the right side, there is a click at about 5 mm. On the left side, there is a more obvious click at about 15 mm of closing. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the styloid areas, moderate pain over the masseters, and minimal pain over the SCMs.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars. Sinuses appear relatively clear with maybe a little bit more cloudiness on the left side as compared to the right side. Turbinates look moderate in size with a good airway visibility. Difficult to see the top of the condyle on the right side, but the left side condyle has a little bit of flattening on the anterior aspect and at the posterior aspect. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle and fossa with relatively normal anatomy. Articular disc appears to be in position with good vertical joint space present.

Left TMJ tomogram shows some flattening of the anterior head of the condyle and some anterior beaking. Articular eminence is fairly steep in angulation. Posterior joint space may be a little bit decreased. Anterior joint space appears increased.

On opening, there is good translation in both joints. Arthritic changes are seen fairly well on the open view. 

Cephalometrically, she is pretty much skeletal Class I just with an anterior open bite of about 2 mm. Oropharyngeal airway appears fairly good with some decreased airway dimension at the base of the tongue in the hyoid area where the airway measures only about 5 to 6 mm.

By clinical assessment, Hanna has bilateral displaced articular discs with opening click on the right side at 10, closing click at 5, opening click on the left at 20, and closing click at 15. 

The MRI was misread by the radiologist, and I will try to have Dr. Carl Gladstad evaluate the MRIs with me.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reductions.
Mandibular hyperplasia.
Anterior mandibular hypoplasia.
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
External nasal deformity.
Recommended Treatment

Recommended treatment for Hanna would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch, placing a step in the arch wire to align the four incisors in an elevated plane. Tip the roots of the incisors mesially and the cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization.
Anterior maxillary osteotomy with bone plate stabilization.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4.
External rhinoplasty.