EMILY SHEEHY									12/28/2007

Emily is 22 years old and is referred by Dr. Bill Hang.  Emily is in good health no major medical problems.  Her TMJ problems began when she was about 13 years of age when she was aware of clicking and popping in her joints.  On January 9, 1997, Emily began her first phase of orthodontic treatment.  The second phase was begun on 02/01/1999.  She was approximately 14 years old when she began treatment.  She was 11 years and 6 months old for phase I and 13 years and 6 months of age when she began phase II.  She finished in March 2002.  Therefore, she was under orthodontic treatment for approximately 5 years.  The clicking and popping that she experienced that began at the age of 13 eventually disappeared but she is not sure exactly when that occurred.  Now she will hear some noises on wide opening.  Previous records show that originally she had good jaw projection when she was 13.  The mandible became more retruded.

Emily currently takes Minocycline and also a topical facial cream.  She takes no other medications.  

She gets headaches at about a level of 5 that occur at different areas on in her head but are in the area of the frontal, temporal and posterior head area.  She rates her average TMJ pain at 2 with the right side being worse than the left side.  Average daily pain at 2.  She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 1 and disability at 0.  She gets no earaches, tinnitus or hearing loss but has moderate vertigo.  

Other joints that bother her include her right elbow, as well as her knees and hips particularly when she runs.  She has recently been told that she has scoliosis.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  Her pain problems are worse in the mornings.  Her jaw joints used to click and pop but then stopped and she is not sure exactly when they stopped.  She has had her four third molars removed.  

In frontal view, Emily appears to have to have fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is 1 mm to the left.  Mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline as is the chin.  In profile view, Emily has probably about 3 to 4 mm of maxillary deficiency.  Chin is about 15 AP deficient.  Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not defined.  Intraorally, Emily has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some spacers in place right now.  There is some mild crowing in the lower anterior arch.  She has adequate attached gingiva although a little bit thin vertically.  She has slight accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.  In the upper arch, Emily has all of her upper teeth back through the second molars.  She has some spacers there as well.  She has a Class I cuspid relationship on the left side and Class I end-on cuspid relationship on the right side being probably 4 mm Class II.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  She has a posterior cross bite on the right side affecting basically just the first molars.  Oropharyngeal areas look good and tissues look normal.  She has a slight constricture of the faucial pillars.  Intranasally, she appears to have a good airway.  The left turbinate is slightly enlarged compared to the right side but still appears to be good airway.  The septum is straight.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the masseters, TMJs, temporalis muscles and styloid areas.  Joints function relatively smoothly.  

EMILY SHEEHY				12/28/2007				Page 2

Incisal opening maximally is about 37 mm but only 21 mm without significant discomfort.  Excursive movements are about 5 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Significant arthritis is present in the right condyle with significant loss of vertical height of the condyle and with increased anteroposterior dimension.  Articular eminence appears somewhat flat.  The left condyle appears to have some morphology and the articular disc appears moderately steep.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses are and the nasal airway appears to be good.  The left turbinate is larger than the right turbinate.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a joint that has somewhat of a flat articular eminence.  Vertical height of the condyle appears to have lost volume.  Condyle is somewhat broad anteroposteriorly.  There is some joint space superior and posterior to the condyle but cannot see the anterior aspect.  Condylar head and neck are quite short in length. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be flattened posteriorly.  There may be some decreased joint space.  Articular eminence is much steeper on this side as compared to the opposite side.  On opening, there is some restriction of translation although the condyles move down almost onto the articular eminence area.  Vertical height of the right fossa is quite short. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Emily has an AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency.  Oropharyngeal airway however, at the base of the tongue is about 9 mm.  Soft palate also is about 9 to 10 mm.  There is just a slight tip in the transverse occlusal plane with the right side being about 1 mm higher than the left side.  

Dental model analysis shows that the left maxillary cuspid is about 2 mm posterior to the right side and in the lower arch the right cuspid is about 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  Transversely, there is an occlusal cant of about 1 mm at the cuspid area but a little bit greater posteriorly.  Dental model analysis also confirms the crossbite in the first molar area.  Also, there is a Class II end-on occlusion on the right side.  Basically a Class I occlusion on the left side.  Curve of Spee in the lower arch is increased approximately 3 mm.  Emily has a tooth size discrepancy of approximately 5 mm in the anterior arch.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with significant deformation and closed-lock situation, right side worse than left side.
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Slight Class II end-on occlusion on the left side by 2 mm and Class II end-on occlusion on the right side by 5 mm. 

EMILY SHEEHY				12/28/2007				Page 3

Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 2 mm higher than the left side. 
Arch asymmetry with the maxillary left cuspid being about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid and mandibular left cuspid anterior to the right cuspid by about 1 mm.  
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4 to 5 mm.  
 Accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch with the incisors being about 3 mm higher than the bicuspids. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
MRI of left and right TMJs (to be performed on 12/29/2007.)
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip maxillary incisors forward opening up a space between the upper laterals and cuspids of 1 mm on each side.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally for interdental osteotomies if necessary.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 3 mm of tooth structure.  Try to decrease the accentuated curve of Spee.  
Surgery treatment option 1.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen)
Bilateral coronoidplasties.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and down graft the posterior aspect.
      Surgical treatment option 2.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and down graft the posterior aspect of the maxilla. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
