AMBER SHOCKEY									04-11-02

Amber is 25 years old and referred by Dr. Moody Alexander.

Patient History

She had jaw surgeries in 1991, 1992, and 1994. She had knee surgery in 1993. She has been told that she may have Raynaud’s and may have mitral valve prolapse.

Patient Concerns

The primary concerns that Amber has include the following:

Teeth and jaws don’t fit together properly.
Teeth seem to move and shift around.
She gets pain in her teeth.
Headache.
TMJ pain.
Popping in her ears that then creates echoing in her head.
Difficulties eating and chewing.

Apparently Amber had a pretty good bite relationship when she was 15 years old. She had an osseous genioplasty done by Dr. Tom Weil in December of 1991. In April of 1992, she tripped on her shoelace and fell on her chin and broke her jaw. She had a closed reduction done. She was told by Dr. Weil that she shattered her lower jaw. 

Then her bite began to get a lot worse on both sides, and in 1994 she had a mandibular advancement. I suspect she probably had idiopathic condylar resorption perhaps initiated or stimulated by the fall. Shortly after that, her bite began to change and shift again. For about seven months her bite remained reasonably stable but then began to shift and change again.

Approximately two years after the surgery, she began having problems with her bite and went back to Dr. Mizell for orthodontic help. He made some plastic retainers for her but about every two months she would chew through them. Dr. Mizell then put her into a harder retainer that opened her bite up. She wore that for about a year and then moved to Dallas. Dr. Moody Alcxander then started treating her and used a tooth positioner which has helped Amber more than anything else that she has had up-to-date. She has worn that positioner for about three years.

She gets earaches occasionally when she gets popping in her ears. She gets occasional tinnitus but no vertigo. She gets a feeling of “sticking” in her jaw joint, particularly on the left side. She doesn’t remember having clicks or pops in her jaw joints. She feels her teeth are constantly aching and shifting. If she doesn’t wear a tooth positioner, she has significant increase in pain and discomfort. She probably has some nocturnal clenching and bruxism problems.



She has some numbness in her lower lip at a level of 2 of 3 and also in the chin area. She rates her headaches at about a level 5 that occur about a couple of times a week usually in the afternoons and cause her to ache pretty much all over her head including the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, and she rates her overall level of pain and discomfort at about 7. She rates her jaw function at 7, diet at 5, and disability at 4. Her ability to concentrate is affected significantly because of the jaw problems.

To palpation, she has some mild tenderness around the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, and SCMs. She has no other joints that bother her.

She is allergic to PENICILLIN. Cheap earrings tend to cause a rash for her around her ears.

Current Medications

She apparently takes the following medications:

Cylert.
Estrostep.
She takes occasional Tylenol for her headaches.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Amber has fair good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 5.5 to 6 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline. 

In profile view, she may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency. Mandible appears a little bit AP deficient probably about 8 mm. She has some hyperfunction of the mentalis muscle. Chin-neckline appears short. Chin-neck angle is not well defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She appears to have good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. Teeth appear to be nicely aligned and leveled. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. In centric relation, she has Class II end-on cuspid relationship by about 3 mm. She has an anterior open bite of 1 to 2 mm. She occludes only on the right side, and the left teeth are out of occlusion. Transversely, the occlusal plane appears fairly level in the maxilla, but in the mandible, the left cuspid is down probably about 1 mm to 1.5 mm. Oropharynx is clear.

Intranasally, the turbinates appear somewhat enlarged. There is a wide columella base. On putting the speculum in the nose, she does get better air intake. However, she states that she feels that she breathes through her nose when she sleeps because of wearing the tooth positioner, which she cannot function without. If she doesn’t wear the tooth positioner, she cannot sleep. She is tired a lot during the day, however. She has a little synechia going from the right turbinate to the septum.
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but all other teeth are present. Roots on maxillary incisors and bicuspids are particularly short with crown length greater than root length. She has had previous chin surgery evident by interosseous wires still present. She has three bone screws in each ramus. Significant degenerative changes in both joints. Sinuses appear relatively clear. 

Left TMJ tomogram, closed view, shows a condyle with significant osteoarthritic changes, and  some what narrow anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is extremely steep. Pseudocysts in the condylar head. Joint space looks fairly reasonable. Bone screws in ramus indicative of previous surgery.

Left TMJ open view shows significant restriction of translation of the joint. Decreased joint space anteriorly between the condylar head and the articular eminence.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with significant degenerative changes and decreased joint space vertically. Pseudocysts in the condylar head. Condyle appears narrow anteroposteriorly. There is some unusual shaping to the condylar neck. A lot of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Evidence of three bone screws in the ramus indicative of previous ramus surgery. Translation is significantly restricted, and there is a decreased anterior joint space between the condylar head and the articular eminence.

Waters view shows the sinuses to be relatively clear. Turbinates appear large, particularly on the right side. Septum is deviated a little bit toward the left.

On cephalometric evaluation, it appears she has some vertical maxillary excess anteriorly. High occlusal plane angulation. Mandible is slight II skeletal relationship with an anterior open bite and a Class II end-on occlusion. Oropharyngeal airway is constricted at the base of the tongue about 6 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with significant deformation and nonreduction.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Slight AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Anterior open bite.
Class II end-on occlusion.
High occlusal plane angulation.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.
Extremely short roots particularly on the maxillary incisors and bicuspids.

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch at two occlusal plane levels. Align the four incisors at an elevated plane level by placing a step in the arch wire. Open approximately 1 mm of space around each upper lateral incisor to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy. Be careful because of the short roots. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally.
Align and level the mandibular arch. Try to elevate lower incisors approximately 1 mm.

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect superiorly, level the occlusal plane, and correct any transverse problems that may arise.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomy to advance to the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

Consider aesthetic periodontal surgery to expose more of the maxillary clinical crowns
