ANNE SHIREY 									09/26/2007

Anne is 34 years old and is referred by Dr. Dan Clifford, 7520 Montgomery NE, Albuquerque, NM.  Previous surgeries that Anne has had includes C-section in August of 1996 and removal of benign tumor in her left foot in March of 2007.  

Anne has had unremitting migraine headaches since August 26, 2006.  She took her daughter to a birthday party and developed a headache and she has essentially had headaches almost since that time.  She gets headaches every day and it has never gone away.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Neurontin 3200 mg per day. 
Fluoxetine 20 mg per day.
Lortab 10/650, 6 per day.
Amitriptyline 20 mg q.h.s.
Valium 10 mg q.h.s.

Anne has lost over 20 pounds of weight.  Most of this weight loss has been more recently and she has extreme difficulties eating.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Jaw pain.
Inability to open her jaws.
Inability to chew.
Severe migraines.
Deterioration of the jaw joints.

Anne did have migraine headaches in college but it is just since August 26, 2006, that they have been this severe and is continuous for her creating inability to eat.  Anne remembers that she began developing headaches as a teenager during her first year in college.  She is unaware of any TMJ related symptoms.  In March of 2007, Anne fell and struck her face on a doorknob.  Since that time she has had significant pain in her jaw joints.  She was not aware of having TMJ pain prior to that incident.  Prior to the incident of her most current problems Anne had a mouthguard that she wore at night to help keep her from clenching.  After August 26, 2006, when she developed her problems, she had 3 splints made, none of which helped her pain and headache situation.  Anne gets headaches directly behind the left eye where she feels like there is an ice pick in her eye at a level of 9.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain around 6, jaw function at 9, diet at 9 and disability at 8.  She has no problems with earaches.  She gets occasional tinnitus and has a moderate amount of vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching her teeth at night and is not sure that she does it during the day.  

Anne has very good facial symmetry and balance in the frontal and also the profile view.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars on both sides.  Her teeth are nicely aligned and level.  She has a very nice bite relationship with a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has about a 3 mm anterior deep bite relationship.  Anne could open comfortably only about 3 mm.  Maximum opening that she could tolerate was about 14 mm.  
ANNE SHIREY				09/26/2007				Page 2

She had less than 1 mm of excursive movement in each direction.  In intraoral evaluation, the oropharynx cannot be completed.  

I-CAT evaluation shows that she has some arthritic changes in the right TMJ with flattening of the posterior head and on the anterior head with peaking on the top of the condyle particularly towards the lateral side of the joint.  More medial the condyle has more of a hockey stick shape to it.  

A Left TMJ sagittal view shows some anterior beaking of the condyle and there appears to be decreased joint space.  There is flattening on the anterior head and posterior head with some peaking also towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Coronal view shows that she has decreased joint space vertically in both the left and right TMJs.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Articular eminence has have moderate steepness.

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  She has a root canal in the mandibular left first molar and mandibular right first molar.  Difficult to evaluate the condyles in this view.

Waters view show that the sinuses appear clear.  The septum appears relatively straight and the turbinates appear normal in size.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little flat on top with maybe a little bit of anterior beaking.  There is decreased vertical and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a decreased superior and posterior joint space.  A little sclerosis on the head of the condyle and a little bit of anterior beaking may be present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is severe restricted translation of both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has good skeletal 1 jaw relationship and good oropharyngeal airway.  Some slight vertical asymmetry at the inferior border of the mandible and also at the occlusal plane level.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction and severe degenerative changes.
Severe headaches.
Severe myofascial pain.
Severe TMJ pain.
Limited incisal opening of only 13 mm.
Severe masticatory dysfunction.
ANNE SHIREY 				09/26/2007				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
CT scans of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen or buttock.)
Postsurgical management and possible physical therapy if necessary. 

Anne is 5 feet 7 inches and weighs 94 pounds.  I talked to her about trying to gain weight prior to any surgical intervention. 