CATHY SHEN										01-19-04

Cathy is 12-1/2 years old and referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich, 3104 Legacy Drive, Ste. A, Plano, TX  75023.

Patient History

She does have a history of asthma problems but it doesn’t bother her too much now except if she runs for a long time at school, then this can cause it. The primary concern that Cathy, her family, and Dr. Goldreich have includes facial asymmetry. It is unknown how long this has been present. Cathy and her family were not aware of this prior to Dr. Goldreich bringing it to their attention. Cathy doesn’t have any trouble with headaches, earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, hearing loss, TMJ noises, or TMJ pain.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Cathy has some increased fullness in the right mandible angle area which is probably 6 to 8 mm greater than the left side. Vertical height of the mandible on the right side appears to be probably 4 to 6 mm lower than the left side. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 to 4 mm. Pupillary plane and ear plane are about level with each other. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 6 to 7 mm to the left. 

In profile, globes are somewhat prominent and slightly proptotic. Nasal dorsum is probably just a couple of millimeters anterior to the anterior projection of the globes particularly with the eyelids closed. AP position of the maxilla looks fairly good. Upper lip is only about 4 mm anterior to subnasale. Chin appears a little bit retruded compared to the lower lip position. Chin-neckline, however, appears very long, but she does have a chin postured forward head-neck position. Chin is probably 4 to 5 mm AP deficient compared to lower lip projection. Nasolabial angle is obtuse. 

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars erupted in. She does have a left-sided severe lingual inclination, and on the right side just has a slight increased curve of Wilson. Mild crowding, lower anterior arch. She does have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her permanent teeth back through the first molars erupted in or erupting in. She occludes predominantly on the left side with the right teeth being for the most part out of occlusion. She has essentially a Class I cuspid relationship on the left side and Class III on the right side. She has an open bite tendency on the right side extending from the cuspid back to the first molar area. She has an anterior crossbite bilaterally in the lateral incisor area. Has a little tendency toward a buccal crossbite in the right cuspid-bicuspid area. As Cathy shifts her mandible toward the right side to correct the midline, she appears to have the facial asymmetry with the right side continuing to be more full. She goes into a posterior crossbite on the right side and a buccal crossbite on the left side when she shifts to that position. She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 to 2 mm lower than the left side. Appears a little bit more evident in the lower jaw than the upper jaw. Transversely, the left mandibular cuspid may be about a millimeter posterior to the right cuspid, but the upper arch is fairly symmetrical. Oropharynx appears clear. 

Nose shows the turbinates are moderate-sized, but she appears to have adequate nasal airway.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses are fairly clear. Turbinates look relatively normal in size. She has a severely lacerated maxillary right second bicuspid root. Maxillary second molars are formed, and the roots are developing. It appears the tooth is starting to erupt into position. There are four third molars, and all four of them are impacted at this time, and it appears there probably is not adequate room for them to come in and function properly. Condylar head and neck appear longer on the right side than the left side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly normal morphology. Some slight anterior beaking present. Joint space appears relatively normal although somewhat thinned. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit flattened on the top. Appears to be adequate joint space, although on one view it appears the disc may be relatively thin. Condylar head and neck appear a little bit longer on this side as compared to the opposite side. Impacted third molars are seen as well as the unerupted second molar.

On opening, there is restricted translation on the right jaw joint, although the left jaw joint seems to translate very well. 

Waters view shows that the right turbinate may be a little bit large compared to the left one. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Right side of the mandible appears to be longer vertically than the left side and appears to be a little bit more transverse fullness on the right side as compared to the left side. Both the posterior aspect of the maxilla and the mandible appear to be rotated off toward the right side.

Cephalometrically, there is a little bit of discrepancy in the vertical occlusal plane area and also at the inferior border. There is some asymmetry in the anteroposterior position of the posterior border of the mandible. Also, one angle is significantly inferior as compared to the opposite side. 

TMJs function smoothly, although she can translate her condyles out beyond the articular eminence which does create quite a thump kind of noise bilaterally. She does have about a 1-mm overbite relationship anteriorly. Incisal opening is about 53 mm, but this is with both condyles translating out beyond the articular eminences. Excursive movement to the left is about 7 mm and to the right about 9 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Right mandibular condylar hyperplasia
Mandibular deviate prognathism
Anterior vertical maxillary excess and asymmetry
Transverse maxillary asymmetry and vertical asymmetry
Posterior aspect of the maxilla and mandible shifted to the right about 3 mm
Vertical elongation on the right side of the face compared to the left side by probably 4 to 6 mm
Increased transverse width of the face on the right side compared to the left side by 6 to 8 mm
Class III occlusion on the right side, Class I on the left side
Significant lingual inclination of the mandibular left posterior teeth
Tendency toward a buccal crossbite on the right side
Unerupted maxillary left and right second molars
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4
Transverse cant in the mandible with the right side being 2 mm lower than the left side
Increased occlusal plane angle
Moderately hypertrophied nasal turbinates (may need to reduce if the maxilla is moved superiorly significantly)

Recommended Treatment

Monitor growth and development

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch. Upright the left posterior teeth which will probably shift the occlusion into a crossbite on that side if it has not developed on its own

Surgery
Right TMJ condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back on the facial midline, level transversely, and correct the posterior yaw
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to shift the maxilla back onto the facial midline, level it transversely, and correct the posterior yaw. Correct the slight vertical maxillary excess and decrease the occlusal plane angle
Surgical removal of impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4
Probable turbinectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
