SUSAN SIMPSON									01-26-04

Susan is 47 years old. Susan was referred by Tony Viazis. 

Patient History

She has had previous surgeries to include surgery on her esophagus in 2001, gallbladder in ’99, left elbow in ’95, sinuses in 1990, and left fifth digit in ’77. She has been diagnosed with fibromyalgia syndrome as well. She does smoke one pack of cigarettes per day and has done this for 20 years. She does have some problems with asthma, although fairly minimal, and she does have some allergy problems. She does have arthritis in her right hip and lower back and also in her jaw joints. She did have some stomach ulcer problems in the past, but they are doing well now. 

Susan’s TMJ problems began she thinks somewhere back in the ‘30s of unknown etiology. She has really had no treatment for it. 

Other joints that bother her include her lower back, neck, shoulders (left one greater than the right one), fingers, right hip, knees, and feet. She does have problems with earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo but has no hearing loss. She gets tinnitus and vertigo fairly frequently. She probably clenches and bruxes her teeth at night, although she is not completely sure of that. She rates her headaches at a level of 3 throughout the head area. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, pain on an average day at 4, jaw function at 7, diet at 7, and disability at 3. 

Current Medications

Paxil 25 mg, 1 q.d.
Strattera 60 mg q.d. 
Prosom 1 mg q.d 

Allergies

She has had an allergic reaction to CIPRO, DAYPRO, LORTAB, PENICILLIN, DESYREL, AND ADVAIR.

Patient Concerns

Her teeth don’t fit together, and her jaws are not aligned well
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Difficulties eating and chewing
Difficulties swallowing. She has trouble at times with the food getting caught in her throat when she has these difficulties swallowing
Fibromyalgia
Multiple joint pains
Snoring
Daytime tiredness
Wakes up frequently at night (that is including taking the Prosom, which is to help her sleep)

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Susan has a little bit more fullness on the right side of her jaw in the masseter muscle area probably due to some mild masseter hyperplasia on the right side as compared to the left as she chews only on her right side. 

Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline and chin are also fairly well aligned with the facial midline.

In profile view, Susan has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe 2 to 3 mm. Chin is probably 12 to 13 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is not well-defined, and she has a fair amount of fullness in the submental area. She has a very prominent labiomental fold. Vertical height of the lower third of the face appears somewhat short due to the anterior deep bite. As she postures her mandible forward, it does improve her overall facial balance and improves the vertical facial height. She does have an obtuse nasolabial angle but is in part due to the nasal tip being slightly turned superiorly. 

Apparently Susan was born with some congenitally missing teeth and only had 26 teeth. Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular left first, second, and third molars, mandibular right first and third molars, and both maxillary third molars. She has multiple spaces between the lower anterior teeth. She has a reverse curve of occlusion in the lower anterior arch. Lots of spacing between the lower teeth including the left cuspid, left lateral incisor, both central incisors, right cuspid and first bicuspid. The posterior teeth on that lower arch are tipped lingually. Very thin attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she does have a reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Some significant malrotation of the teeth. Has an anterior deep bite of probably 8 mm, and that includes some attrition off of her lower incisors. She has a Class II cuspid relationship bilaterally. She has some crenations on her tongue indicative of probably pushing forward on her lower teeth. Oropharynx appears clear without any evidence of pathology, although the posterior aspect of the soft palate appears to be in fairly close relation to the posterior pharyngeal wall. 

Turbinates appear just slightly enlarged but not too significantly, but the right one is a little bit larger than the left one. Airway, however, appears good, and she has a good wide intraoral nasal dimension.

To palpation, she has high moderate to severe pain in the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, styloid areas, SCMs, moderate pain in the posterior neck and shoulder area, and mild pain in the medial pterygoid muscles. Maximal incisal opening is 36 mm and opening without significant discomfort 26 mm. Excursive movement to the right was 7 mm and to the left 4 mm. She does have some crepitation in her right joint as she opens her jaw. 

Transversely, she has a very narrow mandibular arch. No models are available today for analysis unfortunately. However, she appears to have bilateral buccal crossbites and significant vertical overclosure of all of the anterior teeth. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars as well as the mandibular right first molar, left first and second molars. She has a root canal on the mandibular left second bicuspid and appears to have a periapical lesion at the tip of that tooth. Crown is gone from that tooth. Multiple spaces are seen between the lower anterior teeth particularly on the left side. She has a crown on the maxillary right first molar. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Nasal airway appears to have some openings, being greater on the left side as compared to the right side. Left TMJ condyle appears a little bit flattened with some superior peaking of the condyle present. Right joint appears sclerotic. Some anterior beaking appears to be present in the right condyle.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates appear relatively moderate in size. Right ankle appears a little bit more prominent than the left, but she also has tipping in her neck and head posture. 

Left TMJ tomograms show a condyle that is narrow anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Decreased posterior joint space but significantly increased anterior joint space indicative of an anteriorly displaced disc in a vertical orientation. Disc probably reduces early on opening and is probably in a pre-click position. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is very sclerotic with significant decreased vertical joint space. Articular eminence and fossa also appear to be very sclerotic. Decreased superior and anterior joint space. Posterior joint space is decreased by the top of the condylar head but increases a little bit lower down. Articular eminence appears quite long in length.

Opening view shows restricted translation of the right TMJ and virtually no visible joint space. Left TMJ appears to show moderately good translation with the condyle coming down almost underneath the articular eminence. There is some joint space there, but difficult to tell if the disc reduces on that view.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class II jaw relationship and a severe anterior deep bite of about 8 mm. Of significance is that her oropharyngeal airway is severely restricted, and she has less than 2 mm of airway space at the base of the tongue and perhaps less than a millimeter at the soft palate level. A little bit of vertical difference at the inferior border of the mandible. Prominent labiomental fold is seen. Both the maxilla and mandible appear to be retruded. She has a reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch. 

No tooth-size analysis could be done.

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Class II cuspid relationship
Reverse curve of occlusion, upper arch
Slight accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch
Bilateral buccal crossbites
Anterior deep bite of 8 to 9 mm
Significantly decreased transverse width of the mandibular arch due to the teeth being trapped by the bilateral buccal crossbite
Missing mandibular left first, second, and third molars, mandibular right first molar, and all four third molars
Multiple diasthemas in the lower anterior arch
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 1 mm at the soft palate level and 2 mm at the base of the tongue (normal measurements in these areas would be 11 mm)
Sleep apnea symptoms
Severe snoring
Earaches 
Tinnitus
Vertigo
Fibromyalgia
Myofascial pain
TMJ pain
Headaches 

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Make upper bite splint to vertically open the bite to eliminate the bilateral buccal crossbites
Align and level the mandibular arch, expanding the lower arch and closing the lower anterior spacing
Align and level maxillary arch 

CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, meniscectomies, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with the TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Multiple maxillary osteotomies with bone plate stabilization
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Osseointegrated implants with one being placed in the mandibular right quadrant and probably three placed in the left posterior quadrant

Reconstructive density to establish a good bite relationship

ADDENDUM

Susan has had a previous sleep study done but apparently didn’t show very much. This study was done a couple of years ago at least. Susan will try to get a copy of that report for me.