MARINA SIMMONS									07/09/2007

Marina is 23 years old, referred by Dr. Moody Alexander, 5500 Preston Road, Ste. #60, Dallas, TX 75205.  Marina had a tonsillectomy in December of 2004 and she had her third molars removed in 1999.  She is in good health with no major medical problems except her nose gets a little bit stuffy in the mornings and sometimes at night.  She takes birth control pills, Advil about 2 tablets per day and Flonase p.r.n.  To Marina's best knowledge her jaw problems began about 2002 to 2003 of unknown etiology.  She has developed sort of a burning kind of pain through her jaws.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily facial pain at 2, jaw function at 0, diet 2, disability at 4.  She gets headaches at about a level of 5 that predominately come up through the jaw into the temple areas and can go around to the back of the head and can even extend up into the top of her head.  

She had previous orthodontics in 1995 to 1997 done by a general dentist.  Apparently she needed additional orthodontic treatment.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or hearing loss but gets occasional vertigo.  Occasional problems with her left hip.  She believes that she does clench and grind her teeth at nighttime and sometimes during the day.

In frontal view, Marina has fairly good facial symmetry except some deviation of the nose itself.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm.  Maxillary and chin midline are pretty much aligned with each other.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right.  Nasal tip is off to the left probably about 1 mm.  Left eye is about 2 mm lower than the right eye.  In profile view she has fairly good facial balance AP-wise and perhaps just a somewhat short vertical dimension.  Actually mandibular dental midline centric relation is about 2 mm off the to the right side.  She has a Class II end-on occlusion being a little bit worse on the right side than the left side.  She is probably at least 4 mm Class II on the right side and probably II mm Class II on the left side.  She has about a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Marina does have all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  In the upper arch she also has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Transversely the occlusal plane is fairly level.  The oropharyngeal area looks healthy.  Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are all normal.  Tonsils are gone.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  The left turbinate is hyperplastic and the side is a little bit normal shape although the airway is about equal on both sides because of the deviation of the septum.  Cannot see posterior to determine airway back there but anteriorly at least it appears that there is an adequate airway.  She is not aware of snoring, daytime somnolence or sleep apnea problems.  Maxillary opening is about 62 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 10 mm, left 8 mm.  To palpation she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The rest of the teeth are present.  Sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  

Waters view shows the sinuses are clear.  The nasal septum in the bony area is deviated off towards the right side.  Turbinates are fairly large and there does not appear to be any clear airway passage.  

MARINA SIMMONS				07/09/2007				Page 2

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that could possibly be postured forward slightly.  A little flattening on the anterior head.  Articular eminence has relatively normal angulation perhaps just slightly towards the shallow end of the spectrum.  Joint space looks good.  

Right TMJ tomogram is a little bit hard to read.  Condyle appears a little bit more narrow anteroposteriorly.  Articular eminence is a little bit towards the shallow side.  Joint space looks good around the condyle.  On opening, there is good translation in both joints. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a Class II occlusal relationship.  Relatively low occlusal plan angle and mandibular plane angle.  Vertical height of the mandible is somewhat short measuring only about 37 mm.  Oropharyngeal airway looks good.  She has a Class II occlusal relationship but skeletally because of the line it was probably closer to a Class I.  She does have a tendency for crossbites posteriorly in the molar areas.  Marina does have some asymmetry in the lower arch with the right cuspid 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  The upper arch appears a little bit more symmetric.  It appears there is at least a 5 mm transverse arch with discrepancy between the upper and lower arch.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc medially displaced.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion being worse on the right side as compared to the left side.
Mandibular arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.
Mandibular dental midline shifted 2 mm to the right of the mandibular midline and maxillary midline.
Myofascial pain.
Headaches.
Bilateral posterior crossbites.
 Nocturnal and daytime clenching and bruxism.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications.
Klonopin 1 mg tablet, 1 tablet q.h.s. to control clenching and bruxism.
Discontinue wearing the occlusal splint.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider using Class III elastics on the left side and Class II elastics on the right side to try to move the left cuspid distally and right cuspid mesially to correct lower arch asymmetry and to try to shift the mandibular dental midline towards the left 1 to 2 mm. 


MARINA SIMMONS			07/09/2007				Page 3

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla to correct the transverse arch discrepancies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
