JAMIE	 SICKLES									12/06/2010

Jamie is 39 years old, birth date 12/18/1970.  She is a self-referral.  Primary concerns are as follows:

Lower jaw progressively moving backwards and off towards the left side.
Upper teeth rest on her lower lip.
Difficulty speaking and enunciating certain sounds and this is progressively worsening.

The presents for a 23-1/2 year follow-up.  Surgery was 04/12/1987.  She continues to do fairly well.  The incisal opening is 32 mm and excursion movement to the left 4 mm and to the right 3 mm.  Occlusion is stable.  She had to have a new maxillary partial made.  She has no problems with headaches.  Rates her TMJ pain at about a level of 4 that just occurs intermittently and average daily pain of 4.  She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 5, disability at 6.  To palpation, she has no pain around the head and neck area.  X-rays show that the joints are remaining stable, although the left one is completely out of the fossa and articulating anterior to the articular eminence and the left one is articulating on the anterior aspect of the articular eminence.  She is progressing well.  I answered all the questions she had at this time.  

Jamie believes that her problems began when she was about 35 years old in 2005-2006.  She does have a list of previous traumas as follows: 

Age 10-11 in gymnastics, she hit her head against a brick wall and was knocked out.
Boating accident in 1996 where she was hit in he front of her face and broke her nose but hit her jaws.
In 1998 MVA where she hit her jaws from the side.
In 2004 fell and hit the back of her head but did not lose consciousness.

She has had previous treatment including:

2006 a splint for about 3 months but no improvement, and she eventually lost it.  
11/2009 chin implant by Dr. Michelle Carlotti in Scottsdale, Arizona, to try to improve her facial symmetry.
08/2010 Botox injections to masseters and temporalis muscles bilaterally by Dr. Carl Gassman.

Jamie has no significant problems with headaches except once every 3 to 4 months she will get a severe headache that gets to about a level of 6.  She rates her TMJ pain at 0, average daily pain at 1, jaw function at 1, diet at 0, disability at 4.  She gets frequent earaches, although the ENT doctors have not found anything to document the problem.  To Jamie it feels as though there is an infection present, but she is cleared by her ENT doctors.  She gets occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo and she does have some hearing loss.  She has had the stapes replaced in both ears which was secondary to chronic ear and sinus infections.  In addition, she also has anemia problems and low testosterone and estrogen.  She has been evaluated by Dr. Gregory Sabol, who diagnosed her has having condylar resorption and possible ICR.  Jamie does have some decreased sensation in her chin area.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime.  

In frontal view, Jamie has reasonably good facial symmetry.  Upper lip does shift a little bit off towards the right side.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is zero.  The maxillary midline may be just slightly to the left .  The mandibular dental midline is 2 mm off to the left and chin is 2 mm off to the left.  She does have a chin implant probably of Medpor or silastic.  The left side seems to be slightly lower than the right side.  Upper lip is to the right about 2 to 3 mm.  In profile, she has good facial balance.  She has a fairly good Class I occlusion with about a 3 mm anterior deep bite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal, although there may be just some mild constricture of the fascial pillars.  Tonsils are mildly enlarged.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the right TMJ and minimal tenderness over the posterior neck.  Both joints open relatively smoothly, but on closing she has clicking and at about 20 mm of opening on the right side and 15 mm of opening on the left side.  On excursion movements, she also makes noises with the left side being a little bit more prominent of a pop than the right side.  The maximal incisal opening is 44 mm and excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.  She could open about 28 mm and be relatively comfortable.  With palpation, both condyles extend beyond the lateral rim of the fossa.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has a root canal on the maxillary right first molar.  She has four bone screws stabilizing the chin implant.  The condyles appear a little bit smaller in size particularly on the left side.  

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Sinuses appear relatively clear. 

Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderate enlarged, but the sinuses are clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat small in size.  There is some mild anterior beaking.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears relatively small in size.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking present.  In the mid part of the condyle, it is very narrow anteroposteriorly.  The condyle is sitting posterior in the fossa and there is some slight increased anterior joint space but not quite as much as the opposite side.  Both condyles are quite narrow mediolaterally particularly in the mid and medial aspect.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little dip in the center of it.  The lateral pole extends out laterally almost beyond the lateral rim of the fossa.  There is decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the fossa.  The condyle does have a strong medial extent of the condyle.  The medial portion actually is significantly higher than the mid portion of the condyle by 1 to 2 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has an even more accentuated curve in the mid part of the condyle with the medial aspect significantly higher than the lateral aspect.  The lateral aspect extrudes beyond the lateral rim of the fossa.  There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.  The medial extension of the condyle is quite prominent with decreased medial joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Jamie has fairly good facial balance skeletally as well as dentally.  She has a mild high occlusal plane angle.  Her soft palate appears to be a little tight in the oropharyngeal airway and measures about 8 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Jamie would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with possible rotational displacement.
Mandibular hyperplasia.
Pain and discomfort.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJ. 
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
3.	Surgery. 
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
	b.	Bilateral arthroplasty to reshape the condyles.
	c.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies to maintain a Class I occlusion and create space 			within the joints to accommodate the discs.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  