KATELYN SIMPSON									10-20-03

Katelyn is 16 years old and referred by Dr. Joseph Gunter, 3151 Douphin Street, Mobile, AL 36606.

Patient History

Katelyn’s problems began maybe about 2 to 2-1/2 years old. She got hit pretty hard on the left side of the chin with a softball about 2-1/2 years ago. She remembers having clicking in her jaws for about two years. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, and gets vertigo only when she is running. She is a cross country runner. She has no hearing loss problems. Other joints that bother her include her hips, knees, and ankles. She can’t wear cheap earrings. She is not sure of she clenches at night or not. She is predominantly a mouth breather. 

The medication she takes is Advil for her headaches. She gets headaches about once a week in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally at about a level of 6. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 8, diet at 5, and disability at 5. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Katelyn has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline. Actually, chin may be deviated just about 2 mm to the right. 

In profile view, Katelyn has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose. Chin appears a little bit retruded. Seems to have a high mandibular plane, high occlusal plane angle facial morphology. Chin-neckline and chin-neck angle are fairly well defined. Chin is probably back about 5 to 6 mm. 

Intraorally, she has had lower first bicuspids extracted. Has rather thin but probably adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. Teeth appear to be fairly nicely aligned and leveled. In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids as well. She has a Class II end-on cuspid-molar relationship bilaterally. Occludes only on her second molars bilaterally with all other teeth out of occlusion. She has an anterior open bite of about 3 to 4 mm. Katelyn has a transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being about 1.5 to 2 mm higher than the left side. Katelyn does have a lump on her tongue that measures about 4.5 cm long x 2 cm wide basically on the right side of the tongue. It has been evaluated by some other doctors, and it is felt it is either a lymphangioma or a hemangioma. This doesn’t seem to bother Katelyn much at all. Sometimes if she gets cold or gets sick the papilla will get inflamed and infected perhaps.

Intranasally, she has relatively normal-sized turbinate on the left side. On the right side, it is a little hyperplastic and seems to block some of the airway on that side.

To palpation, she has some mild discomfort over the right TMJ and milder tenderness over the right masseter, left TMJ, left SCM, and mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles bilaterally. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly, although she said she could hear a little bit of a glitch in the left joint. Maximal incisal opening is 39 mm, and opening without much discomfort is 26 mm, excursive movement to the right 6 mm, and to the left 7 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses are clear. Nasal airway actually looks reasonably good. She has four impacted third molars. She is occluding only on her second molars, and all other teeth are out of occlusion. Significant evidence of condylar resorption present bilaterally with it looking a little bit worse on the right side as compared to the left side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is small in size with some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Increased posterior joint space and superior joint space. Cortical bone on top of the condyle is difficult to identify. Condylar head and neck appear short. Appears that there has been significant vertical condylar resorption occurring. Appears to occlude only on the second molars.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has much greater resorption, and the condyle looks smaller vertically and anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. May be slightly increased posterior joint space. Cortical bone on the top of the condyle is difficult to identify. Occludes only on the second molars.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles, although the significant condylar resorption is quite evident. 

Waters view shows that the turbinates appear fairly large particularly on the right side. Sinuses appear clear. She has relatively large frontal sinuses. Slight asymmetry in the maxilla and mandible is noted.

Cephalometrically, Katelyn has a skeletal Class II relationship and occludes only on her second molars. She has an anterior open bite extending and including the first molars all the way forward. Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted with a dimension of about 5 mm at the soft palate level and probably about 7 mm at the base of the tongue. She has some adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx that seems to come into fairly close approximation of within about 3 mm of the inferior turbinate. She has a high mandibular occlusal plane and mandibular plane angle. 

Looking at previous x-rays, in 1998 she had a good Class I relationship with about a 2-mm vertical overbite anteriorly. Relatively normal occlusal plane and mandibular plane angle formation. Had adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx at that time which hasn’t changed too much. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis (probably ICR) with articular disc dislocations without reduction
Transverse maxillary deficiency and vertical asymmetry
AP mandibular deficiency and asymmetry
Anterior open bite of 3 to 4 mm
Occludes only on the second molars bilaterally with all other teeth being out of occlusion
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4
Missing maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids x 4 for orthodontic reasons
Slight overangulation of the maxillary and mandibular incisors
Hypertrophied adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx
High occlusal plane angle
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4 mm

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Place brackets only back to the first molars and leave the second molars out of the arch wire. Keep lateral roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to provide room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing to help correct for the significant tooth-size discrepancy 

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand it and correct the asymmetry
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance it and correct the asymmetries
Surgical removal of four impacted third molars
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Dental reconstruction to place bonding on the maxillary left and right lateral incisors to help correct for the tooth-size discrepancy 


