CHRISTY SILVESTER									02-11-05

Dr. Michael Arvystas, 24 Washington Square North, New York, NY  10011 (212-777-9977).
 
Patient Concerns

Bite has changed dramatically particularly in the last 9 months
When she bites, she hits only on her very back teeth on the left side, and all other teeth do not touch at all
Difficult getting lips together, and this is getting worse
Aches and pains in the jaws
Extreme difficulties chewing
Chewing causes significant increase in pain
Extreme difficulties breathing through the nose
Predominantly mouth breather
Moderate snoring

Patient History

Christy’s problems began in 1999 when she woke up and couldn’t open her mouth. Took her a while to get open enough just to brush her teeth. Etiology is unknown. She did have orthodontics from the ages of 12 to 14 which included extraction of four first bicuspids. She began with splint therapy and has actually had splints since 1991 and has had three different splints made by different practitioners. In 02/2003, Dr. Steve Rosser performed bilateral TMJ arthrocentesis. This helped her for about 9 months then he injected hyaluronic acid injections x 4 into the joints. Dr. Rosser also had her do physical therapy and worked with her diet to try to improve her symptoms. Also medications were used. In 03/2004, Dr. Howard Israel performed bilateral TMJ arthroscopy, and this did improve her symptoms for about three weeks. Unfortunately, in 04/2004, she was on a subway and got hit underneath the lower jaw, and this really set things off for her. Since that time, she has had significant changing in her jaw position, and her bite has gotten significantly worse as well as her profile. Her pain also has gotten significantly worse for her. In the fall of 2003, she began developing symptoms such as she would wake up with significant morning stiffness, difficulties getting a deep breath, and had heart palpitations and fast heart rate. It turned out she had a thyroid problem. By the time they figured out it was caused by her thyroid, it had settled back down again, and the symptoms dissipated without requiring any treatment. 

Christy rates her TMJ pain on the left side at an average of about 6 and on the right side at 3, but the pain can escalate to 8. She has constant pain in the TMJ area. On an average day, her pain levels on the left side are at 5 and on the right side at 2. She rates her jaw function at 9, diet at 9, and disability at 7. She really doesn’t have any problems with headaches per se, although sometimes she will get a little achiness up in the temporal area.

She states she probably has some moderate snoring. However, she is not particularly tired during the day and does not wake up at night unable to catch her breath. 

Current Medications

Klonopin 0.5 mg q.h.s. If she doesn’t take the Klonopin, she wakes up with significantly increased pain problems 
Sulindac 150 mg b.i.d. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Christy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 5 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is actually about 2 mm to the right. Chin actually is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Does have a little orbital dystopia with the left eye being about 2 mm higher than the right side.

In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is significantly posterior to subnasale by probably at least 4 to 5 mm. Maxilla is probably AP deficiency by a good 8 to 10 mm. Chin is at least 20 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is extremely short, although chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. She does have some lip incompetence of probably close to 10 to 12 mm.

Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids. Transverse width of the lower arch is constricted. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. A little mild crowding in the lower anterior arch of perhaps a couple of millimeters. In the upper arch, she is also missing the first bicuspids and has the rest of the teeth back through the second molars. Has an anterior open bite of probably about 4 mm on the left side and 5 to 6 mm on the right side. Has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side and on the left side. She occludes only on the left second molars. Transversely, there is a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about a millimeter higher than the right side in the cuspid area in the upper arch. In the mandibular arch, the left cuspid is up probably a couple of millimeters compared to the right side. Transversely, the left mandibular cuspid is about a millimeter posterior to the right cuspid. In the upper arch, it appears she is a little bit more symmetric. Intraorally, the uvula and soft palate are relatively normal in length. Faucial pillars are relatively normal in width. Interestingly, her soft palate is asymmetric being a little bit longer and lower in position on the right side as compared to the left side. 

Intranasally, septum is deviated off a little bit toward the left side anteriorly. Left turbinate is moderately enlarged. Luminal valves are constricted bilaterally. This may be causing most of her significant airway compromise for her. Holding the luminal valves open particularly on the left side significantly improved her airway breathing capabilities. On the right side, it appeared that although the nose is narrow that at least back by the turbinate anteriorly there appeared to be reasonable airway passage. Probably for the size of her nose has moderate enlargement of her turbinates bilaterally. Width of the columella is fairly wide as well. 

To palpation, Christy has low severe pain over the left TMJ, moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters, right TMJ styloid areas, and milder tenderness over the SCMs. Maximal incisal opening is 43 mm. Excursive movements to the right are about 3 mm and to the left 8 mm. Right joint seems to function relatively smoothly. Left joint has significant crepitus sounds to it. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex taken 10/08/04 shows a left condyle that has significant arthritis associated with it. Right side also appears arthritic. It appears that she occludes only on the left second molar with all other teeth being out of occlusion. She has had four bicuspid extraction orthodontic treatment previously performed. She has a root canal on the maxillary left cuspid. Sinuses appear clear.

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. She has a root canal on the maxillary left cuspid tooth. Apparently this tooth was significantly damaged during the incident on the subway in 04/2004. Sinuses look clear. Turbinates appear somewhat enlarged. Appears to have significant arthritic changes in the left TMJ, and the left TMJ condylar head appears shorter as though there has been loss of vertical dimension as compared to the right side. However, the right side also shows some arthritic changes.

Left TMJ tomogram shows the evidence of erosion of the head of the condyle with significant loss of vertical dimension. Decreased joint space vertically. May be a little osteophyte sticking up at the posterior aspect of the condylar head. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows decreased superior joint space although joint space overall is not too bad. There is some anterior beaking present on the condyle. Articular eminence is steeper on this side as compared to the opposite side.

On opening, there is fairly good translation bilaterally with both condyles coming down close to the undersurface of the articular eminence with maybe a little bit of restriction on the left side compared to the right side. 

Waters view shows that there is significant deviation of the nasal septum back in the bony area. Left turbinate appears large and completely obliterating the airway on that side. Sinuses appear clear. The asymmetry in the mandible is seen. 

Lateral cephalometric x-rays shows that Christy has AP maxillary deficiency and significant AP mandibular deficiency. Occludes only on her second molars on the left side. Has a significant anterior open bite of probably at least 5 mm on the average. Difference in vertical height at the occlusal plane level as well as at the inferior border. Oropharyngeal airway dimension is only about 3 mm at the base of the tongue and at the soft palate area (normal 11 mm). 

Dental model analysis shows that there is a Bolton’s difference of 1 mm in the size of the anterior teeth. She has transverse maxillary deficiency and a Class II end-on occlusion and a significant anterior open bite. The transverse maxillary deficiency is probably about 4 mm in width. It involves the cuspids all the way back through the second molars. 

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ severe resorptive arthritis with articular disc dislocation, severe deformation, and nonreducing
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with significant deformation and nonreducing
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Anterior vertical maxillary excess
Transverse maxillary deficiency
Severe AP mandibular deficiency
Apertognathia
Occludes only on maxillary left second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion 
Class II end-on occlusion
Transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being 1 to 2 mm higher than the right side
Crowding, lower anterior arch
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1 to 2 mm
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
High occlusal plane angle 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Hypertrophied turbinates
Deviated nasal septum
Constricture of luminal valves
Severe nasal airway obstruction
Mouth breather
Severe masticatory dysfunction
Vertigo

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch. Consider stripping lower anterior teeth removing a millimeter or 2 of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward and to help correct for the tooth-size discrepancy

CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, downgraft it posteriorly, expand it, and level the occlusal plane transversely and anteroposteriorly
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen or buttocks)
Nasal septoplasty
Tubinectomies
Consider possible reconstruction of the luminal valves

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 