MOLLY SHUTE									07/09/2007

Molly is 16 years old, referred by Dr. Moody Alexander.  Molly has had two rounds of orthodontics previously including the use of a Herbst appliance.  She is now back in braces again.  She had her appliances replaced about a week ago.  She has no problems with TMJ pain, headaches or myofascial pain.  Rates jaw function, diet and disability at all 0.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, Molly has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 4.5 mm.  Maxillary midline may be about 1 mm off to the right as is the mandibular dental midline and chin.  The left eye is about 2 mm lower than the right eye.  In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency maybe 2 to 3 mm of the subnasale.  Chin appears to be retruded about 12 to 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is a little bit short but the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Molly has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  She has a high-attached labial frenulum.  Lower incisors appear somewhat overangulated.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She may have a slight increase curve of Wilson.  She has an anterior open bite of about 3 to 4 mm.  She has a Class II end-on occlusion being probably at least 5 mm Class II.  Slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being about 1 mm lower than the right side.  She has relatively short clinical crown length.  She shows a fair amount of gingiva when she smiles.  She appears to have accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch with the upper incisors being probably 3 mm off the flat plane.  The lower arch has a moderate increased curve of Spee.  The left joint seems to function relatively smooth except for there being occasional noise in the right joint.  On excursive movement there are some definite noises in the right joint.  Maxillary opening is about 50 mm.  Excursive movements are 9 mm in each direction.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  She has no problems with other joints.  She is being watched for scoliosis but has not been diagnosed with that.  The first time she had orthodontics was with the Herbst appliance at the age of 8.  Orthodontics was done the second time when she was about 12 for about 18 months.  Oropharyngeal area looks healthy.  Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are all normal.  Tonsils are normal.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side.  Turbinates are mild to moderate in size.  She may have some mild nasal airway blockage.  The columella is somewhat wide and nostrils are narrow.   She has no sleep apnea, snoring or daytime somnolence problems.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of all 4 impacted third molars.  All the rest of the teeth are present.  Sinuses appear relatively clear as best as can be seen.  The condyles may be just slightly arthritic.  

Waters view shows that the septum is deviated significantly off towards the right side.  There is a bone spur perhaps sticking outwards.  The turbinates appear relatively small on the right side.  On the left side it appears moderately large.  Frontal sinus is quite large but appears clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit beaking anterior and maybe a little bit of sclerosis on the top of the head of the condyle.  Decreased superior and posterior joint spaces are present.  
MOLLY SHUTE				07/09/2007				Page 2

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit sclerotic on the top.  It appears that there may be some decreased superior and posterior joint space.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II and occlusal Class II relationships.  She has an anterior open bite of probably 3 to 4 mm.  She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch and a flat curve of occlusion in the lower arch.  The lower anterior teeth appear to be tipped forward.  Upper teeth also appear to be overangulated.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 8 mm at the soft palate level and probably 9 mm at the base of the tongue.  Tooth size analysis reveals a Bolton's difference of 1.5 mm although it might be a little bit larger than that because the buccal lingual width of the incisors and cuspids are somewhat wide.  Dental model analysis further shows that the first bicuspids are partially blocked out of the arch.  She has a slight bicuspid tooth size discrepancy involving the second bicuspids which are a little small in the upper arch as compared to the lower arch by maybe ½ mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Adolescent internal condylar resorption with articular disc dislocations.
Probable bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Anterior open bite. 
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.
High occlusal plane angle.
Slight overangulation of maxillary and mandibular anterior teeth. 
Anterior open bite of 3 to 4 mm.
 Impacted third molars.
 Hypertrophied turbinates. 
 Deviated nasal septum.
 Partial nasal airway obstruction.
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of approximately 2 mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
MRI of left and right TMJ. 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.   Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing.  Slenderize all 4 bicuspids slightly to compensate for a mild tooth size discrepancy and to help keep from tipping the lower incisors any further forward.


MOLLY SHUTE				07/09/2007				Page 3

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors (if MRI confirms discs are displaced.)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior maxilla superiorly and advance slightly.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Partial turbinectomies.
Nasoseptoplasty.
Surgical removal of third molars.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
