TRACY SHOESMITH								07/20/2010

Tracy is 44 years old and referred by Dr. David Kerns from Waco, Texas.  Tracy’s TMJ problems began when she was a teenager at about the age of 15 of unknown etiology.  Her TMJ problems got significantly worse about 6 years ago and she has been to multiple doctors in reference to trying to figure out what her problem is.  She would have facial swelling so she was sent from doctor to doctor and apparently they had trouble figuring out what was going on and causing her problems.  She was in splint therapy for 6 years and had two different splints.  She had arthrocentesis on January 31, 2006 of the left TMJ b Dr. Lance Reed.  

Tracy gets headaches on the left side at a level of 7 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 7 , jaw function at 6, diet at 5, disability at 7.  Her pain is only on the left side.  She gets frequent left-sided earaches, frequent tinnitus, frequent vertigo, but no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her left knee, left ankle, and back.  She has been diagnosed with sleep apnea and is on a CPAP machine.  She clenches and bruxes her teeth at nighttime and some during the day.  She has severe snoring, moderate to severe daytime somnolence, and tends to fall asleep at work.  She has at least moderate sleep apnea.  She is a mouth breather at nighttime and sometimes during the day.  

CLINICAL EXAM.  In frontal view, Tracy has fairly good left-to-right symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other.  In profile, Tracy has maxillary AP deficiency of probably close to 6 mm at the incisal edge.  The chin is retruded probably 15 to 20 mm.  The chin neckline is extremely short and chin neckline is not defined.  Intraorally, Tracy is missing mandibular right second molar, but has the rest of her teeth throughout to the second molar on the right side.  Both third molars are missing.  In the upper arch, she is missing right second and third molar and left third molar.  She has significant crowding in the lower anterior arch but has adequate attached gingiva.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm to the right and is also to the right of the chin.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 2 mm higher than the left side with the right cuspid.  The mandible may be up about 1 mm on the right side.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being about at least 5 mm Class II on the right side but is Class I on the left side.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 5 mm.  She has lingual tori present.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Fascial pillars moderately constricted.  Intranasally, the right turbinate appears enlarged.  The left side appears a little bit more normal.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  There may be some moderate nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the temporalis, TMJs, left masseter, left SCM, left posterior neck.  On opening, she has crepitation in the left joint and the right joint seems to function reasonably smoothly.  At times, the crepitus is so loud in the left joint that she is asked to leave the table at dinnertime because the noise bothers everybody else.  The maximal opening is 32 mm and on opening without pain about 19 mm.  The excursion movements are 5 mm to the right and 4 mm to the left, but that also caused pain.  The patient does have claustrophobia and has difficulties tolerating the CPAP machine.

Basic diagnoses for Tracy would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandible AP hypoplasia.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal dimension 11 mm).
Severe sleep apnea. 
Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Class I occlusion on the left, Class II end-on occlusion on the right. 
Anterior deep bite of 5 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement approximately 15 mm 			with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction approximately 8 mm.
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 