GIOVANNI ANGELO SILVA							08/19/2010

He is currently 15 years 11 months of age.  Date of birth is 08/15/1995.  He was evaluated at Centrinho.  He has been diagnosed with hemifacial macrosomia with the left side being affected.  There are no photographs available on this patient.

Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  The two maxillary central incisors are missing as well as the left lower bicuspid and lower right bicuspid, but there is space created for that tooth.  The right TMJ looks relatively normal.  The left TMJ appears to have a severely deformed condyle with absence of the coronoid process, and there does not appear to be a developed fossa but difficult to tell from this radiograph.  The left maxillary sinus is quite small.  The left side is vertically shorter than the right side.  There is a space remaining in the upper arch in the central incisor area, but inadequate in size for both central incisors.  There is a 6 x 6 retainer in the lower arch.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a high occlusal plane angle and the left side is vertically significantly shorter in height than the right occlusal plane by probably 6 to 7 mm.  The lower incisors appear to be in reasonably good angulation relative to the mandible.  The occlusal plane is very steep as is the mandibular plane with the left side having a greater angulation.  The maxilla appears retruded and there is posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.  The mandible is retruded and there appears to be AP microgenia as well.  Oropharyngeal airway is constricted and probably 4 mm at the soft palate level and probably 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  There is an anterior open bite of about 1 mm on the left lateral incisor cuspid area and about 4 on the right lateral incisor cuspid area.  There is adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx that is almost touching against the inferior turbinates.  

Records are obviously inadequate without a clinical exam or photographs to evaluate, but possible treatment considerations could be as follows:

1.	Removal of impacted third molars x4.
2.	I-CAT to better evaluate jaws and the TMJs.
3.	Presurgical orthodontics.  
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Rotate lateral incisors mesially creating about a 2 			mm gap between the cuspids and the laterals.  Retract the lateral incisors by 			decreasing the axial inclination and extruding them at least 2 mm.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Maintain the spacing around the left side 			between the cuspid and first bicuspid.  Try to improve the leveling of the arch 			vertically.  Maintain the axial inclination of the incisors, but push the left lateral 			incisor forward and collect all of the anterior spacing between the centrals and left 		central and lateral to be accumulated between the left lateral incisor and left 			cuspid.  
4.	Surgery.
	a.	Left TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total 			joint prostheses in a counterclockwise direction.
	b.	Right mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy to advance it in a 					counterclockwise direction.  
	c.	Bilateral mandibular body ostectomies to remove spacing in the anterior 				mandibular arch. 
	d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, down graft it posteriorly, 			greater on the left side than the right side. 
	e.	Possible bilateral turbinectomies.
	f.	Adenoidectomy.
	g.	Right reduction AP augmentation genioplasty.  
	h.	Fat graft to left TMJ.
	g.	Consider fat graft to left side of face.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
6.	Restorative dentistry to reconstruct the anterior arch with lateralization of the cuspids and 	crowns on the lateral incisors to replace the missing central incisors. 











