LISA SIEGEL										05/21/2008

Lisa is 28 years old and referred by Terry Olejko, DDS, 615 Copeland Mill Road #2A, Westerville, OH 43081.  Lisa began her TMJ problems somewhere around 2003 of unknown etiology.  She had an MRI in October 2003 showing bilateral anteriorly displaced discs and on November 12, 2003, underwent bilateral TMJ arthrocentesis.  Following that she had several injections with Kenalog.  She was diagnosed on August 3, 2005, with internal derangement bilaterally and arthropathy in the right condyle greater than the left.  On October 13, 2005, she had bilateral tempomandibular joint arthroplasty with meniscectomy and placement of temporary silastic interpositional grafts.  On March 1, 2006, the silastic implants were removed.  She then had repeated Kenalog injections.  On April 17, 2006, she had a left TMJ arthroplasty revision with dermal graft placement.  She then had two TMJ steroid injections.  On August 1, 2006, she had a right TMJ revision arthroplasty with dermal graft reconstruction.  She had a Kenalog injection after that in the left joint.  MRI on October 17, 2006, showed diminished range of motion and degenerative joint disease bilaterally, right worse than the left.  On October 19, CT imaging was performed showing the significant arthritis and loose bodies in the joint space.  Another steroid injection was performed to the right joint shortly after that.  On February 20, 2007, she had a right a TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses placed by Dr. Tom Braun, and, on May 1, 2007, she had the left TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses placed by Dr. Braun.  On August 10, 2007, she was involved in a motor vehicle accident.  On February 19, 2008, she had heterotopic bone removed from the left TMJ by Dr. Braun.  On February 21,2008, through February 27, 2008, she had radiation treatment to the left TMJ by Dr. Martin at OSU.  
Lisa rates her headaches at a level of 4 that occur predominantly in the frontal and temporal areas with pain predominantly behind her eyes and at the back of the head.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 5, diet at 4, disability at 7.  She takes the following medications:
Birth control pills.
Celexa 20 mg q.d.
Advil and/or Tylenol for pain.
Ambien occasionally for sleep. 

She has no problems with earaches, but has some tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her neck.  She is allergic to morphine and demerol.  She did have osteomyelitis in the right hip at the age of 3, but probably noncontributory to her current situation.  She is unaware of clenching or bruxism.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Lisa has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.   Upper lip length is about 17 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 1 mm on the left and right 2.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The nasal tip is just slightly off to the right side about 2 mm.  Mandible is on the facial midline.  Chin may be off to the lumbosacral about 2 mm.  In profile view, upper lip is retruded by about 2 mm.  Chin is retruded by 8-10 mm.  Chin neckline is short, though chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, Lisa has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars present.  The teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva, although there is some moderate inflammation present.  In the upper arch, Lisa has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship bilaterally.  She has a transverse cant in her occlusal plane with the left side being about 1-2 mm shorter vertically as compared to the right side.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm.  It is difficult to visualize the soft palate and uvula, but they appear to be relatively normal.  Fascial pillars appear moderately constricted.  Tonsils appear relatively normal in size, although they are not easily identifiable.  Intranasally, the septum may be deviated just slightly off to the right side.  The right turbinate appears a little bit enlarged compared to the left side.  The left side nasal airway looks very good.  Lisa has no complaints of difficulties breathing through her nose.  Lisa is not aware of snoring.  She has some moderate daytime somnolence, but attributes this to difficulty sleeping at night because of the pain levels.  Her pain seems to be worse at night.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the TMJ, styloid areas, and milder pain over the posterior neck, shoulders, and temporalis area.  She can hear crepitus noises in her jaws if she moves her jaw, being greater on the left side than the right side.  Maximal incisal opening is 29 mm and opening without severe pain 24 mm.  Excursion movements are about 1 mm in each direction. 
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of bilateral TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  In the left joint, there is definite evidence of heterotopic bone extending up between the sigmoid notch and the fossa area and some downward growth anterior and probably medial to the fossa component.  The right joint is extremely difficult to reach because of metal interference.  She is missing the four third molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  
Waters view shows she appears to have a good nasal airway and septum is fairly straight.  Sinuses appear clear.  Mandibular components seem to be centered fairly within the fossas.  On the right side, it appears that there may be some heterotopic bone around the metal component of the prosthesis.  On the left side and right side both, it appears that there may be some heterotopic bone on the medial aspect of the mandible and medial side of the fossa, but difficult to tell.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows the presence of heterotopic bone particularly anterior to the condyle.  On the right side, it appears a little fuzzy in that area which could mean that there is some calcification along the anterior aspect of the right prosthesis.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she does have a Class I skeletal relationship and a high occlusal plane angle and some retrusion of the maxilla and particularly the mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway space measures about 6 mm at the base of the tongue, and the soft palate area may be about 5 mm.  
Basic diagnoses for be as Lisa would be follows:
Bilateral TMJ heterotopic bone formation around the TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses (left side worse than right side).  
TMJ pain and headaches. 
Masticatory dysfunction. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:	
 
Bilateral TMJ extensive debridement with removal of heterotopic bone. 
Bilateral TMJ placement of fat grafts. 
Harvest fat grafts from abdomen.  