LINDA SILVANI									05/14/2008

Linda is 64 years old, referred by Mark Piper, MD, DMD, 111 Second Avenue NE, Suite 1006, St. Petersburg, FL 33701.  Linda’s TMJ problems began in about 1978 when she developed pain in and around the right ear and pain in her posterior teeth and right side head pain.  Dr. Douglas Morgan performed the first operation in 1981 placing bilateral Proplast Teflon implants into her tempomandibular joints.  She then had a second surgical procedure in 1982 by Dr. Gary Gradke with the placement of Vitek-Kent joint prostheses.  The third procedure was carried out by Dr. Gradke in 1984 with bilateral silastic implants.  The fourth surgery was performed again by Dr. Gradke with the placement of rib grafts into both tempomandibular joints.  She did okay for several years, but then in 2003 saw Dr. Robert Marx who felt she needed bilateral cartilage grafts to the skull base with placement of prosthetic heads.  This was performed in 2003 and then repeated again in 2006 due to a crack in the titanium neck of the prosthesis.  
Linda has moderate snoring problems, moderate daytime tiredness, and sleep apnea.  She has difficulties breathing through her nose.  Linda takes the following medications:
Synthroid.
Vicodin 10 mg 1 to 2 per day.
Cymbalta 30 mg q.d.
She also takes some vitamins and some other supplements.

Primary concerns Linda has include the following:

Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain down through the head and neck area.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Lower jaw severely retruded.
Teeth do not fit together.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Linda has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 25 mm and upper tooth lip relationship is probably about -2 mm.  The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular midline is  off to the right side about 2 mm.  The chin is fairly straight.  In profile view, the maxillas are retruded by about 4-6 mm.  The chin is retruded by about 25 mm.  Chin neckline and chin angle are not defined.  Intraorally, Linda has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  There is some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch and a little bit of increased curve of Spee.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class II cuspid relationship and occludes only on the second molars.  She has an open bite of 4 to 5 mm and an overjet of 4 to 5 mm.  To palpation, Linda has severe pain through most of the head and neck area.  Incisal opening is 23 mm, opening without severe pain 20 mm, but there are no excursion movements.  The oropharyngeal tissues are very hard to visualize, but it appears that the uvula may be just slightly elongated and the soft palate may be a little bit elongated.  I could not see the facial pillars to evaluate them nor could I see the tonsils.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear relatively normal.  The septum has some minor deviations, but for the most part appears normal.  There does not appear to be any major nasal airway obstruction.  She does have moderate snoring and moderate daytime somnolence, and she does have sleep apnea, probably moderate to severe.  She has a moderate to severe sleep disorder and frequently wakes up at night. 
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars as well as the maxillary right first molar replaced by a small pontic.  She has a 3-unit bridge in that area.  She has a root canal in the mandibular right first molar.  She has bilateral prostheses in place, probably Synthes or Walter Lorenz type of prostheses with no opposing fossa.  Both prostheses are anterior to the fossa and actually sitting in the infratemporal fossa. There appears to be heterotopic bone in and around the fossa area that extends inferiorly, being a larger amount on the left side as compared to the right side.  Sinuses look relatively clear.
Waters view shows that the bony septum is reasonably straight.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  The prostheses are seen to be positioned out almost lateral to the zygomatic arch.  Again, there does not appear to be any opposing fossa component.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows that the condylar heads appear to be sitting up in the infratemporal fossa area and perhaps have settled up through the zygomatic arch.  The prosthesis appears to be intact, but appears to be a 2-piece component.    
Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows that the condyle is anterior to the fossa and sitting in the infratemporal fossa.  The prosthesis appears intact, although it is a 2-piece component.  There is no opposing fossa in either joint identifiable.  On opening, there does not appear to be any translation.   
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Linda has a severe mandibular retrusion.  The prosthesis condyles are anterior to the tempomandibular joint fossa and again are sitting up in the infratemporal areas.  The maxilla appears retruded and there appears to be some posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.  She has severe decreased oropharyngeal airway with an airway dimension of only about maybe 2 mm at the most at the soft palate area and at the base of the tongue no more than 4 mm.  Linda does have a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.  Linda states she has difficulties swallowing which would be compatible with severe decrease in oropharyngeal airway.
Basic diagnoses for Linda would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ failed total joint prostheses.
Bilateral prostheses displaced anterior and superior into the infratemporal fossa with erosion of the zygomatic arch.
Heterotopic bone formation in both glenoid fossas. 
Severe retrusion of the mandible. 
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia. 
Class II occlusion. 
Anterior open bite.
Occluding only on the second molars.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm (normal is 11 mm). 
Crowding of lower anterior arch.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.
Overangulation of the lower incisors.
Severe TMJ pain. 
Severe headaches.
Severe myofascial pain. 
Severe masticatory dysfunction. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:	
 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.  
Removal of her previously placed failed prostheses. 
Bilateral TMJ extensive debridement and removal of heterotopic bone formation in the glenoid fossas bilaterally. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen or buttock). 
Medpor implant to anterior mandible. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.