THEODORE SLATER									07-12-04

Theo is 24 years old and referred by Dr. Warner R. Young, 161st Ave. NE, Ste. 201, Redmond, WA  79052.

Patient History

Theo is in good health with no major medical problems. He takes no medications. He has had had an allergic reaction to BACTRIM. 

Theo just became aware of his jaws being malaligned about four years ago. He has had no treatment for his condition to date. 

Patient Concerns

Teeth and jaws do not line up properly
Clenching and grinding of the teeth particularly at night
Difficulties eating and chewing

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Theo has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much aligned with the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 1.5 to 2 mm off to the left. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly well-aligned with each other. 

In profile view, Theo has some AP maxillary deficiency and a little bit of AP mandibular deficiency. Chin-neckline appears a little bit short, although the chin-neck angle is well-defined. With Theo posturing his chin forward a little bit and filling out the upper jaw, that does improve his overall facial balance. 

Intraorally, Theo has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Second bicuspids are at about a 90 degree rotation. Could be a little extra space around the second bicuspid area. Lower teeth appear to have good attached gingiva. Lower anterior teeth appear they may be just slightly lingually inclined. In the upper arch, Theo has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Very minimal crowding in the upper anterior arch. Theo has an anterior crossbite and bilateral posterior crossbites. Has about a 4-mm Class III occlusion on the right side and about 2 mm on the left side. Has a slight accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Oropharynx is clear. Uvula is a little bit hyperplastic but not significant. 

Septum is relatively straight. Left turbinate is a little bit hyperplastic. Right side is relatively normal in size. 

Theo has about a 1-mm openbite tendency in the front. Has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. To palpation, he has some very mild tenderness over the right temporalis, right masseter, right styloid area, and left TMJ. 

On opening, he has definite clicks out over the articular eminence but on closing has a click probably about 15 mm on the left side. Maximal incisal opening is 65 mm. Excursive movement to the right 11 mm and to the left 13 mm.
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth back through the second molars and the left third molar which is erupted. All three other third molars are missing. Sinuses look relatively clear. Turbinates look relatively moderate in size with the left one being larger than the right one. Could only see the right condyle which I can’t see any gross deformity, but the left condyle cannot be seen well on the x-ray. 

Right TMJ tomograms show a condyle with fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Good joint space superiorly and posteriorly as well as anteriorly. Demonstrates a Class III molar relationship.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is a little bit steeper than the opposite side. Good joint space superiorly, posteriorly, and anteriorly. However, appears that there may be actually a slight increase in joint space and perhaps wasn’t quite closing all the way when the x-ray was taken.

On opening, there is excellent translation of both TMJ areas. 

Waters view shows that there may be some deviation of the nasal septum. Left turbinate is quite large compared to the right one. Sinuses look relatively clear and healthy. Maxillary sinuses look slightly small. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows what appears to be some AP maxillary deficiency. May have a slightly high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway is excellent. Turbinates appear to extend beyond the hard palate area. He has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 1 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary deficiency
Mandibular deviate prognathism
Class III end-on occlusion, worse on the right side than the left side
Anterior open bite tendency
Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites
Malaligned maxillary left third molar
Bilateral TMJ medial displacement of the articular discs but asymptomatic
Mild myofascial pain to palpation

Recommended Treatment

Periodontal evaluation of lower anterior arch to evaluate the gingival recession occurring there

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch 

Surgery
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back on the facial midline
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and expand it
Extraction of maxillary left third molar

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
