JANA SKIBA										01/23/2009

The patient presents for followup evaluation.  She is now 9 years and 1 month post left TMJ total joint prosthesis.  On 07/15/2003, a second procedure was performed for a coronoidectomy, removal of heterotopic bone, and placement of a fat graft.  She continues to have significant pain problems.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain excluding the joint at a level of 3.  She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability at 7.  She gets headaches in the left temporal area at a level of 9.  Incisal opening is 32 mm and excursion movement to the right 2 mm, to the left 9 mm.  The right joint function smoothly, but in the left one she hears a rubbing sound.  She does have some discomfort in the right TMJ as well, but nothing compared to the left side.  Radiographically, she does have a decreased joint space in the right joint towards the medial side, but the lateral side space looks more appropriate.  To palpation, she has severe pain over the left TMJ, left temporalis area, and left retromandibular area.  She has moderate pain throughout most of the head and neck area except for her shoulders where she has no pain.  She gets earaches on the left side of moderate intensity and moderate vertigo, particularly when she gets up in the morning.  Other joints that bother her include her knees, hips, and elbows.  She gets nausea in the morning, and she gets twitching of her left eye that occurs daily.  Radiographically, there are questionable areas of possible calcification on the medial side of the ramus and also there is a specific shadow up over the lateral aspect of the ramus prosthesis and cannot tell if it is an actual heterotopic bone or whether it is a shadow from the prosthesis itself.  At this time, she is not seeking any surgical intervention, and I cannot verify whether she in fact has enough calcification to warrant surgery at this time.  I am not sure whether surgical intervention at this point would be of any benefit to her.  

She has tried Lyrica, Neurontin, and Topamax without any significant improvement or relief.  These medications tended to give her extreme vertigo and she had difficulties even getting out of bed.  I did mention to her that it is possible that the narcotics that she is on could be exacerbating her pain.  She is currently taking the following medications:

Kadian 60 mg b.i.d. 
MSIR 15 mg 1 to with tablets per day. 
Trazodone 50 mg q.h.s.

I suggested that her pain doctor may consider trying some other medications to help reduce her exposure to the opiates.  I suggested perhaps trying methadone or suboxone.  Her diagnoses at this time would be as follows:

Severe left TMJ pain. 
Left-sided myositis. 
Left-sided headaches. 
Fibrosis and possible calcifications around the left TMJ prostheses.

At this time, I will continue to follow her on a yearly basis.  She is to return in 1 year.
