CHRISTOPHER SIMS								10/31/2010
DATE OF BIRTH:  06/04/1991

Christopher is referred by Dr. William Hang, DDS, MSD, 101 N. Westlake Blvd., Suite 202, Westlake Village, CA 91362.  

Primary concerns that Christ has includes the following:

Long-term indications of narrow airway.
Desire to successfully straighten teeth.
Desire to breathe through nose.

Christopher is not sure when his jaw joint problems began or the original etiology.  He had previous orthodontics when he was about 8 or 9 with a maxillary expander.  His current orthodontics began in September 2009 with Dr. Bill Hang.  Chris apparently had an impacted maxillary right cuspid and he had a primary tooth extracted and the impacted cuspid uncovered and brought down into position.  Chris gets headaches predominantly on the right side in the temporal area and in the back of the head that occur about twice a month.  He has no overt TMJ pain or myofascial pain or headaches on a usual day.  He rates his jaw function, diet, and disability at zero.  He takes no medications.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo or hearing loss.  He has no other joint problems.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxing. 

In frontal view, Chris has some various areas of asymmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth relationship is about 2.5 to 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The nose is about 2 mm to the left.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the left and the chin is slightly to the right about 1 or 2 mm.  In profile, the maxilla appears to be about 5 mm AP deficient and the mandible about 10 to 12 mm AP deficient.  The chin neckline is a little bit short.  Intraorally, Chris has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has a nice wide arch.  The teeth appear to be nicely aligned and leveled.  He is fairly weak on the attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has some springs on between the upper laterals and cuspids to open some space and he has about 1 mm of space on each side.  He has an anterior cross bite and a left posterior cross bite.  On that side, he is fairly close to being in a cross bite.  He has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally.  He has about 0.5 mm reverse deep bite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  Uvula may be a little bit elongated.  Intranasally, there may be a little deviation with the nasal septum.  The left turbinate appears quite large and filling most of the nasal cavity.  On the left side, the turbinate appears normal in size.  Chris does have a transverse cant to the occlusal plane with the maxillary right cuspid being about 2 mm higher than the left side and the mandibular right cuspid being 1 mm higher than the left side.  On opening, joints seems to be reasonably smooth, but there is an occasional slight glitch in the left side.  He has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  The maximal incisal opening is about 54 mm, and excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of impacted four third molars.  Nothing else abnormal is seen.

Coronal view shows the left turbinate is quite enlarged.  There is some deviation in the nasal septum.  Right turbinate appears more normal.  Sinus appears clear.  

Axial view shows that there is some deviation in the nasal septum.  The left turbinate appears enlarged and appears to block the airway whereas the right turbinate appears more normal in size.  Sinuses are clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit of sclerosis on the top.  There appears to be a little bit of anterior beaking developing.  The articular eminence has a relatively soft slope to it.  The joint space appears reasonably well balanced.  There appears to be a little flattening on the top of the condyle.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit of flattening on the top and in some areas there appears to be some sclerosis.  The articular eminence has a soft inclination.  The joint space appears fairly well balanced and may be slightly decreased posterior.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is a slight decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint, but otherwise it looks pretty good.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width.  There appears to be decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are AP deficient, although there is a skeletal Class III and occlusal Class III relationship.  There appears to be some vertical difference between the right and left sides.  

I have previously done a workup on Chris and the outlined diagnoses and recommended treatment stands as previously reported.  I will wait to see the radiologist’s impression of the joint situation.  Otherwise, the treatment recommendations remain as previously recorded.  

Bill, if you could please send me the I-CAT from when you first saw Christopher that would be very helpful so I can assess to see if he has active condylar hyperplasia.  That would give us a year growth assessment.