NANCY SINSHEIMER							02/21/2011

Nancy is 54 years old, birth date 03/07/1956.  She is referred by Dr. Max Ebrahimian,
5 Erba Lane, Scotts Valley, CA 95066.  

Primary concerns that Nancy has includes the following:

Severe sleep apnea.
Facial pain.
Headaches.
Difficulty swallowing.
Ear problems and balance problems.
Congestion in throat and nose at night.
Laryngospasms.
Mouth and jaw seem to be collapsing.  
Mouth too small for the tongue.  
Speech affected.

She is on numerous medications as outlined in the questionnaire.  She has had no treatment for her TMJ issues or sleep apnea issues to date.  She does have a tooth guard at nighttime to try to control her clenching and  grinding, probably about 10 years ago of unknown etiology, she gets headaches about two times per week that are likely in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area at about a level of 3.  She rates her TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 5, diet at 2, disability at 5.  She takes a number of medications that are listed on the blue form.  She gets occasional right-sided earaches, no tinnitus, but she gets frequent vertigo and has some balance problems.  About 4 to 6 weeks ago, she had a dizzy spell when turning around and fell down some stairs.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and clenching during the day.  Other joints that bother her include her hips and knees.  She has no known allergies and no trouble wearing jewelry.   Nancy has been on a CPAP machine and tried it for 6 months, but was unable to tolerate it.  She cannot sleep with the device on.  

In frontal view, she has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip is 25 mm in length and tooth lip is -1 mm.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded about at least 6 mm and chin at least 15 mm.  Intraorally, Nancy is missing lower first bicuspids and also in the upper arch probable first bicuspids.  She has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars, although has crowns on the mandibular second molars.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relatively and a division 2 malocclusion.  She is probably 4 to 5 mm Class II.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 to 4 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the retromandibular area, but nowhere else around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly, although there are some sort of glitches at times.  The maximum incisal opening is 46 mm and excursion movements in each direction are about 8 mm. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids.  Columellas appear small particularly in the right side.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  Septum deviates a little bit off towards the left side in the posterior aspect. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that her head is postured up and forward on this radiograph and it was not taken in our office.  It shows that there is some constricted airway even with the head rotated upwards with AP dimension at the soft palate level of about 6 mm and at the base of the tongue at probably 4 to 5 mm.  Moderately high occlusal plane angle is present.  

Basic diagnoses for Nancy would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocations.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class II division 2 end-on occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
Hypertrophied turbinates.  
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Sleep apnea.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJ. 
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise 			direction. 
	c.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction.
	d.	Partial inferior turbinectomies.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  