B129
B129 is 14 years old. She is referred by Dr. XXXX. B129's TMJ problems began within the past year of unknown etiology. Her joints just began to click and pop. She had orthodontics from the age of 8 to 11 years and then had braces reapplied when she was 12 years old to the present. Primary concerns are:

Popping in the jaw joints. Intermittent pain. Retruded lower jaw.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B129 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. There is a little bit increased fullness in the right side as compared to the left side by maybe just 2 to 3 mm. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 5.5 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The lower dental midline is about 3 mm to the left. The chin is about 3 to 4 mm to the left. Chin is retruded about 18 to 20 mm. Chin neckline is short. Chin neck angle is not well defined. She does have a slight head postured forward neck position. Intraorally, B129 is missing the mandibular second bicuspids. The rest of the teeth are present and appear to be nicely aligned. In the upper arch, she is missing probably first bicuspids, but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. B129 has just a slight Class II occlusal tendency on the right side, but on the left side she is end-on Class II by probably 4 to 5 mm. She had an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal. Turbinates appear normal in size. Columella may be a little bit wide and nostrils somewhat constricted; however, the family and B129 are not aware of any snoring problems, but she does have some moderate daytime tiredness, but not aware of any sleep apnea issues. She does have a moderate head postured forward neck position, and she is a mouth breather at night. To palpation, B129 has some mild to moderate tenderness over the right TMJ and some minimal tenderness over the styloid areas. Maximal opening is 51 mm. Excursion movement to the right is 7 mm, to the left 6 mm. On opening, she has a pop at about 35 mm of opening and a closing pop of somewhere around 25 mm. On excursions, she has some popping noises in the right joint. She has a slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being 1 to 2 mm higher than the right side. B129 has a slight posterior yaw off towards the right side of 2 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of four developing unerupted third molars. Sinuses look reasonably clear. Bony septum appears relatively straight. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Condyles appear somewhat arthritic. Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear. She has moderately enlarged turbinates. Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and turbinates are just moderate in size and septum appears relatively straight. Left TMJ sagittal views show degenerative changes in the condyle with loss of vertical volume. There is a little bit of anterior beaking and there appears to be a little bit of a posterior osteophyte sticking off the posterior head of the condyle. Joint space appears somewhat constricted. Articular eminence is mildly shallow. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit better morphology than the opposite, although it does appear as though there has been some loss of vertical volume. Articular eminence is moderately shallow except for the more medial side which is a little bit more vertical. There is decreased superior and posterior joint space. There may be just some slight anterior beaking present. It appears there may be some areas of erosion on the head of the condyle, particularly towards the medial aspect. Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to be somewhat narrow compared to the opposite side. There appears to be some sclerosis on the head of the condyle. There is decreased superior joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm. Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good breadth compared to the opposite side. There is decreased superior and lateral joint space. Lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B129 still has some adenoid tissue in her nasopharynx area, but may not be causing any significant obstruction to the airway. She has a high occlusal plane angle. Her oropharyngeal airway is decreased at the base of the tone and is somewhere around 5 mm (normal is 11 mm). At the soft palate level, she measures closer to 8 mm (normal 11 mm).

Basic diagnoses for B129 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR).
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Class II end-on occlusion, being worse on the left side as compared to the right side. Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm (normal 11 mm).
Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction. Impacted third molars x4.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Maintain present alignment of the maxillary arch. Maintain current alignment of the mandibular arch. Surgery. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction, advancing pogonion approximately 15 mm.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 4 mm and down grafting posteriorly 4 mm.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B129 MRI AGE: 14/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears small in size and appears to have lost vertical and mediolateral volume. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. Discal tissue may be anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has also appears to have lost some vertical volume. Lateral pole of the condyle is significantly lower than the medial pole. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm or so. Discal tissue may be anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is positioned medial in the fossa. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced and sitting down beneath the articular eminence. Articular eminence is quite steep. There is decreased vertical and posterior joint space. The condyle appears to have significantly resorbed. The condyle appears narrow mediolaterally. The disc may be significantly deformed. Translation on opening is relatively poor. There appears to be restricted translation. I do not believe that the disc reduces. It is very difficult to identify discal tissue in these MRIs.

Right TMJ sagittal view notes a lot of distortion probably due to braces. The condyle appears arthritic. There is loss of vertical dimension. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The discal tissue may be anteriorly displaced, but it is difficult to identify. Some views showed decreased superior joint space. On opening, there is better translation on this side as compared to the opposite side. I do not believe that the disc reduces.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis with loss of condylar volume bilaterally and with anteriorly displaced discs of questionable salvageability.

