GEORGE SMARZ									07-27-04

George is 34 years old.

Patient History

He had a broken jaw about 7 or 8 years ago. He had a fractured right mandibular angle. George is in good health with no major medical problems. George is not aware of any jaw joint problems. He has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, TMJ noises, earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. 

Patient Concerns

Jaws are too far positioned posteriorly 
The upper jaw is up too high 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, George has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry and balance. Upper lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -4 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline. 

In frontal view, George has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm. Chin appears to be AP deficient by probably around 12 mm or so. Chin-neckline is short, and submental area is full. Chin-neck angle is relatively well-defined. Upper lip is retruded by about 5 mm posterior to the upper lip. George has a slight obtuse nasolabial angle and a slight C-shaped curve to the upper lip. Chin appears retruded relative to the lower lip, but the lower lip may be everted some because of the occlusal relationship.

Intraorally, George has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth are reasonably well aligned and leveled. A little bit of crowding, lower anterior arch. Has adequate attached gingiva. Occlusal plane is relatively flat. In the upper arch, George has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. There is an anterior deep bite of probably about 2.5 mm. Uvula looks a little bit enlarged in width and maybe just slightly in length but not too bad. Soft palate looks relatively normal. Oropharynx appears relatively normal. 

Nasal septum is deviated a little bit off toward the right side. Turbinates are normal in size. Airway itself looks fairly good. Some minimal constricture of the luminal valves, but not too significant. 

In the left TMJ on opening, he does have a little bit of a click/crepitus kind of noise at about 30 mm of opening. On closing, he has the same kind of noise but more of a click kind of sound. He has no tenderness around the head and neck area nor does he have any tenderness over the TMJ areas. Incisal opening is probably about 57 mm. Excursive movements are about 12 mm in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the four third molars are absent. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Nasal airway appears clear. Has a wire in the right ramus area where the previous fracture was. He has had a previous procedure to lengthen the vertical height of the chin, and the chin is rotated downward. He has two bone plates anteriorly with each bone plate having it appears four screws below the horizontal osteotomy site and on one plate one screw above in the midline and along the side another plate in the cuspid/first bicuspid area adjacent to/fairly close to the mental nerve where there are two screws. A bone cut is just barely beneath the inferior alveolar nerve canal. There is also a screw at the posterior aspect of the mandible on each side unknown but apparently holding an implant in place along each side posteriorly. On the horizontal osteotomy, it appears that there is a bony union on the left side posteriorly but does not appear to be any bone that has grown between the inferiorly repositioned segment and the superior segment. Bone gap probably measures about 8 mm in vertical discrepancy. Left condyle appears a little flattened on the anterior aspect. Right condyle appears to have a little bit better morphology. 

Waters view shows that the mandible appears fairly symmetric. Bone screws can be seen in the posterior body area toward the inferior border supporting an implant back in that area. Nasal airway appears good. Sinuses appear clear. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it. A little bit of flattening on the anterior head. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Some increased superior and posterior joint space. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that actually has a little bit better shape than the opposite side. May be a little sclerotic on the anterior head but not too bad. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Appears to be good almost excessive joint space vertically and superoposteriorly.

On opening, there is almost hypertranslation of the condyles bilaterally. On the open view, the right condyle actually looks a little bit more arthritic than the left side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is vertical maxillary deficiency and AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency. The chin is rotated downward and probably backward from its original position. A big bone gap is seen between the inferior and superior segments. Two bone plates are stabilized in place. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 5 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 12 mm. 

Tooth-size analysis shows that there is a Bolton’s difference of about 2.5 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Anterior mandibular vertical excess
Essentially a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with just a slight Class II tendency of probably 2 mm
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Previous chin procedure with the chin rotated downward and backward from its original position
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations
AP microgenia
Previous implants to angles of the mandible although positioned significantly medially
Clicking and crepitation in the left TMJ

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJs

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure and retract

Surgery
Maxillary osteotomies to advance and downgraft the maxilla approximately 7 to 8 mm anteriorly and 8 to 9 mm posteriorly
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Vertical reduction AP augmentation genioplasty. The other option for treatment for George would be to not include the chin procedure. He would actually prefer to leave the chin where it is. He was worked up both by repositioning the chin upward and forward and leaving the chin where it is, and he prefers to leave the chin where it is
Possible bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors if it is confirmed that the TMJ discs are dislocated
Removal of bilateral mandibular ramus implants
Possible repositioning of mandibular ramus implants by placing a little bit higher on the ramus as well as to provide more lateral projection

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

George also wanted to take all of his x-rays with him so we have no x-rays.