AMY SKIDMORE-CLARK							11/11/2011

Amy is 31 years old, birth date 03/30/1980.  Referred by Dr. Farhad Moshiri, 1320 E. Kingsley, Suite B, Springfield, MO 65804.

Amy is not exactly sure when her joint problems began, but she developed pain shortly after she had her wisdom teeth removed in 2002 and it is possible she may have had some joint issues prior to this that were relatively asymptomatic that were exacerbated by having the wisdom teeth removed.  

Primary concerns that Amy has at this time include the following:

Lower jaw has become significantly retruded.
Headaches.
Pain in the jaw joints.
She has difficulties sleeping and breathing is sometimes difficult.  
Teeth and jaws do not meet properly and the bite is getting worse.

Amy rates her headaches that occur predominantly in the frontal and temporal area at a level of 9.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, daily pain around the head and neck area at 9, jaw function at 9, diet at 7, disability at 6.  She get no earaches, but occasional tinnitus and daily vertigo but no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her fingers and her knees.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  Treatment to date has included primarily just a splint that she wore beginning in 2007 for about 8 months.  She takes Tylenol and ibuprofen for her pain.  Amy has moderate amount of snoring when she sleeps and she has some severe daytime somnolence.  She may have some moderate sleep apnea problems but has not had a sleep study.  She states she has a severe sleep disorder and she probably breathes predominantly through her mouth at nighttime and also some during the day.  In frontal view, Amy has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 2.5 mm.  The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Mandibular midline is about 2 mm to the right and chin is about 2 to 3 mm to the right.  In profile view, she has AP maxillary deficiency with the maxilla being retruded probably about 5 to 6 mm.  The chin is retruded about 22 mm.  The chin neckline is short and the chin neck angle is not defined.  In the upper lip, the upper lip supralabrale is about 2 mm posterior to subnasale.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has significant crowding in the lower anterior arch probably a good 8 mm of crowding.  She has real thin attached gingiva around the lower central incisors.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through second molars present.  She has about a 2 mm anterior open bite.  She has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side, but on the left side she is a little bit Class III, probably being about 3 to 4 mm Class III.  Amy has a tendency to posture her mandible off towards the right side.  When I was able to get her jaws completely relaxed, she closed up with the mandibular and chin midline pretty much on the facial midline.  In closing, she hit initially on the mandibular and maxillary right second molars and all other teeth were out of occlusion.  In her centric relation position, she is also Class I cuspid bilaterally.  Oropharyngeal tissues look fairly healthy except she has a significantly enlarged left tonsil that comes close to midway across the oropharynx and the right tonsil is moderately enlarged.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged, but the septum looks reasonably straight.  The columella is moderately wide.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Turbinates appear enlarged and appear to block most of the airway.  Sinuses, however, look clear.  The condyles are significantly resorbed.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear, but the turbinates are quite large and appear to block most of the airway.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear, but the turbinates are quite large and appear to block most of the functional airway.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that the mandible is postured forward when the x-ray was taken.  There are degenerative changes of the condyles with almost the entire condyles completely resorbed.  Articular eminence also is fairly shallow.  There is anterior beaking on the remaining head of the condyle.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that postured way forward in the fossa.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow with a little greater inclination than the opposite side.  Most of the condyle has been resorbed away.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows that there has been significant loss of vertical height of the condyle.  There is some medial beaking of the condyle.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly maybe about 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe condylar resorption.  There is some medial beaking of what is left of the condyle.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves probably about 4 to 5 mm in the fossa area.  The condyle is positioned almost anterior to the fossa.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the mandible is postured forward.  It appears to occlude only on the second molars.  Tongue fills the oral cavity.  The oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 9 mm and at the base of the tongue about 4 mm.  I do not believe the patient is relaxed or in centric relation on this radiograph.

Amy in centric relation has an overjet of about 4 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Amy would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ rheumatoid arthritis.  
Severe mandibular retrusion and hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP posterior vertical and transverse hypoplasia. 
Basic Class I occlusal relationship.
High occlusal plane angle.
In centric relation occluding only on the right second molars.
Severe crowding in the lower anterior arch.
Mild crowding in upper anterior arch.
Bilateral TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Headaches.
Periodontal defect around lower incisors. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Periodontal evaluation and grafting of lower anterior arch.
2.	Extract maxillary second bicuspids and mandibular first bicuspids.  
3.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch closing extraction space.  Try and lose 			posterior anchorage so that there is 2 mm or less retraction of the incisors.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch. 
4.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
5.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses with the chin coming forward 				approximately 22 mm.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to the advance the maxilla in a counter-     
                        clockwise direction with incisal edges coming forward about 5 or 6 mm.
	c.	Bilateral partial nasal turbinectomies.  
	d.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	e.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
6.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  