PAUL SKINGLE									10/17/2005

Paul is 54 years old, referred by Dr. Al Bishop.  Paul is in good health with no major medical problems.  He takes Lipitor 10 mg per day and baby aspirin.  Paul's TMJ problems began about 5 to 6 years ago of unknown etiology.  He went to see Dr. Miles Poor who made a splint for him but this tended to make his situation worse.  He discontinued it.  Things seemed to get a little bit better for him for awhile and then things became significant once again.  He went to see Dr. Charlie Holt, who made a splint for him and also did some TMJ injections.  This did not correct the problem either.  His dentist, Dr. Doug Henson, referred Paul then to Dr. Al Bishop.  Dr. Bishop examined Paul and referred him here.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS 
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints.
Pain associated predominately with the right jaw joint area.
The pain can wake him up at night. 
He tends to have some locking at times.

Paul has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo but may have some decreased hearing in the left ear due to previous ear problem, perhaps a ruptured eardrum when he was much younger.  He does have some problems with his lower back and has right-sided sciatica.  He says he has a lot of cerumen in his ears.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  He has no problems with headaches.  He rates his TMJ pain at about 7 to 8, but it is not that all the time, but almost daily he will have some episodes of fairly significant pain.  He rates his average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 3, diet at 1, disability at 1.  Paul reports no difficulties breathing through his nose.  Paul does have a constant low-level pain present but at times the pain in the right joint particularly can escalate quite a bit.  

Intraorally, Paul has all of his lower teeth except for his left second and third molar and right third molar.  Actually, his right third molar is probably present and the second molar is probably gone with the third molar forward in the second molar position.  He has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, he is missing maxillary right second and third molars and left second and third molars.  He does have a lot of crowns present.  He basically has  a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side, Class II cuspid relationship on the left side.  He has some upper arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being probably 3 to 4 mm posterior to the left cuspid and in the lower arch, the left cuspid is about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  He has about a 4 mm anterior deep bite relationship.  Paul does not report any problems with snoring.  Oropharynx appears clear.  There appears to be adequate distance from the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall.  The uvula is just mildly hyperplastic but not too significant.  Faucial pillars appear relatively normal.  Intranasally, he does have some deviation of the nasal septum and it is a little bit off to the left side anteriorly and in the mid cartilage area, it bows off to the left side.  The turbinates appear moderately large in size.  Paul reports very minimal problems with snoring.  No problems with daytime somnolence and he is not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  On opening, there is a click in the left joint about 10 mm but it is much more subtle and it is much more obvious than the click on the right side because of 25 to 30 mm of opening.  On closing, there is a cervical click on the right side at 20 mm and on the left side about 5 mm.  Paul has no tenderness to palpation on the head and neck area.
PAUL SKINGLE				10/17/2005				Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the absence of mandibular left second and third molar, maxillary left first molar and third molar with second molar replacing the first molar, maxillary right second and third molar, mandibular right second bicuspid, probably the second molar with third molar forward in the second molar position.  The sinuses look reasonably clear.  Cannot evaluate condyles on this view.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  The septum appears very straight.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  At the base it appears to obliterate most of the nasal airway.  However, the patient does not report any problems breathing through the nose.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is flattened on top with a little bit of sclerosis present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  It appears there is a decreased superior and posterior joint space.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little flattened on the posterior aspect.  Decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the patient has skeletal Class I relationship with a deep overbite.  Low occlusal plane angle is present.  Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted.  The tongue appears to be positioned downward with a significant increased space between the dorsum of the tongue and the palatal area.  The patient reports no sleep apnea symptoms or problems.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
TMJ pain.
Occasional locking on the right side.  
Relative mandibular hyperplasia.
Class I occlusion on the right side, Class II on the left side.
Anterior deep bite of 4 mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Algin and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization.
Consider arch bars if patient does not want to proceed on with orthodontic treatment.
3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.