PETER SINDELAR									04/27/2007

Peter is referred by Dr. William Hang.  Peter is 60 years old.  He has severe sleep apnea for which he uses a CPAP machine.  He has difficulty breathing through his nose.  He has snoring and daytime tiredness.  He has sleep apnea which was diagnosed in 1995.  He has significant problems with tiredness during the day.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Lovastatin 20 mg.
Nasonex 50 mcg two times per day.
Quinine sulfate 260 mg.
Allergy injections 3 shots once a month.
Amoxicillin 500 mg for dental premedication.

The only previous surgery that he has had is his wisdom teeth removed in 1964 and his tonsils removed in 1952.  He has been diagnosed as having mitral valve prolapse.  His desires are as follows:
Eliminate his sleep apnea and the need for CPAP.
He wants more energy. 
He wants to be able to breathe through his nose and through his airway.

He has no TMJ issues.  He does get some mild headaches about 2 times per week and they occur primarily on the top of his head.  No TMJ.  He has headaches that he rates at a level of 1.  No pain on the average day and he rates his jaw function, diet and disability all at 0. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal septal deviation with a large septal spur.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Crowding in the lower anterior arch.
Severe sleep apnea.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to help keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward.




PETER SINDELAR				04/27/2007				Page 2

Surgery.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla about 7 mm and down graft it posteriorly.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction approximately 12 mm.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Nasoseptoplasty with removal of large bone spur.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
