HEATHER SINGLETON								04-15-03

Heather is 26 years old. Dr. Paul Pin referred Heather. Also, she is being seen by her dentist, Dr. Brian Blevins in Lufkin, Texas. She also has seen Dr. Mike Scott, an orthodontist in Longview.

Patient History

Heather’s problems began about four years ago of unknown etiology. Her joints just started to click and pop. She had a splint made by Dr. Scott that seemed to help some, but it got stretched out and became ineffective. Dr. Blevins also has made a splint for Heather that included an upper and lower splint connected by a bar that helped hold the lower jaw forward. Heather said that when she wore this, she did sleep a little bit better, and she could breathe a little bit better, and she felt better, but by 10 o’clock in the morning, all the symptoms were back again. 

Currently, she only takes BC powder for her headaches.

Heather gets headaches that sometimes can last three to four days at a time. They usually start in the afternoon and get worse through the rest of the day. Her average headaches are about a level of 5 and involve the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area, but they can escalate to 8. She rates her TMJ pain at 8, overall pain at 5 on an average day, jaw function at 6, diet at 5, and disability at 2.

Patient Concerns

Bilateral loud clicking and popping
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Speech affected
Difficulty swallowing
Difficulty eating and chewing
Burning sensations around her face, mouth, and ears that get hot

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Heather has good facial symmetry and balance. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much aligned with the facial midline. In profile, she has fairly good facial symmetry. Some slight fullness in the submental area. 

Intraorally, Heather has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a nice Class I cuspid-molar relationship. Oropharynx appears clear, although she does have a bifid uvula. 

Intranasally, turbinates are fairly large and look just slightly inflamed. May be causing some moderate obstruction. When Heather tries to blow her nose, however, she says that she can’t get air out. It gets blocked off. She can breather in fairly easily though.

On opening, she has clicks in both joints. Left one appears to click at about 10 mm of opening; right side may be at 15 mm of opening. Both tend to click on closing at approximately 10 mm. Interestingly, the click on the left side is a little bit more prominent on opening, but the click on the right side is a little bit more prominent on closing. Maxillary incisal opening is 42 mm but without discomfort only 24 mm. Excursive movements are about 9 mm in each direction. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear moderately large. Third molars are absent. All other teeth are present. A 3 x 3 retainer is seen. Condyles appear a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly. Articular eminences appear quite steep, and the left one appears quite elongated even compared to the right one. 

Waters view shows that the right turbinate appears enlarged and blocking off most of the airway. Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa, and, in fact, clear at the back wall of the fossa. Articular eminence is quite steep. Superior joint space also is somewhat decreased. Anterior joint space is increased. Probable vertical orientation of the articular disc. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with slightly decreased vertical joint space. Articular eminence is fairly vertical. Increased anterior joint space indicating probable vertical orientation of the disc within the joint space. 

Open views show good translation of both left and right TMJs.

Cephalometrically, there is a good Class I skeletal jaw relationship. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is about 8 mm and at the base of the tongue probably about 7 to 8 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with early reduction
Relative mandibular hyperplasia
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Earaches 
Tinnitus 

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion and create room within the TMJ joints to accommodate the discs

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
