TODD SKIBBA									9/14/05

Todd is 46 years old, referred by Dr. Tom Weil, Austin, Texas.  Todd takes the following medications:

Daypro 1200 mg per day.
Once a year infusion of experimental Campath for MS.
Tylenol for pain and inflammation.
Glucosamine, chondroitin and MSM.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Severe TMJ pain.
Loss of jaw function.
Extreme difficulties eating and chewing.
Inability to get dental care.
Severe ringing.

Todd's TMJ problems began about 13 years ago.  He relates it primarily to stress and clenching.  In 1997, he underwent splint therapy and he tried for quite awhile with splints but these devices only increased his pain levels.  He has had cortisone injections predominantly into his muscles but possibly into his joints x4.  He has had also botox muscle injections x2.  He has received no other treatment.

Todd states that he was in a flood with his wife in New Orleans in 1983.  Since then, he and his wife have developed some significant parallel medical problems.  They both have developed pustular psoriasis that affects predominantly the soles of the feet and the palms of the hands.  These problems began apparently after the flooding.  Their water had a brownish color to it.  They called the health officials and they told them they were just flushing out the pipes.  It continued on and on and they drank the water and bathed in it and finally it was figured out that the septic tank was backing up and sewage was getting into their water line.  Besides developing the pustular psoriasis, both Todd and his wife have developed ossification of the rib cartilage.  At times the rib cage will swell up and become quite lumpy.  Apparently his wife began getting the pustular psoriasis about a year after that.  Todd began getting the calcification of the rib and sternal cartilage about 4 years afterwards.  Then after that, he developed the psoriasis and then his wife developed the ossification of the ribs and sternal cartilage.  One of the differences was that Todd would take showers whereas his wife would take baths.  His wife also has had to have laser treatment for precancerous dysplasia vaginally.

Currently, Todd's symptoms include some earaches and he has severe tinnitus at times.  He has no vertigo or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother him involve primarily some tinnitus in the right elbow and he has had a procedure performed on the left hip where 3 pins were placed.  These pins were subsequently removed.  He has an allergy to Vioxx and codeine.   He is very much aware of clenching of his teeth and does that during the day and probably at nighttime as well.  He gets severe flareups in the jaw areas where he gets significant swelling and debilitating pain.  He really does not have much problems with headaches at all.  On an average day he rates his TMJ pain at but it can escalate to a 10.  
TODD SKIBBA				9/14/05				Page 2


These flareups occur at least once every month or two.  For awhile he would have a flareup and it would just go away and begin again.  It has subsided a little bit perhaps since he began the injections of the Campath.  He rates his average daily pain at 3 except for the flareups when it does escalate significantly.  He rates his jaw function at about an 8, diet at 5, disability at 6.  He reports no problems with urinary tract, bladder system, ocular area, respiratory system, GI system, etc.  He has been told that he has deep pockets around his gingiva.  He smokes 1 pack of cigarettes per day and has done this for 26 years.  He does at times get a tightening feeling in his throat and he feels as though his uvula hangs down at times as well.  He does have problems with fatigue and has been developing problems with short-term memory loss.  He has had problems with palpitations in the past with his heart but it only occurs occasionally and he has been evaluated for it and the doctors told him to wait until he develops worsening problems if they do occur.  He does have the ossification problems of the rib cartilage and sternum.  He has had a fair amount of exposure to birds.  From the age of 5 to 10 years he lived in Kentucky next door to a farm where they had ducks, peacocks and chickens.  He was around these birds quite a bit.  In addition, the farm also had cows and horses.  When he met his wife she had had a parrot for about a year and then they kept the bird for an additional year before getting rid of it.  This was in about 1982 or 1983, coincidentally around the same time as the flood occurrence.  He had 1 cat for about 17 years that died in 1998 and it did eat birds.  He had a Labrador for about 10 years then it died in 1989, but it was not particularly a dog that chased and ate birds.  The cat during its last 8 years was predominantly an indoors cat by that time so it was just the first 10 years that he partook of bird delicacies.  For about the last 5 to 6 years, Todd usually keeps a couple of pet rats around.  These rats live about 2 to 2-1/2 years and die and then they are replaced.

In the frontal view, Todd has good facial symmetry and balance.  On profile, Todd also has good facial balance and harmony.  Intraorally, Todd has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars and also the upper teeth.  He has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Basically, he has a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  He has a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1 to 2 mm higher than the left side.  Occlusion seems to fit together very well in a Class I.  He has about a 1 to 2 mm vertical overbite relationship.  He does have premature contact of his left teeth before the right teeth come together.  Intraorally, the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars as best as can be seen appear relatively normal though there is a little redness probably from the chronic smoking.  Nasal airway is good.  To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the left masseter, left TMJ, left styloid and left SCM and some fine crepitation in the left TMJ.  Incisal opening is 14 mm.  Excursive movement to the right side about 1 mm, to the left side 5 to 6 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
He is missing all 4 third molars.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  He has some deep pockets particularly around the maxillary left lateral incisor and all the upper incisors appear to affected some.  The right joint cannot be seen very well but the left joint appears severely arthritic.


TODD SKIBBA				9/14/05				Page 3



Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Turbinate on the left side may be a little bit enlarged. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that actually has fairly good morphology.  The joint space appears a little bit thin.  Articular eminence has a relatively normal inclination.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears quite arthritic and it appears there may be bone-on-bone contact.  Mild degeneration appears to be present.  On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints but with greater restriction in the left joint.  It just has very minimal forward translatory abilities.  

Lateral cephalometric shows that there is a little bit of vertical asymmetry in the transverse occlusal plane angle and this also translates to the inferior border of the mandible where the left side is higher than the right side.  Oropharyngeal airway looks normal and he has a skeletal Class I profile with good facial balance.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
     1.   Left TMJ severe degenerative arthritis with ankylosis.
     2.   Severe left TMJ pain.
     3.   Severe tinnitus.
     4.   Myofascial pain.
     5.   Severe masticatory dysfunction.
     6.   Multiple sclerosis in 2003.
     7.   Pustular psoriasis.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Left TMJ condylectomy, debridement and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Left TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen.)
Application of arch bars.