JODY SMITH										12-29-03

Jody is 32 years old and referred by Dr. Adam Andrews.

Patient History

Jody has had multiple TMJ surgeries, approximately 15 from 1991 through 2001. The only medication Jody takes is oxycodone 40 mg b.i.d. This medication is inadequate to control her pain at this time. She does receive Botox injections to her muscles about every two months and has done this since 2001. They apparently inject the masseters, temporalis muscles, and medial pterygoid muscles. 

Jody’s TMJ problems began on 06/19/91 in the military when she sustained a blunt trauma to the right side of her face that injured the left jaw joint. She had her first major treatment in 08/1991 when she had some procedures performed to try to increase her jaw opening. On 10/06/91, she had a left TMJ arthroplasty and discectomy. On 02/07/92, she had a left TMJ gap arthroplasty with a dermal graft placed. On 10/07/92, she had a left TMJ rib graft placed. On 05/26/93, she had bilateral coronoidectomies and jaw manipulations. On 01/13/93, she had a right TMJ arthroscopy. On 06/16/93, she had a left TMJ arthroplasty and silastic spacer. On 07/07/93, she had a right TMJ arthroscopy performed again. In 10/1993, she had multiple procedures to try to increase her jaw opening. On 11/05/93, she had a left TMJ removal of the silastic spacer and other hardware. In 07/1998, she had a left TMJ total joint prosthesis placed. On 11/20/01, she had removal of the left TMJ prosthesis and a dermal graft placed and coronoidectomies repeated again. On 02/28/02, she had bilateral TMJ total joint prostheses placed. 

Between the time that she had rib graft on 10/07/92 through 06/16/93, she had almost daily sedation and jaw expansion but still continued to produce bone and ankylosis. 

In addition to the TMJ surgeries, she has also had genioplasty performed twice to try to align the chin up with the center of her face. She also had liposuction done to try to decrease the illusion of her jaws becoming more retruded. 

In addition to all the surgical procedures, she has bone through biofeedback, relaxation therapy, physical therapy, TENS treatment, Therabyte, Therapacer, tongue blade therapy, and jaw exercises.

The only other joint area that she has problems with is with her neck. She may have a component of fibromyalgia. However, the VA Hospital refutes this as they don’t believe that syndrome exists. She also has been diagnosed as having chronic fatigue problems. She is also aware of nocturnal and daytime clenching. Jody states that she has numbness throughout most of her facial area. She has some sensation but no fine sensations at all. She basically feels numb throughout the whole facial area. Has weakness in the frontal branches of the facial nerve, and the left marginal mandibular branch seems quite a bit weaker than the right side. She gets migraine headaches but besides those has fairly constant headaches particularly between the Botox injections. The headaches are primarily in the temporal and frontal area at about a level of 8. She rates her TMJ pain on an average day at about a level of 8 and overall pain around the head and neck area on an average day at about 8. Jody rates her jaw function at a level of 9, diet at 8, and disability at 7.

Jody does have significant problems sleeping at night.
Patient Concerns

Primary concerns and problems that Jody currently has include the following:

TMJ pain
Headaches 
Malocclusion where the teeth and jaws do not fit together well at all
Decreased jaw opening
Ringing in the ears
Neck and shoulder pain
Earaches 
Lightheadedness
Dizziness
Light sensitivity
Hearing loss
Eyesight loss on the left side
Cardiac arrest x 2 during surgery
Speech problems associated with the jaw malalignment
Difficulties eating and chewing
Inability to have dental work done on her teeth
Major disabilities associated with her jaw problems and joint problems
Depression secondary to all the above
Difficulty swallowing, and this has been attributed to the jaws becoming more receded
Sleep disorder

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Jody has fairly good facial balance in the middle and upper third face. Some asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. She has increased fullness in her cheek on the left side as compared to the right side. Appears that the angle of the mandible is shifted probably 5 to 6 mm further off to the left side than the right side. Maxillary dental midline is shifted about a millimeter off to the left. Lower incisors are 6 mm off to the left side, so mandibular dental midline is 6 mm off toward the left side. Chin is probably about 8 mm off to the left. 

In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is probably about 2 to 3 mm posterior to subnasale. Maxilla appears to be probably about 4 mm AP deficient. Mandible may be about 10 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is somewhat short and full. Chin-neck angle is not well-defined. 

Intraorally, Jody has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Has moderate crowding, lower anterior arch. Has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class II, division II type of malocclusion. When she bites down, she hits only on her incisors, and the rest of her teeth are all completely out of occlusion. Transversely, she has a fairly significant cant in the occlusal plane with the left cuspid being probably 3 to 4 mm elevated compared to the right cuspid. In the mandible, the vertical difference of the left cuspid to the right is only about 1 to 2 mm. In occlusion, she only hits on her maxillary central incisors and mandibular right central and lateral incisor. Jody has a Class I cuspid occlusion on the right side but a full Class II cuspid occlusion on the left side. Mandibular left cuspid is 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. Maxillary right cuspid is 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. This contributes a little bit to the AP shift of the occlusion from the left to the right side. Appears her posterior open bite is about 3 to 4 mm with it being greater on the left side as compared to the right side. Does have a full crossbite on the left side. 

To palpation, Jody has fairly severe pain to palpation bilaterally in the temporalis muscles, masseter muscles, medial pterygoid muscles, TMJs, styloid areas, posterior neck muscles, and moderate pain to palpation in the SCMs and shoulders. Incisal opening maximally is 18 mm and without significant pain about 9 mm. She has about a millimeter of excursive movement in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation

Radiographic evaluation shows the presence of bilateral TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Vertical height of the ramus on the left side appears significantly shorter than the right side. She is missing all four third molars, but the rest of the teeth are present and appear to be in reasonable condition. Sinuses appear relatively clear, although there is some interference particularly on the right side where the x-ray is not quite as clear around the joint prosthesis or the sinus. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Appears to be heterotopic bone growing out posterior to the prosthesis on the left side, although it may have been there before. A lot of bone is absent on the left side in the ramus area. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows the TMJ Concepts prosthesis in position. Appears to be some fuzziness around it indicative of perhaps heterotopic bone around the prosthesis. Posterior open bite is seen. There are some metal clips in the joint. Difficult to identify any other coronoid process.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that most of the ramus has been removed from the left side of the mandible. Prosthesis in the fossa appears to be put in at a little bit of an angle. Open bite can be appreciated on this side. There are a number of clips inside.

Waters view shows that the left side of the mandible is significantly shorter vertically than the right side by probably a good 8 to 10 mm at the angle area. Vertical length of the mandibular component of the prosthesis on the left side is significantly shorter than the right side. The left fossa component appears to be set inferiorly parallel to the cranial base, whereas the fossa component on the left side is angled down significantly toward the medial side and is probably 6 to 8 mm lower medially than it is laterally. This may account for some of the shifting of the mandible off toward the left side. The crossbite is very evident on the left side. Transverse cant of the occlusion is really appreciated on this x-ray as well.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the head was tipped upward and forward when this x-ray was taken. Oropharyngeal airway, however, looks very good. Inferior border of the mandible at the angle area on the left side is about 10 mm shorter vertically than the right side. She does have two bone plates in the chin area. Division II malocclusion can readily be seen.

Additional radiographic evaluation from radiographs taken by Dr. Adam Andrews:  Left TMJ AP films shows that the fossa component is placed at an angle. However, condyle component appears to be sitting a little bit more toward the medial side of the fossa. Appears to be heterotopic bone encasing the fossa component and extends down onto the neck of the prosthesis. Bone appears to fairly well surround the condylar head. Probable bony ankylosis in this area.

Right TMJ coronal view likewise shows heterotopic bone that appears to have grown from around the fossa down onto the mandible in the condyle area. Fossa on this side appears more flat in orientation. Screws on both sides appear to be intact in this position. In reviewing pictures of the image of the model, it appears there was no recontouring done in the fossa area. It could be that the polyethylene is fairly flat on this side and could be just the metal base that is more angulated. Jody did have radiation treatment after her last surgery, the day after, to try to prevent heterotopic bone formation. The first TMJ implants that Jody had were Christensen implants just on the left side, and this was a metal on metal prosthesis in the left joint. 

Patient Objectives

Primary objectives Jody would like to reach would be as follows:

Gain jaw function again
Significantly decrease the pain levels
Regain the facial balance and harmony that she once had
Decrease or hopefully eliminate the headaches 

Basic Diagnoses

Multiple previous TMJ surgeries with approximately 14 surgeries on the left side and at least 4 on the right side
Bilateral TMJ total joint prostheses with bony ankylosis
Chronic infection, left TMJ prosthesis
AP maxillary deficiency
Transverse vertical maxillary asymmetry
Mandibular AP deficiency
Left mandibular vertical deficiency
Transverse mandibular asymmetry
Mandibular dental midline shifted 6 mm to the left of the  maxillary dental midline
Bilateral posterior crossbites extending from the lateral incisors through and including the second molars
Class I cuspid relationship on the right side, Class II cuspid relationship on the left side
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side of the maxilla being 3 to 4 mm vertically shorter than the right side
Chin shifted 8 mm to the left of the facial midline
Possible chronic low-grade infection, left mandibular ramus area
Significant iatrogenic loss of the vertical height of the mandibular ramus on the left side
Severe TMJ pain
Severe headaches 
Severe myofascial pain
Earaches 
Tinnitus 
Vertigo
Severe limitation of incisal opening 
Occludes only on maxillary central incisors and mandibular right central and lateral incisor with all other teeth out of occlusion
Sleep disorder

Recommended Treatment


Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward

Surgery, stage I
Removal of heterotopic bone around the TMJ prosthesis
Remove left TMJ prosthesis including mandibular and fossa components

IV antibiotics as recommended by Infectious Disease

Consider possible exploration of left joint area to see if tissue samples could be taken to identify or rule out localized chronic infection

Surgery, stage II
Left TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis
Possible cranial bone grafts to left ramus area
Right mandibular sagittal split osteotomy
Removal of bony ankylosis, right TMJ
Multiple maxillary osteotomies with bone plate stabilization and hydroxyapatite grafting
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Long-term IV antibiotics to try to eliminate any potential infection that may be present on the right side

Other Systems

Jody has problems with the bones in her neck. She gets lot of urinary tract infections and has burning sometimes. She has polyuria and nocturia. She is aware of spilling proteins. She does have difficulties emptying her bladder at times. Her periods are regular, and she has excessive pain with them. She probably has fertility problems and had difficulties getting pregnant during her first marriage. She has one child, age 5. She has been diagnosed with endometriosis. She previously has had pelvic inflammatory disease. She has had an abnormal Pap smear x 2 that required no treatment. As a child, she had pink eye three or four times but no current eye symptoms. She has chronic sinus problems. There is no history of smoking. She gets earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, and has loss of hearing. She gets frequent colds and viruses. She occasionally gets recurrent sore throats and hoarseness. She does have some chest pain that is due to nerve damage on the right side from a rib graft harvest. She has not had bronchitis that is aware of before, but she has had pneumonia x 2, once as a child and the other after her third surgery. She has problems with nausea and abdominal pain and cramping. She is not aware of any STDs. She does have chronic fatigue problems and occasionally runs a fever. She has been told that her thyroid is inflamed, although the lab tests have come back relatively normal. 
She does have memory loss with the short-term being worse than long-term. The only heart problem she is aware of is when she had cardiac arrests x 2, but this was associated with deep sedation and not related to a general anesthetic. She has not been exposed to any birds. She has had cats all of her life but has had only three as each lived to be about 18 years of age. One did catch birds. She has had dogs all of her life and probably six dogs all together, and these have been mainly indoor dogs. For the last six years, she has lived on a farm where they have raised cows (an average of 13) and horses x 3. She has no other implants except for the TMJ prostheses and the bone plates in her chin. 