DANIELLE SMITH								04/02/2011
Birth Date:  11/16/1993
Age: 17 years 3 months

The patient has a history of progressive development of facial asymmetry with the right side of the face becoming elongated compared to the left side.  

Records provided included facial and occlusal photographs, lateral cephalometric radiograph, frontal cephalogram, and a Panorex, but unfortunately the condyles are cut off the imaging.  

In frontal view, the patient has significant facial asymmetry.  The right side or the inferior border of the mandible appears to be a centimeter lower than the left side.  The chin is shifted towards the left side.  The maxillary midline appears to be on the facial midline as does the mandibular dental midline.  He has a significant transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being probably at least 3 mm lower at the cuspid compared to the left side.  There is a transverse cant in the commissures of the lips with the right side being approximately 3 mm lower than the left side.  Profile view shows maxillary AP hypoplasia and mandibular AP hypoplasia but AP macrogenia.  The patient also has external nasal deformity with a dorsal hump and relationship large nose.  The lower third face appears it may be somewhat short in vertical height.  Occlusion shows a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  The right side of the maxilla is probably at least 3 mm lower than the left side.  All the teeth are present.  She has anterior deep bite of about 2 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric evaluation shows the maxillary and mandibular AP hypoplasia, inferior border of the mandible on the right side is probably 12 mm longer in length than the left side (difficult to determine because the lateral cephalogram is magnified).  Significant difference in the occlusal plane angles with the right side being probable 3 to 4 mm lower than the left side.  Oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal.   PA cephalogram shows the elongation of the mandible on the right side compared to the left side and the significant cant in the transverse occlusal plane with probable vertical difference of about 3 to 4 mm with the right side being lower than the left side at the cuspid area.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  There is no Panorex on this patient.  The Panorex that is sent is from a different patient.  However, the lateral and PA cephs show the presence of four impacted third molars.  

The following questions remain in reference to completing the workup:

Does the patient have pain or headaches?
Is there is a nasal airway obstruction?
Is there clicking or popping in the TMJs?
Based on the records available, the following treatment would be recommended:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJs to determine status of articular discs.
2.	Discontinue interarch elastics.
3.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  If an open bite develops on 			the right side, do not attempt to close it.
4.	Surgery.	
	a.	Right TMJ low condylectomy and articular disc repositioning with Mitek 			anchor.
	b.	Consider left TMJ disc repositioning if that disc has been displaced from 			the overload caused by the tumor on the right side. 
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the maxilla vertically as well as 			advance it forward probably 5 to 6 mm.
	d.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance it forward in a slight 			clockwise direction as well as level the occlusal plane transversely.
	e.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
	f.	Right mandibular inferior border ostectomy to established vertical height 			at the inferior border of the mandible.
	g.	Genioplasty to improve facial balance and symmetry.
	h.	Consider possible inferior turbinectomies if there is nasal airway 				obstruction.
i.	Consider external rhinoplasty if the patient requests.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.