CATHERINE ALYSSA SMITH						07/11/2011

Alyssa is 15 years old, birth date 02/04/1996.  Referred by Dr. Terry Adams, 8201 Preston Road Suite 555, Dallas, TX 75225.  

Catherine believes that her jaw joint problems began when she was about 13-1/2 years old.  She was under orthodontic treatment from 2008 through 2010 and towards the end of the orthodontic therapy she began to develop clicking and popping in her joints.  She was initially treated by Dr. Jeff Johnson.  Since then she has worn a splint from September 2010 through March 2011, with Dr. Rick Riggs.  She has had some chiropractic treatment, but it was mainly for scoliosis that she has been diagnosed with and not treatment for the jaw area.  

She gets headaches about 2 times per week at about a level of 4 in the frontal and temporal areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 5, diet at 0, and disability at 8.  She has some mild decreased sensation in her cheek areas bilaterally.  She gets frequent earaches, but no tinnitus, occasional vertigo and no hearing loss.  No other joints bother her, but she does have the scoliosis.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime but not during the day.  

Primary concerns that Alyssa has are:

Pain in her jaws.
Inability to sleep.

Catherine has some mild snoring and severe daytime somnolence likely associated with the significant sleep disorder that she has.  She has difficulty sleeping at night mainly due to the discomfort.  She has been tried on several medications, but nothing seems to work for her.  At nighttime when she sleeps, she feels that she does breathe through her mouth and her nose.  

In frontal view, Alyssa has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 21 mm in length.  Tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm on the left side and about 3.5 on the right one.  The maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left as is the chin which is probably 1 to 2 mm off to the left.  In profile view, the maxilla and upper lip are probably 6 to 8 mm AP deficient and chin is probably 20 mg AP deficient.  The chin neckline is very short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  She does have a head forward postured neck position.  Intraorally, Alyssa has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She is missing the maxillary right first molar and has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She is fairly close to being Class I cuspid on the right side, but on the left side is about 2 to 3 mm Class II.  She has an anterior deep bite of 2 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated significantly off towards the right side.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  She has a cross bite on the maxillary left first molar.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the masseter muscles.  She has some popping in her joints that sometimes is audible.  On the left side, it may be at about 15 mm of opening and 10 mm of closing.  The right side is not as consistent as the left side but this pops occasionally.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.   Panorex shows the presence of 4 impacted third molars and the missing maxillary right first molar.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  The right turbinate appears somewhat enlarged.  The condyles appear arthritic.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The nasal septum is deviated off towards the right side.  The right turbinate appears enlarged and it appears as though the right nasal airway is almost completely obstructed.  On the left side, the turbinate is more normal size. 

Axial view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear.  The septum deviates off to the right side.  The right turbinate is enlarged and it appears that there is some significant obstruction of the nasal airway on the right side, although on the left side, the turbinate appears more normal in size.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is arthritic.  There has been significant loss of condylar volume.  There is an osteophyte extending out from the anterior aspect of the condyle and there is an erosion in the head of the condyle.  The superior joint space is decreased.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone some condylar resorption.  There is some anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  There is actually a pseudocyst in the articular eminence.  Both condyles appear narrow anteroposteriorly.  The articular eminence on the right side has a moderate inclination.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is somewhat narrow in width.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The top of the condyle appears a little bit rough.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to be in a little better shape than the left side.  There is a pseudocyst in the lateral aspect of the condyle.  The joint space is decreased, but greater than the opposite side.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 or 4 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are both significantly retruded and hypoplastic.  Oropharyngeal airway measures 5 mm at the soft palate level and 5.5 mm at the base of the tongue.  The occlusal plane angle appears steep.
Basic diagnosis for Alyssa would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR) with discs anteriorly displaced.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class I occlusion on the right side, Class II end-on occlusion on the left side (3 mm).
High occlusal plane angle.
Impacted third molars x4.
Missing maxillary right first molar.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm (normal AP dimension 8 mm).
Deviated nasal septum off to the right side.
Hypertrophied right nasal turbinate.
TMJ pain.
Headaches
Earaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Advance the maxillary right second molar 		to the first molar position if it is elected to remove that space 				orthodontically as compared to placing a dental implant.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider slenderizing the lower anterior 		teeth to keep from flaring them too far forward and adjust for a potential 			tooth size discrepancy (models were not available for tooth size analysis).
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance it forward in a 				counterclockwise direction advancing pogonion approximately 20 mm.
	c.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise rotation with 			incisors coming forward approximately 8 mm.
	d.	Nasal septoplasty.
	e.	Right partial turbinectomy. 
	f.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4 or 3 if it is decided to 			preserve the maxillary right third molar to move it in the second molar 			position.  
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
4.	Consider dental implant to the right maxilla to replace the first molar with a 	bicuspid size crown. 
