ADAM SMITH										12-20-04

Adam is 18 years old and referred by Dr. Lee Fitzgerald.

Patient History

Adam’s problems began about three years ago of unknown etiology. It started out with a clicking on the right side, and then the left side has become involved. He had orthodontics from the age of 15 to 17. He has had no treatment for his current TMJ condition. He does take Tylenol as necessary for pain. He gets occasional earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo. No other joints bother him. He does have a history of clenching and bruxism at night, and he used to do it quite a bit during the day, but that has lessened some since he has become more aware of it. He has rather constant headaches, but they get a little bit worse up to about a level of 5 about once or twice a week in predominantly the temporal and the frontal area. He rates his TMJ pain at 6 that occurs about every two days to that level. Average daily facial pain and headaches are around 4. Jaw function is at 6 and diet and disability are at 2. 

Clinical Examination

To palpation, Adam has high moderate pain to palpation over the TMJs and moderate pain over the temporalis and styloid areas and SCMs. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly on opening, but on excursive movements, he has a click in the right joint. He has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship and occlusion with about a 3 to 4 mm anterior deep bite. The left joint functioned relatively smoothly today. Maximal incisal opening is 45 mm but 39 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movements to the right are 7 mm and to the left 8 mm. 

Intraorally, he still has his tonsils. Appears to be some adenoid tissue remaining at the posterior pharyngeal wall area that appears a little reddened compared to the adjacent tissues. Soft palpate and uvula look relatively normal.

Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off to the right side. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Appears to have a good airway with the airway much larger on the left side compared to the right side because of the septal deviation.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars. The lower third molars are in lingual inclination. Upper third molars are in a vertical orientation. Sinuses are clear. Septum looks fairly straight. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Left condyle appears a little bit flattened on the anterior aspect but difficult to tell from this view. A 3x3 retainer is present on the lower anterior teeth.

Waters view shows the sinuses are relatively clear. Right turbinate appears a little bit enlarged. Appears to be a nasal septal perforation with perhaps a large spur off toward the right side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little flattened on top with a little bit of sclerosis on top. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa. A little anterior beaking may be present and a little sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles. 

Cephalometrically, Adam has a skeletal Class I jaw relationship. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
Mandibular hyperplasia
Headaches
Myofascial pain
TMJ pain
Masticatory dysfunction

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Place appliances in the maxillary arch
Place appliances in the mandibular arch 


Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies 

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine and retain occlusion
