CLAIRE SMITH									01/26/2007

Claire is 24 years old and is referred by Dr. Keys Townsend from Colorado Springs.  Claire's problems began when she was about 14 years old of unknown etiology.  She developed what appeared to sound like a closed lock situation.  She was on vacation in Colorado and her orthodontist sent an air pillow kind of retainer for her to bite on and this seemed to help her and then she felt better for a while.  In approximately August of 2003, her situation got worse while she was in Costa Rica.  She was unable to open her mouth more than about 7 mm.  She received some treatment down there including some therapy and some muscle relaxants and by the time she came home she could open again fairly well.  

She had initial orthodontics when she was about 11 to 12 years and then had a second stage when she was from about 13 to 15 years old.  She had retainers at the end of that treatment and she found that she would grind through those retainers.  She got orthodontic appliances again placed in April of 2005.  She had physical therapy in the summer of 2006 with some help but did not help substantially.  She did have previous splint therapy beginning in January 2004 for about 15 months up until she started orthodontic treatment but this did not seem to help her at all.  Claire has no problems with earaches but does get occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo but no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her hips and right knee.  She had surgery on her right knee in June of 2003.  She has allergies to dust, molds, animals, pollens and grasses.  She is allergic to penicillin.  She does get allergy shots.  She has no known allergies to jewelry.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism.  

Claire gets headaches about once a week at about a level of 8 that occur sometimes beginning in the back of the head then coming forward through the temples into the frontal area or other times it will start in the front and migrate posteriorly.  These do occur about once a week and it may be stress initiated.  They occur more often in the late afternoon or evening.  She has a constant pain in her jaw joints at a level of 2 but will have episodes during the week that will escalate to 9 and then once that episode occurs, it lasts only for probably less than 10 minutes then her pain levels remain at about a 6.  When she gets her headaches and she takes ibuprofen, it seems to help.  Her average daily pain when she does not get these severe TMJ pains is at about a level of 1.  However, with the heading occurring or when she gets these jolts her average daily pain may be at an 8.  Claire rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 6 and disability at 4. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS: 
Headaches.
Jaw pain with the right side being worse than the left side. 
Neck and shoulder pain.
Difficulties eating and chewing.

In frontal view, Claire has reasonably good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline.  Nasal tip is deviated off to the right side about 2 to 3 mm.  In profile view she has just some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe 2 to 3 mm.  

CLAIRE SMITH				01/26/2007				Page 2

The chin appears that it may be retruded about 8 to 10 mm.  Chin-neckline is a little bit short but the chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, Claire has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth appear to be nicely aligned and leveled.  She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch Claire has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class II end-on occlusion of probably about 4 mm.  She has an overjet of about 4 mm.  She has about a 0 vertical overbite relationship.  Intraorally, the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear normal.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side.  Left turbinate is moderately enlarged but the right one appears relatively normal.  Right airway looks very good, left appears somewhat constricted.  No history of snoring, daytime somnolence nor sleep apnea.  Claire has had her wisdom teeth previously removed.  The only other surgery she had is on her right knee where she had arthroscopic surgery performed in the summer of 2003.  To palpation she has some very minimal tenderness over the temporalis muscles, right masseter and shoulders.  No tenderness directly over the TMJs.  On opening, she has crepitations in both joints with the right side being significantly worse than the left side.  Maximal incisal opening is 57 mm and excursive movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  Claire has no history of having rashes except with amoxicillin that she had a reaction to.  She was told to tell subsequent treating doctors that she is allergic to penicillin.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  The rest of the teeth are present.  They have good bone levels around them.  Both condyles appear arthritic.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Waters view shows that the nasal septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side and the left turbinate appears somewhat large.  The right side appears to have a more open airway.  Sinuses do appear clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows increased joint space and a relatively flat articular eminence although it is long in length and it is possible that she may not have been in centric relation when this x-ray was taken.  There appears to be a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle and there appears to be a little bit of anterior beaking present.  There appears to be slight increased posterior joint space.  

Right TMJ appears to be more taken in centric relation as the molars are a little bit more Class II on this side and she is equally Class II on both sides.  This x-ray demonstrates significant degenerative changes and arthritic changes in the condylar head and decreased joint space posteriorly and superiorly.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow and similar to the opposite side.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship and a Class II occlusion.  She has 0 overbite relationship.  She does have significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with the airway being only about 4 mm from the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal only about 3 mm from the base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall.  
CLAIRE SMITH				01/26/2007				Page 3

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption with displacement and severe degeneration of the articular discs
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
Class II occlusion.
Anterior open bite tendency.
High occlusal plane angle. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 11 mm.)
TMJ pain.
 Headaches.
 Masticatory dysfunction.  

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.
CT scans of TMJs and jaws.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and down graft it posteriorly to decrease the occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

ADDENDUM:  Claire tends to posture her mandible forward in normal jaw relationship.  She has difficulties going back into a centric relation.  This will probably increase her pain levels if she did.  However, from her relaxed profile view, mandibular advancement would not be much more than another 4 to 5 mm.  She postures herself forward almost into a Class I position probably because of comfort and better fit of the bite relationship although it is not in a stable position. 
