TRICIA SMILEY									05-27-03

Patricia is 52 years old. 

Patient History

Patricia has had longstanding TMJ problems. In 1975, she had extensive crown work done with oversized crowns placed on her teeth. In 1984, she had a mandibular advancement performed. Prior to that, she was very much aware of having TMJ problems. Nothing was done to treat the joints at that time. She progressed on, however, with her life even though she had constant headache problems and developed fibromyalgia. On September 3, 2002, she was involved in a horse accident where she was around a horse that got spooked and jumped in the air and caught Patricia in the face and jaw area that then made Patricia airborne for about 10 or 15 feet, and she landed on her chin, sustaining multiple fractures of the mandible, which included bilateral subcondylar fractures and a symphysis fracture. She was taken to surgery that night for what appears to be closed reductions of the subcondylar fractures and open reduction of the symphysis fracture. She has had no further surgeries since that time. 

Patricia has no problems with tinnitus or vertigo. She has no earaches per se but does have painful ears that are tender. She also has sound sensitivity. She is very much aware of daytime and nocturnal clenching and bruxism. She has some decreased sensation to her lower lip and chin area, but this has been present since her orthognathic surgery in 1984 and somewhat worse since her accident. She has sort of a constant low-grade headache at about a level of 3. However, about every month or two she gets headaches that last about three days that register at about a level of 8 that involve pretty much most of her head and neck area. She has continuous TMJ pain that reaches a level of 9 on a daily basis. Overall facial pain and headaches on a daily basis reach at about a level of 9. Patricia rates her jaw function at 9, diet at 8, and disability at 8.

Current Medications

Celebrex 200 mg q.d. and 100 mg q.d.
Hyoscyamine 2/3 tablet b.i.d. 
Triamterene ½ tablet to 1 tablet q.d. 
Effexor q.d. 
Cyclobenzaprine q.h.s.
Ambien p.r.n. 

Patient Concerns

TMJ pain
Severe jaw dysfunction
Retruded lower jaw
Headaches 
Difficulties eating and chewing
Teeth don’t fit together, and she hits on only a few back teeth
Decreased airway so that when she lies down, she feels significant difficulties breathing
Severe snoring
Difficulties breathing through the nose
Burning,acidy taste in her mouth

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Patricia has fairly good facial balance in the middle and upper third face. Some asymmetry in the mandible. She has more fullness in the left angle area as compared to the right angle area by probably about 4 or 5 mm. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm. Maxillary dental midline is shifted to the left about a millimeter. Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm to the left. Chin is probably about 3 or 4 mm to the left. She does demonstrate bilateral masseteric hyperplasia with the left side being a little bit more full than the right side. 

In profile view, she does have some nasal prominence. Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to the subnasale by probably a good 4 to 5 mm. Maxilla is AP deficiency by probably 6 mm. Chin is retruded by approximately 28 mm. Chin-neckline is not well-defined, and she has some extra folds of tissue in the submental area. Chin-neck dimension is extremely short.

Intraorally, Patricia is missing the mandibular left first and second bicuspids and both her molars. She has crowns on all of her posterior teeth. In the upper arch, she is missing the bicuspid on the right side and appears to have the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. Probably missing the second bicuspid on the upper right side. All four third molars are absent. She has crowns on almost all of her maxillary posterior teeth. In centric relation, she appears to occlude only on her second molars and perhaps the first molars, but the rest of the teeth are out of occlusion. She has an overjet relationship of about 8 mm. There is an open bite of about 2 mm. She has a full Class II occlusal relationship. Oropharynx appears fairly clear; however, the posterior faucial pillars are extremely posteriorly positioned and transversely somewhat narrow. This is probably contributing to her airway problems. 

Intranasally, she has a portion of the septum back about 1.5 cm from the front that extends significantly off toward the right side. Turbinates themselves are not particularly enlarged. She does have a wide columella and narrow nostrils. Holding open the nostrils a little bit significantly improved her abilities to breathe through her nose bilaterally. She has had her nose fractured twice before, once about 12 years ago when she got hit in the nose with a golf ball that split it open, and this was repaired, then in 2002, she had another horse accident where a horse hit her nose and broke it. 

She has a crossbite in her occlusion on the left side but not on the right side. Maximal incisal opening is 35 mm. Excursive movements are less than 2 mm in each direction. To palpation, she has mild to moderate pain throughout the head and neck area including the TMJ area where she has moderate pain. Patricia does state that when she had her arch bars on, she developed a worsening of this burning, acidy kind of taste in her mouth. Also, her lips were quite inflamed and sore with ulcerations. Following removal of the arch bars, this has improved some, but she still continues to have a little bit of the acidy taste in her mouth. The only allergy she is really aware of is CODEINE. She has difficulties in jewelry with the stainless steel watch that she has. She sometimes has difficulties with her earrings. Other joints that bother her include her right shoulder, elbows, wrists, hands, fingers, hips, knees, ankles, feet, and toes. She is not sure if the pain in her neck is strictly muscle or if it involves the vertebrae as well.

Transversely, the maxilla appears fairly level.
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex demonstrates the absence of all four third molars and the mandibular left first and second bicuspids and maxillary right first bicuspid. She had root canal therapy on the mandibular right first molar and maxillary right second molar. She has crowns on most all of the posterior teeth. Sinuses appear clear. Turbinates don’t appear excessively large except the left one is a little bit larger than the right one. She has metal plates in her mandible and some interosseous wires there as well. She has interosseous wires in her mandible from previous orthognathic surgery. There is evidence of bilateral subcondylar fractures with significant degenerative changes of the condyles themselves. The condyles are functioning essentially out of the fossa.

Right TMJ tomogram shows the evidence of a previous subcondylar fracture. Condyle is actually functioning on the articular eminence and is forward in the fossa by probably 6 mm. It appears there may be some reactive bone in the fossa itself on the articular eminence. Articular eminence itself is extremely flat. The condyle has obviously been significantly displaced with significant foreshortening of the vertical height of the ramus. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle functioning in the articular eminence. The articular eminence is quite shallow. Condyle appears to be almost 12 mm anterior to the fossa area. The vertical height of the ramus on this side is extremely short.

Opening view shows that there is some translation of the condyles but not really significant. Significant malformation of the articulating area of the condylar stumps. 

Waters view shows significant deviation of the nasal septum off to the right side. Airway is maybe somewhat obstructed. Sinuses appear clear. Vertical height of the mandible on the left side appears significantly shorter than the right side. The lateral aspect of the ramus on the left side is significantly wider than on the right side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the maxilla is AP deficient, and the mandible is severely AP deficient. She has a high occlusal plane angle. Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway particularly at the level of the soft palate where there may be only a couple of millimeters of airway space. She has an anterior open bite and severe retrusion of the mandible. Head is tipped upward fairly significantly, and so the airway might even be more constricted if a normal head position was used when the radiograph was taken. 

Dental model analysis shows there doesn’t appear to be any really significant tooth-size discrepancy. Aligning the models up, get a reasonable occlusion on the right side, but the left side is in a significant big time crossbite. Mandible is probably a good 6 mm wider than it should be to fit with the mandible. The rest of the teeth fit reasonably well.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral severe TMJ destruction secondary to pre-existing pathology and recent subcondylar fractures 
Severe AP mandibular deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Excessively wide mandible due to malunion
Class II occlusion
Anterior open bite of 2 mm
Occluding only on molar teeth with all other teeth out of occlusion
High occlusal plane of 30 degrees (normal 8 degrees)
Missing mandibular left first and second bicuspids, maxillary right second bicuspid, and all four third molars
Presence of bone plates in right anterior mandibular body and symphysis area
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm (normal 11 mm)
External nasal deformity
Wide columella creating narrow nostrils
Nasal airway obstruction
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Severe snoring
Sleep apnea problem
Daytime somnolence

Recommended Treatment

Testing at the Environment Center for the materials in the prostheses

CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Presurgical orthodontics 
Placement of maxillary appliances
Placement of mandibular appliances
Try to work up to surgical grade arch wires

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomy, debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and downgraft the posterior maxilla
Left mandibular body ostectomy to narrow the width of the mandible
Fat graft to bilateral TMJs (harvested from the abdomen)
External rhinoplasty
Reconstruction of columella
Removal of bone plate from right mandibular body and symphysis area

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

Dental reconstruction which may include implants and restorative dentistry