ANDREW SMITH									12-18-02

Andy is 24 years old and referred by Dr. Jim Compton, 4610 N. Garfield, Midland, TX  79705.

Patient History

Andy has had previous orthodontic treatment x 2. Andy’s problems began as a teenager. He first noticed his mandible overgrowing at about the age of 15 to 16. He had had orthodontics x 2 prior to that. The last time was from age about 13 to 15 years old. He did not really develop any pain and headache problems until about the age of 21 or 22. Now he has rather constant headaches. He rates his TMJ pain at 3, overall pain at 5, function and diet at 5, and disability at 4. No problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. He has no problems with any other joints.  He is aware of nocturnal bruxism, and he also does that some during the day as well. Andy does state that he has a lot of problems with snoring and has frequent arousals at night where he is trying to catch his breath, which could be related to sleep apnea problems.

Patient Concerns

Andy’s primary concerns are as follows:
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Difficulties eating and chewing
Major nasal airway obstruction
Clenching and grinding of the teeth particularly at night
Snoring
Frequent nightly arousals apparently due to possibly apneic episodes

Current Medications

He takes no medications.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Andy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is 3.5 mm. Nasal tip is deviated off towards the right side probably about 3 to 4 mm. Maxillary dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 3 mm to the left. Chin is fairly well aligned to the facial midline.

In profile view, Andy demonstrates AP maxillary deficiency. Chin appears to be in fairly good AP position and not too over prominent. Chin-neckline is a little bit shortened, although chin-neck angle is fairly well defined. Maxilla is AP deficient by probably 6 to 8 mm. Chin is moderately prominent compared to the AP position of the lower lip.

Intraorally, Andy has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. He has some fairly significant crowding, lower anterior arch, with the left lateral incisor rotated and blocked out slightly. Probably has about 4 or 5 mm of crowding in the lower anterior arch. Lower left bicuspids are tipped lingually. Appears to have adequately attached gingiva.

Roots are extremely prominent in the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, he is missing first bicuspids but has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars. Some moderate crowding in the upper anterior arch but mainly just due to labial palatal inclination of the lateral incisors. Andy has a full Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally. Has a total crossbite on the left side and also on the right side, but the crossbite is greater on the left side. Has an anterior crossbite as well. Has maybe 1 mm of reverse deep-bite relationship. Upper arch is V-shaped. Appears fairly symmetrical transversely, however. 

Anteroposteriorly, the cuspids in both the upper and lower arch appear symmetrical. Right cuspid in the upper arch is about 1.5 mm higher than the left cuspid, and the lower right cuspid is about 2 mm higher than the left cuspid.

Intranasally, Andy has severe nasal septal deviation with it anteriorly deviating off a little bit to the right side, but then in the mid part of the septum, it deviates severely off to the left side, creating total obstruction on that side of the nose. I cannot see posteriorly at all on the left side. Turbinate appears to be of moderate size. On the right side, the turbinate is moderately hyperplastic. He also has some constricture of the luminal valves just inside the nose. Luminal valve on the right side is more constricted than the left side. Slightly wide columella base. It may be contributing some to the constrictures.

To palpation, he has some mild tenderness of the temporalis muscles. Otherwise, no particular pain around the head and neck area to palpation. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly on opening. On excursive movements, however, there is a lot of bumpiness in the joints that may be due to just condyles functioning around the articular eminences. Maximal incisal opening is about 56 mm. Excursive movements are about 7 mm in each direction. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and upper bilateral first bicuspids. Sinuses look reasonably clear. Nasal airway difficult to assess. Condyles look relatively normal in size and shape, and lay of the condylar head and neck looks relatively normal. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are reasonably clear. Septum is deviated. Turbinate particularly on the right side is enlarged. Has a large septal spur on the left side.

Cephalometrically, he appears to have AP maxillary deficiency and perhaps some mandibular prognathism. Oropharyngeal airway actually looks reasonably good with a dimension from soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall of about 8 mm and from base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall of probably about 10 or 11 mm. Has a low occlusal plane angle. Chin is slightly strong compared to the AP position of the lower incisors.

Tooth-size analysis reveals a Bolton’s difference of 2.5 mm

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Condyle appears to be positioned a little posterior to the fossa. Slightly increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep and moderate in length. The disc could be in a slightly anterior position but difficult to tell.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space may be a little bit decreased superoposteriorly. Anterior space may be just slightly increased but not too significantly. Translation of both condyles is very good.

Andy apparently when he was about 20 or 21 years of age had problems with lightheadedness and dizziness and had trouble maintaining his balance. They didn’t find anything at that time. It is possible it could have been a viral kind of factor for Andy.

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary deficiency
Mandibular prognathism
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations
Class III cuspid relationship
Bilateral posterior crossbite and anterior crossbite
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2.5 mm
Moderate crowding, lower anterior arch
Mild crowding, upper anterior arch
Slight cant in the transverse occlusal plane with the right side being 1.5 mm higher than the left side
Mandibular dental midline shifted about 3 mm off to the left side
Missing maxillary first bicuspids
Severe nasal septal deviation
Turbinate hyperplasia
Severe nasal airway obstruction
Hyperplasia of the uvula
Significant snoring
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Sleep disorder

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure to help compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy. Try to shift the mandibular dental midline a little bit to the right to be coordinated with the midline of the chin

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and expand it
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set it posteriorly into the best occlusion as well as level the transverse occlusal plane
Nasal septoplasty
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies
Uvulectomy

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion