GREGORY SMITH									10-09-02

Greg is 34 years old and referred by Dr. Jaime Vasquez, 2929 Welborn Street, Dallas, TX  75219.

Patient History

Greg has had some previous surgeries including C5-C6 fusion in October of 2000. In January of 2002, he had a deviated nasal septum procedure. He had his wisdom teeth removed in November of 1983 and had a tonsillectomy in June of 1980. He smokes one-half pack of cigarettes per day and has done this for about 18 years. He has a history of high blood pressure problems but not currently.

Greg did develop some TMJ problems when he was a teenager. He was treated with orthodontics from the age of 15 to 18, and this helped settle things down. He also had his wisdom teeth removed. Although he would have some periodic problems, things were fairly quiescent until the past 7 years, when his joint problems started to act up again. Particularly in the last three years, his symptoms have gotten much worse, perhaps in part due to increased stress in his life. For the past year, he has had a splint that he wears at night to help control nocturnal bruxism. 

He gets earaches bilaterally, gets tinnitus, and occasional vertigo. The only other joints that really bother him include his neck, where he has had the previous C5-C6 fusion. 

He has some allergies to NSAIDS, VIOXX, and RELAFEN.

He has a history of nocturnal clenching and bruxism and bites his cheek. He says his pain is bad in the mornings when he wakes up, but the worst pain is usually after 10 o’clock at night. He rates his headaches he gets at least three times a week at about a level of 7 in the frontal, temporal, and towards the top of the head. He rates his TMJ pain on his current medication regime at 4, but without the medications, he can escalate to 9. Overall pain currently is around a level of 5. He said at times before getting on the medications his pain was so severe that it almost made him suicidal. He says the pain is so significant that it even hurts to smile. He rates his jaw function at 7, diet at 7, and disability at 8. He says his diet was almost liquids up until about a week-and-a-half to two weeks ago, and now he is able to eat some food.

Current Medications

Darvocet-N 100, 1 tablet q.4h. p.r.n. pain.
Ultram 50 mg, 1 tablet q.4h. p.r.n. pain.
Claritin 10 mg p.r.n. allergies.
Propecia 1 tablet q.d.
Clonazepam 1 mg p.r.n. anxiety.
Skelaxin 400 mg t.i.d. 



Clinical Evaluation

Gregory has good facial symmetry and balance. He has all of his lower teeth present except for his third molars, and that is also true for the upper arch. Good attaché gingiva, lower anterior arch. He has a fairly good Class I cuspid-molar relationship. He has an anterior deep-bite of about 3 mm. 

To palpation, he has fairly significant pain directly over the TMJs with the right side being a little bit worse than the left. Actually didn’t apply as much pressure as normally. In the right masseter, he had one spot where I hit that created some fairly severe pain at about a level of 9. He had high moderate pain over the styloid areas and milder pain in the temporalis and left masseter area. Maximal incisal opening was 50 mm, but that was with significant pain. He could open about 20 mm without significant pain problems. Excursive movements are 5 mm in each direction, but these are all quite painful for him.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses appear clear. Septum appears fairly straightened. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Missing all four third molars. Other teeth appear to be aligned and leveled well and with good periodontal support. Condyles look large and relatively unremarkable, although the right one may express a little bit of difference in morphology as compared to the left side but not too significantly.

Waters view shows the sinuses appear relatively clear. Nasal airway appears good. Jaws appear relatively symmetrical. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be a little bit large. There is some anterior beaking present. Joint space looks fairly well balanced. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. The image is not quite as clear on this side. 

Left TMJ shows a condyle with fairly good shape and morphology. Joint space looks reasonably good. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Open views show reasonably good translation. Left condyle appears a little bit different than the right one. Right-sided process is slightly elongated. Left side is not as easily seen and is probably indicative of more medial positioning of those structures.

Cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class I relationship. Good oropharyngeal airway is present. Evidence of the C5-C6 surgery with a plate and screws in place.

Additional tomogram obtained for Greg on the right TMJ shows that the condyle has reasonably good shape. Joint space appears fairly good. Articular eminence is slightly shallow but not too bad. 

Other Systems

Greg does have the neck problems. He gets occasional urinary tract infections. He has more recently polyuria and nocturia. Also feels he can’t hold as well as he used to. He has no prostate problems. Has had problems with conjunctivitis and has gotten that fairly frequently in the past three years. He has problems with burning, itching, and dryness of his eyes. He does not wear contacts. He did have chronic sinus problems prior to his septoplasty that was performed in January of 2002 but has not had much problem since then. He does smoke one-and-a-half packs of cigarettes per day and has smoked for 18 years. He does have earaches, tinnitus, and occasional vertigo. He used to get frequent colds and viral kinds of infections prior to his septoplasty and also had frequent sore throats about every three weeks. He does get hoarseness most days, particularly towards the evening. He used to get bronchitis quite frequently before his septoplasty but has not had too much problem since then. He had pneumonia twice in 2001. Some problems with nausea, but it could be related to his nervousness or medications. He does get some abdominal cramping and pain and some constipation problems that he feels are related to the medications. He does suffer from fatigue problems, but this also could be related to medications, as could his short-term memory loss that he currently is experiencing. He also gets occasional hearing loss, and he has to pop his ear to clear his ears.

He did have two parakeets from the age of 7 to 9, and he took care of the birds, cleaning the cages, etc. The birds died of unknown cause. He also would go hunting with his father and did help clean wild birds that they shot. His mother had five cats, and he would stay with her at times, and those cats would eat birds, chipmonks, mice, etc. His father had hunting dogs that were bird dogs.

Dr. Brian Blevins apparently has previously injected Greg’s TMJs. Dr. Blevins apparently injected the joints and probably some muscle areas. Greg had significant reduction of his pain levels, although the pain came back as soon as the local anesthetic wore off.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ reactive arthritis, being worse on the right side than the left side, with radiographic and MRI evidence of bone destruction on the right lateral pole.
Moderate to severe headaches.
Moderate to severe TMJ pain.
Significant difficulties eating and chewing.
Myofascial pain.
Earaches.
Tinnitus.
Occasional vertigo.
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism.



Recommended Treatment

Recommended treatment at this time would include the following:

Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s. and can increase up to 2 tablets q.h.s.

Zithromax, disp. 2 packs, take 1 pack as directed, wait two days, and begin the next pack, keep repeating, refill x 4

Greg is to contact my office in two to three weeks to let me know if he has noted any improvement with the change in the medication regime. The discal position actually looks pretty good on the MRIs, although there are some areas that are questionable as though there could be some pathosis present. Dr. Blevins, whom he has previously seen, had good results in reference to alleviating pain with the injections. Dr. Blevins also has a set of x-rays that I would like to see before recommending any additional radiographic evaluation. Depending what those radiographs show, we may want to get tomograms through the Dental School, which show us better coronal and sagittal views.

If the Zithromax is ineffective, we may need to try a different antibiotic.