CODY SMITH										08-16-04

Cody is 17 years old and referred by William Hang, DDS, MSD, 101 N. Westlake Blvd., #202, Westlake Village, CA  91362.

Patient History

Cody has had a previous broken wrist. Cody is in good health. The primary concern Cody has involves his jaws, and the fact that his jaws are not lined up properly and his teeth don’t fit together very well. Cody is also missing a lot of teeth. He can only chew on the right side of his mouth because the left side there is no way he can get his teeth to even come together there. Cody’s father has the same basic jaw problem, but his dad has been reconstructed mainly with implants. Cody’s problem is worse than his father’s. Cody has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, hearing loss, clenching, or bruxism. He gets headaches once or twice a month that he describes as migraines, and they occur predominantly in the frontal area at about a level of 8 to 9. When he gets them, they last about two hours. He will sometimes take Advil for it but is not sure that it really helps him that much. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Cody has good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 18 mm if the upper lip is filled out some. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -4 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline. Chin is shifted off to the right side about 2 to 3 mm. Lower dental midline is a little bit to the left of the chin midline  by about 2 mm. In centric relation with the teeth apart, Cody has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip. Upper lip is probably 6 to 8 mm AP deficient. Chin is prominent relative to the lower lip which is somewhat retruded probably due to dentoalveolar retrusion. The chin itself appears slightly AP deficient. Chin-neckline is not well-defined. Chin is probably about 4 mm anterior to the lower lip. Some prominence of the nasal dorsum is present.

Intraorally, Cody is missing the permanent lower incisors but has retained primary teeth. Lateral incisors are quite small. Actually has retained primary lateral incisors as well. He has laterals, cuspids, and first bicuspid on the left side and permanent lateral incisor, cuspid, and both bicuspids on the right side. He has some diasthemas between the lower teeth. Has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. Arch appears relatively level to the pupillary plane. In the upper arch, he appears to have his four incisors and then a large space and has his cuspids, first bicuspid on the left side and the same on the right side. He has retained E’s in the upper arch yet. No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. Joints function relatively smoothly. Cody has an anterior crossbite. He is a full Class III bilaterally in the cuspid area. Hits only on the right side, and he actually has no teeth that provide any vertical stop. The upper teeth actually are completely inside the lower teeth. 

Intranasally, the turbinates are moderate in size, but the nasal septum is severely deviated off toward the left side, and it appears that it is obliterating most of the left nasal airway. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses are relatively small but appear fairly healthy. Septum appears deviated off toward the left side, and there appears to be obstruction of the left nasal airway. Appears he had retained primary A’s and B’s bilaterally in the lower arch but yet has laterals, cuspids, first bicuspids bilaterally, and also has a second bicuspid on the right side. Inferior alveolar nerve is located quite high and anterior in the mandible. It is almost directly beneath the lateral oblique rim. Condyles look large and relatively normal. Very short alveolar height posteriorly in the maxilla. Alveolar bone posteriorly in the mandible also appears to be fairly deficient. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with good morphology and fairly good joint space around it. Increased posterior joint space, but he was in a closed position here, and most likely the condyles and mandible may have been postured forward slightly. 

Left TMJ tomogram also shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Joint space looks fairly good. Condyle may be just slightly forward. Posterior vertical height of the mandible relative to the alveolar deficiency is observed on both sides. 

On the open tomogram views, condyles have excellent translation, and both come completely out and well in advance of the articular eminence. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are quite small. Turbinates appear moderate in size. In fact, the right one appears larger radiographically than it does clinically. Septum is deviated off significantly toward the left side in the bony area and clinically in the cartilaginous area as well. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a skeletal Class III relationship. There was actually movement while the x-ray was taken causing some inadequacies in the clarity of the films. He has a fairly large adenoid mass in the nasopharynx that provides minimal airway distance between adenoid tissue and the tuberosity of probably just a couple of millimeters. Oropharyngeal airway, however, is quite good with about 11 mm at the soft palate level and also at the base of the tongue. 

Cephalometrically, he has a retruded maxilla and retruded mandibular dentoalveolus. 

Cody has been under orthodontic treatment since he has been about 9 years old with very little progress being made, so he was under treatment for approximately 5 years before he was referred to Dr. Hang. Dr. Hang removed Cody’s braces and referred him here. Cody actually had his braces on for 6 years. He just had his braces removed within the last couple of months. He had a couple of cavities because he had his braces on so long, but these have been taken care of. 

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Vertical maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency 
AP macrogenia
Partial anodontia missing maxillary bilateral second bicuspids, first, second, and third molars, and bilateral mandibular first, second, and third molars and left second bicuspid
Retained primary central incisors and primary maxillary E’s bilaterally 
Multiple large diasthemas in the upper arch and diasthemas particularly on the right side between the cuspid and first bicuspid
Skeletal and occlusal Class III relationship
Severely deviated nasal septum
Hypertrophied nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue
Nasal airway obstruction on the left side
Extremely high position of inferior alveolar nerve
Recommended Treatment

Extract mandibular primary bilateral central incisors

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up spaces around the upper central and lateral incisors of about 2 mm between each tooth so that larger, more normal crowns can eventually be constructed on the four incisors. Maintain current angulation of maxillary incisors. Maintain space in the right maxillary arch between the cuspid and first bicuspid for future implant placement. Try to adjust the spacing in the upper arch to coordinate well with the spacing to be achieved in the lower arch. Try to be sure that the maxillary cuspids are directly across from each other in the arch and not aligned asymmetrically (maxillary right cuspid is a millimeter or two anterior to the left cuspid currently)
Align and level mandibular arch. Move permanent centrals and laterals forward opening up space around each tooth so that larger teeth will eventually be made during the restorative dentistry process. Be careful not to distalize the cuspids and bicuspids. Try to adjust the spacing around the lower incisors to correlate to that same spacing in the upper arch

Surgery, stage I (for possible consideration)
Bone graft maxillary sinuses bilaterally
Extract maxillary primary E’s
Placement of implants in the second bicuspid and first molar areas bilaterally as well as in the space between the right cuspid/first bicuspid 
Surgery Stage I could be done in the fall so the implants will be well-healed at the time of the subsequent orthognathic surgery, and, therefore, could be used to help stabilize the jaw structures during Surgery Stage II

Surgery, stage II
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward approximately 8 mm and downgraft it 4 to 5 mm. Expand the maxilla approximately 6 to 8 mm 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a clockwise direction
Bilateral lateralization of the inferior alveolar nerve to facilitate implant placement
Bilateral implants to the mandible with probably two on each side
Nasal septoplasty
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 


Restorative dentistry to reconstruct the maxillary and mandibular arches