ALISON SMITH									08/08/2007

Alison is 14 years old and is referred by Dr. Brenda Chockley, 3916 E. 91st St., Ste. 210, Tulsa, OK 74137.  Since Alison has been 5 to 6 years old she has been aware of having clicking and popping in her jaw joints.  Etiology is unknown.  From the age of 8 to 9 when she was in the third grade she had a palatal expansion done of the maxilla but she also wore a headgear trying to correct a retruded maxilla.  She also had some braces on at that time.  Splint therapy was initiated in November of 2006 by Dr. Terry Bennett.  This has helped her significantly with her pain problems.  She currently takes no medications. 

She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 5, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 5, diet and disability at 0.  She gets some mild headaches in the right temporal and posterior head area but only about 2 of those per month.  Her headaches were in a greater magnitude and occurred more frequently prior to receiving the splint.  She has no problems with earaches or tinnitus although she did have tinnitus before she got her splint.  She gets frequent vertigo.  No hearing problems.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Jaws popping.
Jaws locking and catching.
Sore jaws.
Back teeth do not touch.
Unhealthy bite. 
Difficulties breathing through the nose.

In frontal view, Alison hs fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about almost 4 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, she may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency.  She has some problems with the mandible.  She has a lip incompetence of probably about 5 mm.  Chin-neckline and chin-neck angle are fairly well defined.  As she does open her jaws a little bit, it does improve the projection of her chin.  Intraorally, Alison does have all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding.  The lower incisors are a little bit in lingual inclination.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva although is fairly thin in a vertical dimension.  In the upper arch Alison has all of her upper teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding anteriorly.  She has almost an end-on incisor relationship but has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship of probably 5 mm.  She has posterior crossbite tendencies bilaterally being a little bit greater on the right side as compared to the left side.  She has 0 overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal including the uvula, soft palate, faucial pillars and tonsils.  She does have some hypertrophied turbinates but the septum appears relatively straight.  She probably has moderate nasal airway obstruction.  Her mother states that she does breathe a lot through her mouth.  To palpation she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Today the joints seem to be functioning relatively smoothly.  There are times when she has popping on a regular basis and other times, as this time, the popping is not really present.  Maximal incisal opening is 57 mm.  

ALISON SMITH				08/08/2007				Page 2

Opening without significant discomfort is 40 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is 6 mm, left 8 mm.  In centric relation she occludes only on the right central incisors.  All other teeth are out of occlusion.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars that are impacted.  The maxillary sinuses appear relatively.  The condylar head and necks look relatively normal, though may be just slightly elongated.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Waters view shows deviation of the nasal septum and that the turbinates are quite enlarge and appear to obliterate most of the nasal airway.  Maxillary and frontal sinuses as well as the ethmoids appear relatively clear. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa with some decreased superior and posterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that seems to demonstrate an elongated head and neck.  Difficult to evaluate the condyle and fossa interrelationship.  On opening, there is some restricted translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a significant hypertrophied adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx area.  She has a skeletal Class III relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 10 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  She has an end-on incisor relationship.  

Bolton's analysis reveals no problems with tooth size discrepancy.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral condylar hyperplasia.
Mandibular prognathism. 
Transverse maxillary deficiency. 
Vertical maxillary excess.
Class II occlusion. 
Bilateral posterior apertognathia.
Occluding only on the right central incisors.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Impacted third molars x4.
 TMJ pain.
 Sphenoid sinus cyst.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Brain MRI. 
Consultation with ENT specialist or neurosurgeon. 



ALISON SMITH				08/08/2007				Page 3

Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomy.
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Reevaluate to determine if condylar hyperplasia is present by assessing growth.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies (if condylar hyperplasia is confirmed) and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to correct the mandibular prognathism.
Maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly and expand.
Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Vertical reduction with slight AP augmentation genioplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
