LAURA SMITH									08-29-02

Laura is 29 years old and referred by Drs. Moody and Cliff Alexander.

Patient History

She was involved in a motor vehicle accident two years ago and sustained back and neck injuries and brain injury. Upper back and neck still cause some problems for her. She has some mild allergy problems and is particularly allergic to dust. She takes Allegra as needed and guaifenesin as necessary. She records an allergic reaction to PENICILLIN and KEFLEX.

Laura’s TMJ problems may have begun as long as 10 years ago. She had orthodontics between the ages of 17 to 19. As best as she can recall, her teeth did come together before orthodontics and afterwards, but very shortly after orthodontics was completed, she noticed that her bite began to open particularly in front, and her bite began to shift significantly. She does not recall any injury to her jaws at that time.

She has no problems with earaches or vertigo but does get some buzzing in her ears. Other joints that bother her include her neck, back, and knees. She occasionally will get a TMJ pop. She feels her speech is affected by her current jaw alignment, and unless she really concentrates on the enunciation of words, she would have a lisp. The jaw problems create significant difficulties for her singing and enunciating words. She is aware of having nocturnal clenching.

She gets headaches once every two weeks or so in the frontal and temporal area that she registers at about 11, but they can get a lot worse. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, overall pain at 4, jaw function and diet at 3, disability at 6.

Laura does report that she has significant snoring problems and literally can’t sleep on her back. If she tries to sleep on her back, she develops sleep apnea symptoms. She has to sleep essentially on her stomach in order for her to keep her mouth closed and be able to breathe reasonably well. 

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Laura has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. The nose is deviated a little bit off to the left side a couple of millimeters. Maxillary dental midline is off to the left a millimeter. Mandibular dental midline is off a millimeter, and chin is off probably about 3 mm.

In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Chin appears a little bit retruded by maybe about 8 mm or so. Chin-neck area is full, and chin-neck angle is not well defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the third molars present. Some very minimal crowding, lower anterior arch. Appears to have good attached gingiva around lower anterior teeth. Lower central incisors are lingually inclined slightly and slightly elevated compared to the rest of the teeth.
In the upper arch, she also has all of her teeth back through the third molars present. Some mild crowding with the upper lateral incisors being lingually inclined. In centric relation, she has basically Class II bilaterally. On the right side, she is 2 mm Class II, and the left side, she is 4 mm Class II. She has an anterior open bite of about 2 to 3 mm. Occludes only on her first, second, and third molars bilaterally with the bicuspids on forward being out of occlusion. She does have crossbite tendencies posteriorly. Lower arch looks relatively symmetric. Upper arch also appears relatively symmetric in an anteroposterior direction.

Oropharynx appears clear. Tonsils are moderately large but appear non-inflamed. Uvula is moderately hyperplastic but not too significant. Faucial pillars appear relatively normal. Maybe some constricture because of the large tonsils.

Intranasally, the nasal septum is deviated off to the right side a little bit. Right turbinate is moderately large, but it appears that there may be adequate airway around it. Left turbinate is quite large and appears to block a good part of the airway. The septum is straight, and there would probably be decreased airway on the left side. Maximum incisal opening is 49 mm, and she can open 42 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movement to the right 6 mm, to the left 7 mm. On opening, she had some crepitation in the left TMJ. To palpation, she had moderate pain over the TMJs and mild to moderate pain over the masseters, styloid areas, and milder tenderness over the temporalis area.

Laura has a tooth-size discrepancy of about 3 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of all of Laura’s teeth. She has a root canal on the mandibular right first molar. It appears she may have a carious lesion in her maxillary right third molar. Also, there may be caries in her maxillary right first molar. Difficult to tell with the other teeth. Sinuses look relatively clear with what can be seen of them. Nasal airway can’t be very well evaluated on this film. Open bite appears to extend from the bicuspids on forward. Condyles look as though they are in reasonable condition.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence could be vertically oriented within the joint area. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle itself looks like it is in pretty good condition.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle, fossa, and articular eminence that appear to have relatively normal anatomy. A little more posterior space is present compared to the other side. Suspect that the disc may be in position.

Waters view shows the sinuses all appear to be clear. Nasal airway appears a little bit blocked on one side as compared to the other side.

Open tomographic views show good translation of the left joint but minimal translation of the right joint. This is inconsistent with her clinical examination.

Cephalometrically, she has a high mandibular occlusal plane angle. She has an anterior open bite and Class II end-on occlusion. Oropharyngeal airway at the base of the palate is about 4 mm. At the base of the tongue, it is closer to 8 or 9. 

Basic Diagnoses

Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Anterior open bite of 3 mm.
Class II end-on occlusion being slightly worse on the right side as compared to the left side.
Possible bilateral TMJ medial disc displacements.
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of almost 3 mm.
Overangulation of lower incisors.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.
Carious lesions in the mandibular right first molar, maxillary right first molar, and maxillary right third molar.
Malaligned third molars.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Occludes on only four teeth:  Right and left first and second molars.

Recommended Treatment

Dental work to include the following:
Extract maxillary right third molar.
Restorative dentistry to get the right first molar into a healthy situation.

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level the maxillary arch with very specific method. Align the cuspid through second molar and extrude the upper cuspid about 1 mm. Segment 2:  Left lateral incisor through right lateral incisor, but place a step in the arch wire to align the four incisors at an elevated plane compared to the cuspids and posterior teeth. Segment 3:  Right cuspid through right second molar. Extrude the cuspid slightly.
Be sure to tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for necessary interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing a minimum of 2 mm and possibly 3 mm of tooth structure to help compensate for the significant tooth-size discrepancy.

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly, advance it, and expand it.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Consider bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors if confirmed by the MRI that the discs are displaced.
Bilateral partial turbinectomies.

Extract remaining third molars that include bilateral mandibular third molars and maxillary left third molar

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion