KERI SMITH 										03/09/2006

Keri is 26 years old.  Keri is actually referred by Dr. George Toledo.  Keri's problems began about 15 years ago of unknown etiology.  When she was 9 years old she did have a three-wheeler accident where the handle bars swung up and hit her in the side of the cheek and she had a black on the left side.  This began some migraine headaches for her but she was unaware of any joint problems at that time.  She had orthodontics beginning in 1991 at the age of 11 for 3 years.  Following removal of her orthodontic appliances, she started to have clicking in her jaw joints.  By age 15, she was referred by Dr. Charlie Holt who made some splints for her.  This did not seem to help her a whole bunch and she then saw Dr. Dean White who did bilateral arthrocentesis.  This did help her for awhile but her bite continued to shift and move.  At age 17, she had orthodontics for the second time but only on the upper arch for about a year.  She was then placed in retainers.  Her pain continued to increase.  Her opening decreased and she had increased difficulties with chewing.  Her migraines are getting worse.  She saw Dr. Preston Harrison about her migraines.  She had another splint then for about six months.  She then saw Dr. Max Saigusa in Tyler, Texas.  He did bilateral arthrocentesis x3.  After the first two, she did have surgery in May of 2004 that were bilateral arthroplasties to reposition the disc and repair a perforation on the left side.  She had some bone recontouring done at least on the left side and maybe the right side as well.  By September of 2004 she redeveloped severe pain again predominately on the left side.  On January 26, 2005, she had a left TMJ arthroplasty done once again.  After that she has had splints.  She had an NTI splint by Dr. Rick Coker.  She has had 3 rounds of Botox injections.  The first 2 would help for about 3 months or so.  The last one was of no real significant benefit.  She has had physical therapy that has not been helpful for her either.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Zanaflex 4 mg q.h.s.
Elavil 25 mg q.h.s.
MS Contin 30 mg daily. 
Inderal q.h.s. for migraines.
Librax t.i.d.
Prevacid q.h.s.
Birth control pills. 

Keri has no problems with tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  She does get rather severe earaches on the left side.  Other joints that bother her include her wrists, fingers, knees, left ankle and toes.  She has an allergy to penicillin and Compazine.   She does have difficulties wearing cheap earrings.  She occasionally runs a low-grade fever.  At Christmas she was diagnosed as having H. pylori in her mouth and stomach.  She was put on some antibiotics and this helped significantly with that problem.  She actually does clinch her teeth at night and perhaps during the day at times but not consistently.  She does have a sleep disorder and does not sleep well mainly because of the pain factors.  She usually feels better in the mornings and then the pain gets worse as the day progresses on. 

In frontal view, Keri has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm.  Maxillary dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is off to the right about 1 mm.  
KERI SMITH 					03/09/2006				Page 2


The chin is fairly close to being on midline.  In profile view, Keri has fairly good balance between the upper lips cheeks and nose.  She may have just some slight AP deficiency.  Chin is deficient by probably about 10 mm.  Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not well defined.  She does have a head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, Keri has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has lingual tori that are fairly large.  She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  There is an end-on Class II occlusion about 2 mm on the left and 3 mm on the right.  She actually has about a 2 mm deep bite relationship.  She has an overjet of probably about 2 to 3 mm.  Oropharynx appears normal.  The uvula is relatively small.  The soft palate and faucial pillars are all within normal limits.  She reports no problems breathing through her nose.  She does have some mild snoring and moderate daytime somnolence.  She is not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  She does have a sleep disorder though associated with her pain factors. 

She has a constant headache that occurs on the left frontal and temple areas at a level of 5.  She has pain in the left joint at a level of 10 and on the right side a level of 2.  Average daily pain is level 9.  She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 7.  Incisal opening maximally is 31 mm but to only 50 mm without significant pain.  Excursive movement to the right 5 mm, to the left 6 mm.  Joints with limited movement due function reasonably smoothly.  To palpation, she has rather severe over the left TMJ, high moderate pain over the left masseter, left styloid area and moderate pain over the left SCM, left posterior neck and bilateral shoulder areas.  She has milder tenderness over the temporalis muscles and the right TMJ.  She also has left-side Fry's syndrome when she eats.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has a crown and root canal on maxillary right second molar.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Joints appear quite arthritic, left side worse than the right side.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is relatively straight.  Turbinates are moderate size but appears that there is a good nasal airway.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the articular eminence is quite flat probably due to previous surgery.  Decreased superior and posterior joint space.  The condyle does look arthritic.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows what appears to be significantly decreased joint space and a little broad osteophyte off the top off the top of the condyle.  Decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is a skeletal Class II jaw relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 5 perhaps maybe 6 mm and the base of the tongue measures about 7 mm.  
KERI SMITH					03/09/2006				Page 3

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Severe TMJ pain, left greater than right.
Left-sided headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Sleep disorder.
Sleep apnea symptoms. 
Overangulation of lower incisors.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest grafts from the abdomen.)
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
