STEPHANIE SMITH									07/11/2007

Stephanie is 30 years old, referred off the Internet.  Previous surgeries include a C-section on November 7, 2006, and wisdom teeth removed in December of 2002.  Stephanie is otherwise in good health.  She takes birth control pills and some vitamins.  She had an adverse reaction to penicillin and vicodin gives her headaches.   She had some orthodontic treatment from about 1985 to 1989 by Dr. Reece in Ann Arbor, MI, to correct a crossbite.  Her mother first noticed that Stephanie's bite was changing when she was in college in about 1995.  Etiology is unknown.  For the past 10 years her facial asymmetry and occlusion and gotten worse.  In 1997, her upper front teeth were forward over her lower front teeth and now the lower front teeth are anterior to the upper teeth.  She was about 21 in 1998.  

In frontal view, Stephanie has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face relative to the orbits and forehead.  The nasal tip is deviated off to the right side probably 4 mm.  Maxillary midline is off to the right about 1 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is off to the right about 5 mm.  Chin is off to the right about 8 mm.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1.5 mm in the midline.  In profile view, she has some infraorbital deficiency probably about 4 mm.  Chin is just slightly AP deficient by probably 4 to 5 mm.  Upper lip is in fairly good balance with the cheeks and the nose.  Chin-neckline is slightly short although the chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined.  The left infraorbital area is a little bit deficient by probably 3 to 4 mm as well.  Intraorally, Stephanie has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.  Some asymmetry in the lower arch with the right cuspid being 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch, Stephanie has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side but almost a full Class III cuspid relationship on the left side.  She has an anterior crossbite and a right posterior crossbite.  Transverse cant in the occlusion with the left cuspid being approximately 3 mm lower than the right cuspid.  As Stephanie shifts her mandible about 6 mm to the left at the midlines, it significantly improves her facial symmetry.  However, she is still slightly more full on the left side in the mandibular angle area as compared to the right side.  When she shifts her mandible in that direction the crossbite is corrected on the right side but develops on the left side and the anterior bite of course gets worse.  She has about a 0 vertical overbite relationship.  She has a slight yaw in the occlusion with there being just a light rotation off towards the left side in the molar area by 1 to 2 mm.  The oropharyngeal areas look healthy and structures appear normal.  Anteriorly in the nose, the left turbinate looks relatively normal.  The right one looks maybe just slightly enlarged.  The nasal septum appears reasonably straight.  Clinically looking at the anterior aspect of the nose there does not appear to be any significant airway obstruction but cannot evaluate the posterior aspect.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over her shoulders but no other tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is about 45 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 9 mm, left 10 mm.  





STEPHANIE SMITH				07/11/2007				Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Left condyle might be just slightly larger than the right but not too significant of a difference.  The left condylar head and neck may be just slightly longer than the right side but again not real significant. 

Waters view shows that there is a little curvature in the bony septum.  Turbinates appear moderate in size and the nasal airway actually looks reasonably good.  Sinuses appear clear.  She has no frontal sinuses.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows that there appears to be a decreased joint space vertically.  Condyle has a reasonably good shape.  Condylar head and neck length may be increased over the opposite side.  

Right TMJ shows somewhat of a decreased vertical joint space although it may be slightly better than the opposite side.  A little bit of a hockey stick shape to this condyle.  On opening, there is restricted translation but clinically she has excellent translation of the joints.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class III occlusal relationship.  There is a vertical discrepancy at the inferior border of the mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway looks very good.  She has a low occlusal plane angle brachiocephalic facial morphology.  There is a Bolton's discrepancy of –1 mm. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Left TMJ osteoma versus osteochondroma.
Mandibular deviated prognathism and asymmetry.
Maxillary asymmetry.
Right-sided crossbite and anterior crossbite.
Transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being 3 mm lower than the right side.
Class III occlusion on the left side, Class I occlusion on the right side.
Posterior yaw in the occlusion with the left side being 1 to 2 mm more lateral compared to the right side.
Nasal asymmetry.
Headaches.
 TMJ pain.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Consider bone scan of left and right TMJs.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch. 




STEPHANIE SMITH				07/11/2007				Page 3

Surgery.
Left TMJ condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back onto the facial midline. 
Maxillary osteotomies to transversely level and set back on the facial midline.
External rhinoplasty and align the nose with the rest of the facial structures. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

In evaluating photographs from two years ago, her occlusion appears to have worsened particularly on the left side compatible with a slow but progressive growth of the left condylar element.  She has seen Dr. James more for consultation in 2005.  She also has seen Dr. Odell Marshall for orthognathic surgical consultation.  Dr. Marshall suggested doing double jaw surgery to correct the bite problem.  He did not address any TMJ issues. 