RAY SMITH										07/19/2010

Ray is 49 years old, referred by Dr. Robert Conlon, 312 Center Street, Lake Geneva, WI 53417.  The orthodontist is Dr. Robert R. Youngquist, DDS, 255 Havenwood Drive, Lake Geneva, WI 53417.  

Ray was born bilateral cleft lip and palate.  The lip was repaired in infancy and he subsequently has had at least 2 operations on the roof of his mouth.  He has good speech quality.

In frontal view, Ray has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm, but there is no central tubercle so at that level it is 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is probably about -1.  The maxillary midline is a little bit off towards the right side about 1 mm, and the mandibular dental midline is off to the left about 2 mm.  The nasal tip is about 3 to 4 mm off to the right.  The chin is pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, the nasal dorsum is quite prominent.  The maxilla is protruded probably at least 10 to 12 mm.  The chin may be slightly strong by maybe 3 to 4 mm at the nose.  Intraorally, Ray has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  All of his teeth are in severe lingual inclination.  He has severe crowding in the lower anterior arch with both lateral incisors blocked out lingually.  If the lower arch were expanded out, it is possible that the lower incisors would have room to be properly aligned.  Currently, they are in significant lingual inclination.  In the upper arch, he is missing bicuspid on the left side and two bicuspids on the right side.  It appears that he is actually missing probably second bicuspids bilaterally.  He has very small lateral incisors, one in the anterior segment and it appears that one on the left side is in the posterior segment.  There is severe transverse collapse of the upper arch and the cuspid in bicuspid area.  He likely has bilateral oronasal fistulas.  Hard and soft palate soft tissues have been closed.  The soft palate on the right side is shorter anteroposteriorly then the left side.  The only teeth that touch are the second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.  He has severe bilateral posterior cross bite and anterior cross bite.  Ray reports major problems breathing through his nose and basically is a mouth breather day and night.  There is difficulty seeing intranasally.  The septum is deviated significantly off towards the left side causing almost total collapse of the nostril on the left side.  The turbinates appear pretty much normal in size.  The septum deviates significantly off towards the left side anteriorly.  He does have some significant nasal airway obstruction.  Ray does report moderate to severe snoring, but no daytime somnolence and no sleep apnea.  He is, however, a predominant mouth breather day and night.  He has reverse deep bite of about 6 mm.   Ray reports no TMJ issues.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of maxillary second bicuspids, but the rest of the teeth are present.  It appears there may be alveolar clefts present anteriorly.  In the lower arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars present.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The turbinates appear relatively normal. 

Coronal radiograph shows that the bony nasal septum is fairly straight and turbinates are relatively normal in size with the sinuses clear.  

Axial view shows that the septum is deviated off towards the left side anteriorly, but then it is pretty straight through most of the nose.  The turbinates are normal in size and the sinuses are clear.  

Bilateral TMJ tomograms show that the joint space appears thin and articular eminences are moderately shallow.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has got perhaps some mandibular prognathism but lingual inclination of the lower incisors.  The maxilla appears to be hypoplastic and the upper central incisors are actually angled posteriorly.  Oropharyngeal airway appears to be about 11 to 12 mm at the base of the tongue and further up may be about 5 mm at the soft palate level, however, the soft palate was not relaxed when radiograph was taken.  

Basic diagnoses for Ray would be as follows:

Repaired bilateral cleft lip and palate.
Severe maxillary AP, transverse, and vertical hypoplasia. 
Mandibular prognathism.
Severe Class III occlusion.
Bilateral anterior oronasal fistulas.
Missing maxillary second bicuspids. 
Deviated nasal septum off to the left side.
Total obstruction of the nasal airway on the left side at the nostril/luminal valve area.  
Severe crowding of the lower anterior arch.
Wide columella.
External nasal deformity.
Severe curve of Wilson in the lower arch.  
Significant lingual inclination of the lower incisors.

There is severe transverse collapse of the maxilla with a transverse dimension between the cuspid tips of only about 14 mm.  The transverse dimension between the bicuspids is 10 mm.  There is an approximately 20 mm transverse deficiency in the maxillary arch. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Tip maxillary incisors and lateral incisors forward about 3 mm to get rid of the 			reverse angulation.  Do not worry about aligning the rest of the upper teeth. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Tip incisor back forward and transversely 			expand the molar-bicuspid and cuspid area.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward approximately 8 to 10 mm.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set it posteriorly 3 to 4 mm.
	c.	Nasal septoplasty.
	d.	External rhinoplasty.
	e.	Reconstruction of vermilion of the upper lip. 
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
4.	Preparation of maxillary teeth for over denture.
5.	Construction of maxillary over denture.  