PAM SMITH 										08/23/2006

Pam is 38 years old, referred by Dr. Larry Byrd, 7660 Woodway, Ste. 325, Houston, TX 77063.  Pam's problems in her joints probably began back when she was a teenager as her mother recalls her complaining of popping at that time.  Things may have become much worse in about 1993.  TMJ problems are of unknown etiology.  She does get earaches, tinnitus and vertigo but no hearing loss.  Other bones that bother her include her neck and right hand.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime.

Previous treatment includes orthodontics as a teenager and then she has had splint treatment beginning about 10 years ago that has been on and off.  

MEDICATIONS:
Trazodone 50 mg at bedtime.
Valium 2.5 mg at bedtime.
Flonase nasal spray.
Birth control pills.

She gets headaches about every 10 days that escalates to about a level of 10 that are predominately in the right temple and posterior head area.  She gets severe pain at a level of 10 in the TMJs but not everyday.  Some days her pain level is only about a level of 1.  Average daily pain and headaches is 2, diet is 2 and disability is rated at 3.  She says her headaches are a level of 10 in the temporal and posterior head and neck area.  She used to get headaches two to three per week prior to her current splint therapy.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Difficulty swallowing with a feeling of choking.
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.
Bite is off.
Earaches and ringing in the ear as well as lightheadedness and dizziness.

In frontal view, pam has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face with significant asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is probably 2 mm.  Maxillary midline is probably a good 2 mm off to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm off to the right side.  Chin is probably about 6 to 7 mm off to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, Pam has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks and nose.  Chin appears somewhat retruded although the chin neckline actually looks reasonably good in length.  The chin may be about 10 mm AP deficient.  Pam has a head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, Pam is missing lower first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth.  Some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Appears to have good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch she is missing first bicuspids as well.  She has an end-on Class II occlusion being about 2 mm Class II on the left side and probably 4 to 5 mm Class II on the right side.  She has an anterior deep bite of 5 to 6 mm.  Pam has a significant shift in transverse occlusal plane with the right side being about 4 mm shorter than the left side.  
PAM SMITH					08/23/2006				Page 2


Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are all within normal limits.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off to the right side with some spurring.  Right turbinate is a little bit large and significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway is present.  The left turbinate appears relatively normal in size and there appears to be good airway on the left side.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function smoothly.  Excursive movement to the right about 9 mm, left 10 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all first bicuspids.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  The left condyle appears large with a little notch in the posterior head of the condyle.  The left side appears to have undergone significant resorptive and degenerative changes.

Waters view shows that the bony nasal septum does have some deviation.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged with the right side appearing larger than the left side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is broad anteroposteriorly.  Joint space, however, seems to be fairly well balanced.  Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Right TMJ shows severe osteoarthritic changes in the condyle and joint.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints but significant difference in the size of the condyles can be appreciated. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II relationship with some vertical asymmetry.  Oropharyngeal airway that the tip of the soft palate measures about 6 mm and the base of the tongue about 7 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation being nonreducing and with severe deformation.
Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation at the lateral aspect of the joint.  
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
TMJ pain.
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 Class II occlusion.
 Anterior deep bite. 
 Missing all four first bicuspids from previous orthodontic treatment.  
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm. 
PAM SMITH					08/23/2006				Page 3


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up spacing around the upper lateral incisors to equal 1 mm on each side to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to facilitate interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concept protocol.)
Surgery.
Right TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Left mandibular sagittal split osteotomy to advance the mandible on that side.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posterior.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
Restorative dentistry to place bonding or Veneers on the maxillary lateral incisors to eliminate the spacing created to correct the tooth size discrepancy. 
