TIMOTHY SMITH									05/16/2007

Tim is referred by Dr. George Adams.  Tim is 29 years old.  His problems began about two months ago when he was playing soccer and got hit underneath the chin with subsequent fractures to the mandible.  Apparently he had a parasymphysis fracture and perhaps a left subcondylar fracture.  The symphysis was open and treated.  However, the subcondylar fracture was treated in a closed reduction manner.

Tim had previous orthodontics from 1996 to 1999 by Dr. Charles Berce in Arlington, TX.

Tim has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, pain around the head and neck area.  He rates his jaw function, diet and disability at 0.  He has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  He currently takes no medications.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Teeth have become misaligned since the injury.
Teeth do not fit together correctly. 
On opening, the jaw deviates significantly towards the left and then back to the right.

In frontal view, Tim has fairy good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is –2 mm.  Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Lower dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin.  He did have a lower incisor extracted by Dr. Berce for orthodontic reasons apparently.  It appears the mandibular left central incisor was extracted.  Left angle of mandible is about 4 to 5 mm less prominent than the right side.  This is a change since the injury.  This may indicate that the left mandibular body and ramus rotated medially following the reduction of the fractures.  This will account for the asymmetry and also for the malocclusion.  In the treatment we may need to consider doing a body osteotomy between the left cuspid, first bicuspid and the mandible to reestablish facial symmetry.  In profile view, Tim appears to be over-closed vertically.  Upper lip is retruded by about 4 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded by about 4 to 5 mm.  Tim has a fairly prominent pogonion compared to the projection of the lower lip.  Intraorally, Tim is missing mandibular left central incisor.  He appears to have the rest of the teeth back to the second molars.  Crown on second molars.  He is a little crowded and maligned.  He is pretty close to being a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side.  On the left side he may be just slightly a Class III by maybe 1 to 2 mm.  The left cuspid is about 2 mm anterior to the right cuspid.  He has anterior deep bite of 2 mm.  In centric relation Tim has a Class II end-on occlusion by probably 2 mm and he has an overjet of about 3 mm.  He goes into a buccal crossbite on the left side in centric relation.  The chin shifts off to the left side probably about 3 mm in centric relation.  Mandibular dental midline which is in the center of the right central incisor is also 3 mm off towards the left side.  In centric relation he occludes first on the left second molars.  The rest of the teeth are out of occlusion.  Intranasally, the septum is significantly deviated.  Anteriorly it is deviated significantly off to the right side causing some narrowing of the nostril.  About ½ to 1 cm posterior to that, the septum is deviated off towards the left side.  The turbinates look relatively normal but with a deviated septum there may be some airway obstruction there.  Tim has no problems with snoring, daytime somnolence or sleep apnea.  
TIMOTHY SMITH				05/16/2007				Page 2

He does state that he did have some problems after his previous jaw surgery where he had difficulty breathing and they had to put him on a nasal decongestant afterwards.  In centric relation he only has about a 1 mm overbite relationship.  Maximal opening is 50 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is about 9 mm, left is 14 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars plus the mandibular left central incisor.  He has root canals on the mandibular right second molar, left mandibular first and second molar, maxillary left second molar, second bicuspid and right second bicuspid.  There are crowns on these teeth as well.  He has a bone plate in the mandible in the first bicuspid.  It appears there was a subcondylar fracture although the condyle is angled reasonably well.  The condyle is positioned down and forward in the fossa.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  There is a severe deviation of the bony nasal septum with it being shifted severely off towards the left side and impinging upon the turbinates.  Cannot see the cartilaginous septum which clinically goes off to the right side.   It appears that the obstruction on the left side is a large osseous spur.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has very good shape and morphology.  Articular eminence has normal inclination.  Joint space looks reasonably good and appears fairly well balanced.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is postured down and forward in the fossa down about 3 to 4 mm and positioned forward about 3 mm.  Significantly increased joint space is present.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is AP maxillary mandibular deficiency and vertical maxillary deficiency as well.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm at the soft palate and about 9 mm at the base of the tongue.  There is a tooth side discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 5 mm but this is negated somewhat because of the thickness of the incisal edges on the maxillary teeth.  Tooth size discrepancy may only be in reality about 2 mm or so.   Vertical heights of the crowns on the maxillary central incisors are only about 8 to 8.5 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Post-mandibular fractures with malunions of the left parasymphysis area/anterior body and left subcondylar fracture.
AP mandibular deficiency and asymmetry.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Vertical maxillary deficiency. 
Class II occlusion on the left side and closer to Class I on the right side.
Mandible shifted significantly off to the left side about 3 mm. 
Occludes only on the left second molars.
Buccal cross bite on the right side.
TIMOTHY SMITH 				05/16/2007				Page 3

Missing mandibular left central incisor previously extracted for orthodontic reasons.
 Deviated nasal septum with a large spur on the left side obstructing the airway.
 Mandibular left cuspid is about 2 mm anterior to the cuspid.  
 Previously placed bone plate mandibular left parasymphysis area.
 Left mandibular body and ramus rotated medially causing significant lower jaw and dental arch asymmetry. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to improve left to right arch symmetry by retracting the left cuspid about 1 mm and advancing the right cuspid forward about 1 mm.  Place brackets on the second molars to try and get them better aligned as both second molars are tipped buccally and the first molars are tipped lingually.
Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible and to seat the left condyle.
Left mandibular body osteotomy to aid in expansion of the left mandible and angle.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and correct any residual transverse problems.  
Nasoseptoplasty.
Removal of bone plate of mandibular left body area.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Periodontal treatment to improve exposure of the central incisor crowns. 
Consider restorative dentistry to finalize the crowns on the maxillary anterior teeth. 