GAIL SMOLIK									03/27/1006

Gail is now 45 years old.  This is 16 years to the day since we did her surgery which included a right condylectomy, disc repositioning and a left repositioning as well as multiple maxillary osteotomies and bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies.  She has actually done quite well since surgery.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Levothyroxine 100 mcg per day. 
Cenestin.
HCTZ (for swelling.)
Ibuprofen.

She apparently has a lot of other joint problems ongoing.  She does not have any particular problems with earaches but gets frequent tinnitus and gets daily vertigo.  She also has some hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her neck and back (she has a disc dislocation and she has a narrow canal.)  She does get some problems in her shoulder joints, elbows, fingers and knees.  She recently has been diagnosed with hypothyroidism and was placed on the levothyroxine about 4 months ago.  To palpation, she has some very mild tenderness over the medial pterygoids but no other tenderness around the head and neck area.  Occlusion is a Class I with 0 overbite relationship.  Incisal opening is 53 mm.  Excursive movement to the right about 10 mm, left about 3.5 mm.  The right joint seems to function relatively smoothly.  The left joint has a pop at about 40 mm of opening and closing about 30 mm.  She gets headaches at about a level of 3 in the frontal, temple and posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 2, overall average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 4, diet at 1 and disability at 1.  

Panorex shows the presence of 4 bone plates in the maxilla and also bone screws in the mandible, 3 in the right side and 2 on the left side.  The left condyle actually has pretty good form and shape to it, right side appears a little bit sclerotic but functioning.  

Left TMJ tomogram actually shows very good joint space.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space looks very good particularly vertically.  It is possible the disc may be in place and she could possibly be translating off the front of the disc.  Again, joint space looks very good.  The left TMJ tomogram does not appear to be significantly different from prior tomograms.  There is just a slight bit of flattening in that left joint compared to 1990 but joint space still looks well balanced. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows very good joint space.  There is a little bit of sclerosis anteriorly so it is a little bit hard to identify the actual anterior aspect of the condyle.  There is actually not a significant difference in the appearance of the right TMJ tomograms compared to those taken on May 21, 1990, even up through March of 1996 and October 11, 1999, there is no real appreciable difference.  




GAIL SMOLIK				03/27/2006				Page 2


Gail appears to be doing fairly well.  She wakes up with headaches in the morning so it is quite possible she could be clenching and bruxing at night.  Radiographically it looks like she has good joint space.  So the click that we hear on opening on the left side may be the fact that she is coming anterior off the anterior aspect of the disc.  Again, joint space looks the same as it did back in 1990.  Gail had a previous test for chlamydia and she had positive IgG.  I am suggesting that we retest for the chlamydia group antibody titers.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
TMJs appear to be stable.
Headaches.
Neck and back pain. 
Multiple joint problems.
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism.
Minor tenderness over the TMJs. 
Hypothyroidism being treated with medication.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Klonopin 0.5 mg tablets 1 tablet q.h.s. dispensing 30 tablets, refill x4.
Chlamydia antibody titers (she is seeing her physician tomorrow for some other blood tests and that test could be done at the same time.)
Continue to monitor. 
Perhaps consider an antibiotic depending on the outcome of the antibody titer study.
