KENNA SMITH									10/11/2006

Kenna is 16 years old, referred by Dr. Tom Pitts, 4786 Caughlin Parkway, Reno, NV.  Kenna is in good health.  

Kenna gets some TMJ pain at about a level of 6 and average daily pain is about a level of 4.  She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 6, disability at 5.  She gets headaches in the temple area at about a level of 2.  She gets occasional earaches on the right side.  Fairly common tinnitus but no vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her except she states her hips will pop out occasionally. She is not aware of any clenching or bruxing problems.  The only medication she takes is Ortho Tri-Cyclen.  Kenna has had no previous treatment.  

In frontal view, Kenna has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Some slight asymmetry in the mandible.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm.  Maxillary midline is about 4 to 5 mm to the right.  Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly close to being aligned with each other.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  The mandible appears a little bit strong.  Pogonion appears a little bit prominent.  Chin-neckline appears relatively normal and chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Kenna has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars erupted in.  She has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship of about _______.  She has a tendency towards crossbite on the right side.  She has an end-on incisor relationship.  She has a tendency towards anterior open bite of probably about ½ mm.  Oropharyngeal airway looks normal and healthy.  Tonsils are present and look relatively normal.  Uvula may be mildly elongated but the soft palate appears normal in length.  Partial pillars maybe just mildly constricted but not significant.  She has no snoring, no daytime somnolence and reports no sleep apnea symptoms.  She does tend to breathe through her mouth when she sleeps, however.  The septum is fairly straight or maybe just slightly off to the right side but not too significant.  Right turbinate appears enlarged.  Left turbinate appears relatively normal in size with good airway on that side.  The right side is a little bit obstructed with enlarged turbinate.  To palpation, she has moderate to high moderate pain in the TMJs with the right side being a little bit greater than the left side.  She has moderate discomfort over the styloid areas and mild tenderness over the right medial pterygoid area.  On opening and closing, the joints at least to palpation seem to function reasonably smoothly although Kenna reports that she can hear clicking noises in her joints as she opens and closes.  It is uncomfortable for her to go into excursive movements.  It is also quite uncomfortable for her when she opens real wide.  Maximal incisal opening is 40 mm with about only about 24 mm without discomfort.  Excursive movements are about 6 mm in each direction but with discomfort.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 to 3 mm lower than the right side in the cuspid area.  There appears to be a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1.5 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of all 4 third molars and they are impacted unerupted.  The condylar head and necks are elongated.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The right turbinate appears enlarged.
KENNA SMITH				10/11/2006				Page 2


Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that seems to have fairly good shape.  Condylar head and neck are close to the articular eminence.  Joint space appears very thin between the condyle and the fossa.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows similar findings as the right side.  Normal appearing architecture but elongated condylar head and neck.  Articular eminence has a relatively normal slope to it.  Joint space appears thin.  On opening, there is some restriction of translation. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear.  Right turbinate appears enlarged and appears to fill most of the oral cavity.  The bony nasal septum appears relatively straight.  Left turbinate appears relatively normal in size and there appears to be adequate airway on the left side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Kenna has a Class III skeletal relationship with some slight over angulation of the maxillary incisors.  Oropharyngeal airway appears good.  She has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc medially dislocated.  
Deviated mandibular prognathism.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess. 
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Class III end-on occlusion.
Anterior open bite tendency of about ½ mm.
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites being worse on the right side.
Transverse vertical facial asymmetry with the left side of the occlusion being 2 to 3 mm lower than the right side.
 Impacted third molars x4.
 Hypertrophied right maxillary turbinate.
 Partial nasal obstruction on the right side.
 TMJ pain.
 Headaches. 
 Increased occlusal plane angle. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip the lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Continue to monitor facial growth and development. 


KENNA SMITH				10/11/2006				Page 3


Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back to the facial midline and level the occlusal plane.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly and expand as well as decrease the transverse and AP occlusal plane angles.
Surgical removal of 4 impacted third molars.
Right partial turbinectomy.
Post-surgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
