SHEA SMITH										01/21/2010

Shea is 24 years old and referred by Dr. Constance Greeley, Omega Professional Center, Suite D-74, Newark, Delaware 19713.  Shea’s TMJ problems began in about 2003 when she was 18 years old when she noted some popping beginning in her jaw joints.  It was not until she realized that her bite was opening in the front in April 2009.  She began developing significant headaches around the same time.  Shea rates her current headache level at 8 that occurs predominantly in the frontal, temporal, and on top of the head.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 5, diet at 8, disability at 8.  She gets frequent shooting pains through her ears that occurs daily.  She has tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  The only joints that bother her are her knees.  She has previously been diagnosed with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time.  When she was 15, she got hit in the right ear with a soccer ball that damaged her hearing mechanism, but she had a cochlear implant placed in the right ear.  

She takes the following medications:

Synthroid 75 mcg q.d.
Pamelor 10 mg q.d.
Robaxin 500 mg t.i.d. 
Anaprox 275 mg t.i.d. 

Shea had orthodontics from 1999 to 2000 at the age of 14.  In 2007 through December 2009, she wore a splint.  She has been receiving physical therapy since 2009. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Shea has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm and upper lip tooth relationship is about 3.5 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other.  The tip of the nose is just slightly off to the right side about 2 mm.  In profile, Shea has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 mm.  The mandible appears to be retruded by about 15-18 mm.  The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is relatively well defined.  She has a lip incompetence of about 9 mm.  Intraorally, Shea has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch but has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has what appears to be a slight decreased curve of Wilson particularly in the bicuspid area.  Shea has a Class II end-on occlusal relationship and being probably about 4 mm Class II.  She has an anterior open bite of probably only about 3-4 mm.  She occludes only on her second molars.  Shea did have her wisdom teeth removed when she was 18 and noticed after that procedure that she had a little bit of locking.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Tonsils are moderately enlarged.  Intranasally, she does have some narrow nostrils and columella has moderate increased width to it.  Turbinates are enlarged.  She does state she has a lot of trouble with stuffiness of her nose.  She is predominantly a mouth breather when she sleeps at night.  She states she has no problems with snoring, but has some mild daytime somnolence but no sleep apnea.  She has moderate pain in the temporalis, masseters, medial pterygoids, and retromandibular area and milder tenderness in the shoulders.  In the TMJs, she has high moderate pain to palpation.  Maximal incisal opening is 32 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 2 mm, to the left 3 mm.  Opening without significant pain is about 16-17 mm. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has an anterior open bite.  She is occluding only on the second molars.  The bony septum appears reasonably straight.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The turbinates are quite large, particularly on the left side.  Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates are moderately enlarged; in fact, the left one is quite large and obliterates most of the functional nasal airway.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that there is a significant amount of loss of condylar volume.  There is significant flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  The joint space is increased vertically and posteriorly.  

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show that she has some significant arthritis in the joint and loss of condylar volume.  There is anterior beaking present.  The joint space is decreased anteriorly between the condyle and the articular eminence, but increased posteriorly.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows that she has significant loss of condylar volume.  There appears to be significant decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The top of the condyle appears to be somewhat rough.  It appears a good portion of the condyle has been resorbed.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that likewise has lost a lot of volume, but not quite as severe as the opposite side.  There is some roughness on the head of the condyle.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm.   There appears to be decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a Class II skeletal relationship with an anterior open bite.  Mandibular occlusal plane is steep.  Tonsils are little bit hyperplastic.  The airway dimension from the base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 7 mm, and, at the base of the soft palate, the posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 9 mm.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis with articular discs dislocated with severe deformation and non-reducing.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia and anterior vertical hyperplasia.
Anterior open bite of 4 mm.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Occluding only on the second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts 			total joint prostheses.
	b.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and move it upwards 			anteriorly about 2 mm.
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 