BLAIR SYNDER								08/29/2011

Blair is 26 years old, birth date 07/14/1985.  Blair is referred by Dr. Laura Philipps, 2300 West Michigan, Suite 2, Midland, TX 79704.   She has had a consultation with Dr. Jim Compton, 4610 N. Garfield, Suite A-9, Midland, TX 79705.  

Blair’s joint problems began she believes when she was about 24 years old of unknown etiology.  She was a cheerleader in high school and knows that she has struck her jaw several times while cheerleading.  She did have orthodontics from the age of 13 to 14.  Relative to her TMJ problems, the only treatment she has had currently is splint therapy which was initiated in April 2011.  However, this made her pain significantly worse so she discontinued using it.  She has had her third molars previously removed, but has retained maxillary third molars.  Blair rates her headaches at a level of 6 in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 9, diet at 7, and disability at 9.  She gets frequent earaches, daily tinnitus, and occasional vertigo.  She has no hearing loss and no other joints bother her.  She does have allergies to outside stuff.  Earrings and rings cause discoloration of her skin, but she has no pain or discomfort that she has associated with those.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and she catches herself clenching during the day as well.

She takes the following medications:

Adderall XR 30 mg q.d.
Lexapro 10 mg q.d.
Birth control pill.
Cyclobenzaprine 10 mg q.d.
Valacyclovir 1000 mg when needed for cold sores.  

In frontal view, Blair has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline and lower dental midline is about 1 mm to the right and chin is about 2 to 3 mm to the right.  In profile, she has fairly good facial balance.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch particularly on the right side.  She has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  The upper arch appears fairly well aligned.  She has a Class I cuspid relationship bilaterally.  She has about a 3 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Turbinates are relatively normal, although the right side is slightly larger than the left.  Nasal anatomy looks relatively normal.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the TMJs, milder pain over the right temporalis and high moderate pain over the right styloid area.  On opening, she has some crepitation in the right joint.  The left side is not particularly noisy today, although she says that side does click and pop at times.  On her right side, she does get closed lock episodes periodically.  The maximal incisal opening is 57 mm, opening without pain 31 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 9 mm and to the left 10 mm.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side.  Blair has just slight increased fullness on the left side of the mandible being about 2 to 3 mm more prominent with the left angle as compared to the right side.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of mandibular third molars that were previously extracted.  Maxillary third molars are present and appear erupted.  The septum appears relatively straight and the turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  The sinuses appear clear.  Difficult to evaluate the joints on this radiograph.

Coronal view shows that the nasal septum is deviated off a little bit towards the left side.  The turbinates are relatively normal in size with the right one being slightly larger than the left one.  Airway looks good however.  Sinuses appear clear.

Axial view shows the base of the septum fairly straight and the turbinates are relatively normal in size with the right one being larger than the left one.  The sinuses appear clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  There may be a little bit of an osteophytic kind of development on the top of the condyle towards the medial aspect of the joint.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  The condyle appears almost too large for the fossa.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking at the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology laterally, but medially there is some flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of anterior beaking present.  The posterior joint space is decreased.  The articular eminence is fairly steep.  There is an increased anterior joint space.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  The joint space appears fairly well balanced in the joint.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width, although just slightly more narrow than the opposite side.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 4 to 5 mm.  There appears to be some decreased vertical and lateral joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a Class I skeletal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway may be slightly narrow, but it may be partially due to head posture and position.  

Basic diagnoses for Blair would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation being worse on the right side than the left side. 
Mandibular relative hyperplasia.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side.
Mandibular dental midline 1 mm to the right and chin 2 to 3 mm to the right.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Malaligned maxillary third molars.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Consider opening 1 mm of space between 			the upper laterals and cuspids to accommodate for the tooth size 				discrepancy.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider slenderizing the lower anterior 		teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size 			discrepancy.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain the Class I occlusal 			relationship.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Refine occlusion. 
	b.	Retain occlusion with a Hawley retainer in the maxillary arch and a fixed 			retainer in the lower anterior arch.  Do not use Essix type of retainers.  
4.	If space is opened in the upper arch, then consider bonding to fill those spaces.  