LYDIA SALINAS SOTO								03/12/2007

Lydia is 45 years old and is referred by Dr. Emma Carrillo, Edinburg, Texas.  Lydia's orthodontist is Dr. John A. Gerling, 4900 N. 10th St., Ste. F-2, McAllen, Texas 78504.  

She had previous gallbladder surgery in January of 2006.  She had a C-section in 1991 and a bladder lift.  She had cysts removed in the right ovary in December of 2005 and a tubal ligation in December of 2005.  Except for her jaw problems, Lydia is in good health.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Cymbalta 30 mg daily.
Trazodone 50 mg q.h.s.
Doxycycline 20 mg for her skin.

Lydia's problems began when she was about 20 years of age.  At least that is the first that she became aware of having clicking and popping in her jaw joints.  Etiology is unknown.  She unfortunately was referred to a psychiatrist for treatment because she could not open her mouth.  They did some type of therapy on her and placed her on Valium.  Prior to the onset, she had orthodontics in her early teens.  I suspect that her bite may have begun to change and so she had orthodontics again in her late teens with extraction of teeth.  Teeth were actually removed during the first orthodontics but she required full orthodontic treatment again in her late teens.  She was told that she needed jaw surgery to advance the mandible to correct her bite but she just did not think that the technology was advanced enough to warrant her going through it.  She has been through splint therapy x3.  Once with Dr. Gary Swarz, Dr. Gerling and Dr. Martinez.  She currently has been in orthodontic treatment again for almost 2 years.  The current plan is to open up the first bicuspid spaces which appears to have been pretty much accomplished for the subsequent placement of implants and crowns.

She has earaches, tinnitus and vertigo but no hearing loss.  The only other joint that really bothers her is that her right shoulder has become quite painful and her right arm is quite weak.  She finds that she has to use her left arm and hand to help move and support the right one.  She does clench and brux her teeth at night.

She gets headaches daily at about a level of 6 that occurs in the posterior head area.  She rates her average TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 7, diet at 4, disability at 1.  

In frontal view, Lydia has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is –2 mm.  Maxillary midline is deviated off to the left side probably about 2 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is on the facial midline.  Chin is deviated off to the right side probably about 6 to 8 mm.  In profile, upper lip is retruded about 3 to 4 mm.  Chin is retruded at least 10 mm.  Chin-neckline is extremely short and chin-neck angle is not well defined.  She is short vertically in the lower third face.  Chin-neckline is not defined.  Intraorally, she is missing one lower central incisor but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch, she is missing first bicuspids and that space at time was closed but now it has been opened.  Cuspid width appears exceptionally wide.  In centric relation, she is almost a full Class II cuspid relationship but Class II molar.  
LYDIA SALINAS SOTO			03/12/2007				Page 2

As Lydia even postures her mandible posteriorly, she has significant pain in the joint area moreso on the right side than the left side.  If she is manipulated backwards, the pain is significantly increased.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  In centric relation she has probably a 5 to 6 mm overjet relationship.  If she goes back into a more centric relation, she has almost a buccal crossbite particularly in the bicuspid areas.  Oropharyngeal areas are relatively normal.  Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are normal.  Lydia has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side.  Intranasally, she has deviation of the nasal septum off towards the right side.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Right nasal airway appears somewhat obstructed but the left side appears open in part due to the deviation of the septum.  She has crepitation in both TMJs.  Maximal incisal opening is 45 mm.  Opening without significant pain is 30 mm.  Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction.  She does have crepitation in both joints on function.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  Maxillary first bicuspids are absent but the space is opened in position.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  Bony septum looks relatively straight.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  Vertical asymmetry is noted with the left ramus being positioned a little vertically higher than the right side.

Right TMJ tomogram is difficult to read but it appears the condyle is positioned superiorly and posteriorly in the fossa and it appears that there is a decreased superior joint space. 

Left TMJ tomogram is difficult to read.  It appears the condyle is small and postured forward in the fossa making it difficult to read.  On opening, there is moderate translation.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has AP maxillary deficiency as well as vertical maxillary deficiency.  The mandible is significantly retruded.  Occlusal plane appears moderately high.  Oropharyngeal airway space appears constricted with an airway dimension of about 5 mm at the base of the soft palate and about 6 to 7 mm at the base of the tongue.  There is vertical discrepancy seen at the occlusal plane level as well as the inferior border of the mandible.  Lydia says that she has difficulty swallowing and also she has choking problems at times.  This is likely related to the decreased oropharyngeal airway.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocations with severe deformation and non-salvageable.  
AP mandibular deficiency and asymmetry.
AP maxillary deficiency and asymmetry. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Class II occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle. 
Severe TMJ pain.
LYDIA SALINAS SOTO			03/12/2007				Page 3

Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
 Severe snoring.
 Missing maxillary first bicuspids and mandibular right lateral incisor.
 Spacing in the upper arch bilaterally in the first bicuspid area.
 Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Try to decrease transverse width between the cuspids as they are slightly overexpanded.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Keep upper second bicuspid roots tipped distally to make room for osseointegrated implants.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Bilateral osseointegrated implants to maxillary first bicuspid area.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
5.  Restorative dentistry to replace the missing first bicuspids and to buildup the incisors.  