DAVID SOMMERFELD								01/25/2008

David 47 years old and is referred by Dr. Farhad Moshiri.  He is in good health.  He takes Prilosec 10 mg p.r.n.   His primary concerns are correction of his bite.  He has had no previous treatment.  He has no TMJ symptoms, headaches, or ear symptoms.  He is aware of clenching and bruxism occasionally at nighttime and he is aware of clenching during the day.  He began his orthodontic treatment in November of 2006.  

In frontal view, David has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  Maxillary midline looks like it is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular midline is 1 mm + to the right and chin is about 2 to 3 mm to the right.  Upper lip has fairly good balance and may be retruded just a couple of mm.  The chin appears to be retruded about 12 to 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is short although the chin-neck angle was moderately well defined.  David has a high mandibular plane facial morphology.  Intraorally, David has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and leveled.  In the upper arch David has all of his teeth back through the second molars present.  Maxillary right first molar appears to be superiorly positioned relative to the other teeth.  He has basically an end-on Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by probably 5 mm and on the left side he is closer to a Class I.  He has a 3.5 mm vertical overbite.  Mandibular right cuspid is about 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch the left cuspid may be 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  He has about a 3 mm transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being higher than the left side in the cuspid area.  The mandibular arch is up about 2 mm on the right side compared to left side.  David has some slight increased fullness in the left side of the mandible in the masseter muscle area compared to the right side.  David has a slight yaw in the maxilla and mandible with them being shifted towards the left side about 1 to 2 mm.  The uvula is moderately hyperplastic.  Other soft tissues in the oropharyngeal area look relatively normal.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side.  The turbinates are moderate in size but seem to be a little bit short vertically so it appears he may have adequate airway beneath the turbinates.  Incisal opening is 58 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 8 mm, left 10 mm.   He may be a little bit Class II on the left side by about 1 to 2 mm.  Dental model analysis shows that he has a small upper lateral incisor on the right side.  He may have an ankylosed maxillary right first molar, as it is elevated at least 2 mm above the rest of the occlusal plane.  The bicuspids are pulled up slightly as well.  The maxillary right second molar appears to be extruded slightly.  The left side fits together fairly well except there is a tooth size discrepancy in the bicuspid area with the upper second bicuspid being slightly Class II although the first bicuspid is closer to Class I.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  He has the rest of the teeth present.  Maxillary right first molar appears elevated compared to the rest of the teeth and again it may be indicative of ankylosis of that tooth.  Mandibular right first molar appears to have hyperplastic roots.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  The condylar necks appear short and the condyles appear large.  



DAVID SUMMERFIELD			01/25/2008				Page 2

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The bony septum has a spur off towards the left side.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged and appear to block off most of the airway at the inferior aspect of the nose.  Transverse cant in the occlusal plane can be seen illustrating the right cuspid is about 3 mm higher than the left cuspid.  The asymmetry in the mandibular dental midline and chin also is appreciated with it being shifted off towards the right side 1 to 2 mm.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is fairly large and has some flattening on the posterior head.  Joint space appears fairly reasonable.  There is a little bit of peaking at the anterior superior aspect of the condylar head.  

Left TMJ tomogram show a condyle that also is fairly large.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be adequate joint space.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that David has some retrusion of the mandible and maxilla.  He has a skeletal Class II relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway is fairly constricted with an airway dimension of only about 4 mm at the soft palate level and approximately 4 mm at the base of the tongue.  Double images are seen of the occlusal planes but interestingly at the inferior border of the mandible there is not too much vertical difference.   Occlusal plane difference is almost 4 to 5 mm in the second molar area from one side to the other side.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior maxillary deficiency. 
Significant transverse asymmetry with the left side being 3 mm shorter vertically in the cuspid area and 5 mm in the molar area.
Class II end-on occlusion being worse on the right side than the left side. 
Ankylosed maxillary right first molar.
Slight tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 2 mm. 
Rule out TMJ pathology.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway of only 3 mm (normal 11 mm.)
 Sleep apnea symptoms. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
MRI of left and right TMJs to rule out TMJ pathology.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct the tooth size discrepancy.



DAVID SUMMERFIELD 			01/25/2008				Page 3

Surgery
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible approximately 12 mm in a counterclockwise direction leveling it transversely. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it and down graft it posteriorly to level the transverse occlusal plan and maximize the occlusion.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Place crown on maxillary right first molar to achieve occlusal interdigitation with that ankylosed tooth. 

