ANNA MARIE SOMMERHAUSER							5/5/05

Referred by:  Dr. Duane Keller.
Age: 50.
Date of Birth: 7/31/54.
Home address:  5 Toussaint Dr., O'Fallon, MO, 63366.
Home phone:  636240-1002.
Work:  314-654-7478 (work time 2 a.m. to 12 noon.)

Anna was involved in a motor vehicle accident in 2001.  She apparently had a dislocated jaw at the time.  She was taken to the ER and the jaw was reduced.  She also injured her right knee in the accident and subsequently had surgery on her right knee.  Since then, she has had continued significant problems with her jaw function and with her jaw joints.  Treatment to date includes injections in the muscles in the head, neck, back and jaw area; physical therapy for 1-1/2 years and splint therapy since 2001.  

PRIMARY PROBLEMS:
Earaches.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain around the head, neck, jaws and shoulder areas.
Difficulty with eating and chewing.

She gets earaches, tinnitus, and occasional vertigo.  The other joints that bother her include her neck, right knee predominately when there are weather changes and her left foot where she has previously fractured her 5th toe and it is malaligned.  She states that she wakes up stiff everyday but then as the day goes on at work, her pain problems become worse.  She starts work at 2 in the morning and works normally until noon or later.  She apparently does a lot of computer work and this seems to aggravate her situation.  She says that when she wears her bite plate that she does not clench her teeth but without she does clench and also does this during the day.  She said she had a bone scan done and she has decreased bone density in her left hip but she has no problems with it.  Medications she takes include ibuprofen 800 mg tablets as needed and usually takes it daily for her headaches.  She also takes Celebrex daily.  She gets daily headaches predominately in the temple and back of her head area at a level of 5.   She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 5, diet at 8, and disability at 4.  

To palpation she has moderate pain in the temporalis and masseter muscles and mild to moderate pain over the TMJs.  

Based on MRI, history as well as photographs, Anna's diagnoses would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation.
Mandibular hyperplasia (relative).
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Masticatory dysfunction.
ANNA SOMMERHAUSER			5/5/05					Page 2


Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Place orthodontic appliances on the maxillary teeth and begin to align and level the arch.
Place orthodontic appliances on the mandibular teeth and begin to align and level the arch.

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization. 

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I answered all the questions that Anna had at this time.  She has some financial questions and insurance questions and I told her to call Eve and discuss those factors with her.  She will do so.  She is to call us if she has any other questions or concerns.  We will prepare a letter of preauthorization for her insurance company.  