B132
B132 is 66 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. She has had a number of previous surgeries but none associated with the TMJ. B132 is in good health with no major medical problems. B132 takes the following medications:

Dyazide 3 times per week.
Estradiol 0.5 mg q.d.
Synthroid 75 mcg q.d.
Trazodone 25 mg q.h.s. p.r.n.
Primary concerns that B132 has includes the following:

Snoring.
Sleep apnea. Daytime sleepiness.
She has no TMJ symptoms or apparent problems. She is aware of possibly clenching and bruxing some at nighttime, but she has been told that she has that but she is not particularly aware of that herself. Previous treatment includes orthodontics as a teenager.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B132 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. There is some slight extra fullness maybe on the right side as compared to the left side in the angle area. Upper lip length measures about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 1. The maxillary midline is on the facial midline. The mandibular dental and chin midline are all fairly well aligned with each other, but about 2 mm to the right the maxillary midline. In profile view, B132 is probably a good 6-8 mm AP deficient in the maxilla. Chin appears to be 10-12 mm AP deficient. Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well defined. She does have some prominence of the labial mental fold. Upper lip supralabrale is about at least 3-4 mm posterior to subnasale. Intraorally, B132 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. The mandibular right incisors are hyper-erupted. She has an accentuated curve of Spee. All the teeth on the mandibular right side appear to be elevated compared to the teeth on the left side. In the upper arch, B132 has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She is missing what appears to be the maxillary left central and lateral incisors replaced by a bridge. She has an anterior deep bite of about probably a good 7 mm. She is very close to being Class I on the left side but Class II end-on on the right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal. Nasal airway looks reasonably good, although there is some slight deviation of the septum but not too significant. TMJs seem to function reasonably smoothly, although there are some noises that are present. Incisal opening is 42 mm counting the 7-mm vertical overbite. Right lateral movement is about 9 mm and left lateral movement 10 mm. She has no myofascial pain to palpation.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars but the rest of the teeth are all present. She has crowns on the molars in all 4 quadrants and root canals on a number of teeth as well. Turbinates appear enlarged. Sinuses appear clear. It is difficult to evaluate the joints. Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates appear quite large. Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear and turbinates appear quite large with the left side being slightly larger than the right side. Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show condyles that have a little bit of a hockey stick shape to them; however, there does appear to be good joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with a little bit of anterior beaking. Joint space looks reasonably good. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Vertical joint space looks almost excessive. Left TMJ coronal view because of the angulation is a little bit difficult to interpret. There does appear to be decreased joint space. Right TMJ coronal tomogram shows decreased joint space, but the rest of the joint spacing is pretty good. Condyle appears a little flat across the top. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B132 has AP maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 3 mm and at the base of tongue measures 4 mm.

Basic diagnoses for B132 would be as follows:
Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway. Sleep apnea. Class II end-on cuspid on the right side and Class I cuspid on the left side. Anterior deep bite of 7 mm. Accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch. Crowding of the lower anterior arch. Mandibular arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. Snoring. Daytime somnolence. Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction. Missing maxillary left central and lateral incisors replaced by a bridge.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch. Consider using turbos in the molars to open the bite to help level off the mid buccal units in the lower arch by extrusion of the bicuspids and minimal intrusion of the anterior teeth. Try to correct the lower arch asymmetry by shifting the right cuspid forward about 1mm and/or retract the left cuspid. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure.

Surgery. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a clockwise direction.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance it approximately 6-8 mm at the incisal edge. Partial inferior turbinectomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry as necessary to complete the occlusal result.

B132 MRI AGE: 66/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There is decreased lateral joint space and the disc appears medially displaced. Lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit more arthritic. It appears it may have lost some volume, but too much different than the opposite side. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. As in both sides, the lateral pole of the condyle extends almost beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. On the right side, the disc appears to be anteriorly and medially displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows at the lateral aspect of the joint the disc is not readily identifiable. More medially, the disc appears to be in a little bit better position. Articular eminence is fairly steep. The disc is almost in the vertical orientation particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint. On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyle and the disc is in a reduced position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head with some slight anterior beaking. Articular eminence is fairly steep. The disc does appear to be in reasonable position. The condyle may be postured slightly downward and forward. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and disc. The disc is in a reduced position in the open views. The disc could be just slightly anteriorly positioned in the closed views.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular discs may be anteriorly displaced at the more lateral aspect of the joint but also medially displaced.

