JENNA SPEAR										05-24-04


Patient History

Jenna’s problems began for unknown reasons, and the onset is not really known either. Her husband states that he first noticed asymmetry about two years ago but wasn’t aware of it prior to that. She was involved in an MVA in ’97 where she sustained a head injury and lost consciousness and also some internal injuries. Earlier she had orthodontics at the age of 14 for about a year-and-a-half, and then she noticed her teeth were shifting and changing, so she underwent orthodontics again beginning in 06/2002 and ending in 06/2003. During that time, the orthodontist tried to use elastics to try to get the teeth together on the right side but was unable to accomplish that. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. She is aware that she does clench and night. She gets daily headaches at a level of 8 that occur in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, overall pain on an average day at 7, jaw function at 4, diet at 2, and disability at 0. She has no other joint problems. The only previous surgery was she had her gallbladder removed as a consequence of the auto accident in ’97. 

She is aware of having clicking in the right TMJ area.

Patient Concerns

Headaches 
TMJ pain
Teeth on the right side don’t touch
Difficulties eating and chewing

Current Medications

Allegra
Ortho-Tri-Cyclen
Advil for her headaches and takes between 2 and 4 per day

Allergies

She has had an adverse reaction to DEMEROL and MORPHINE, so we want to use an alternative pain medication, and we may consider Dilaudid in her situation immediately postsurgery.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Jenna has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 16 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is about 1.5 to 2 mm off to the left of the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm off. Chin is about 7 to 8 mm off to the left side.

In profile view, Jenna has good facial symmetry and balance. Chin-neckline is long, and chin-neck angle is well-defined. Chin may be just slightly prominent compared to the lower lip, but overall she has fairly good balance.

Intraorally, Jenna has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. In the upper arch, she also has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Has relatively thin vascular gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. Has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship on the left side as well as on the right side. She has an open bite on the right side and tendency toward a buccal crossbite. She has an open bite of about 2 to 3 mm on that side. She has a fairly significant cant in the occlusal plane with the maxillary right cuspid being about 2 mm lower than the left and the right cuspid being about 3 mm lower than the left. 

To palpation, she has no pain around the head and neck area. Joints function relatively smoothly, although she does hear a little bit of a click on the right side. Incisal opening is 47 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 8 mm and to the left 7 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses are clear. The third molars are absent, and all other teeth are present with good bone and root structures. The left TMJ condyle looks relatively normal. Right TMJ condyle demonstrates the presence of a mass extending anterior to the condylar head. Comparatively, the left condyle measures a little bit less than 10 mm anteroposteriorly whereas the width of the right condyle measures 25 mm. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is flattened a little bit on the anterior aspect. Slightly increased anterior joint space and decreased posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. It is possible the disc could be just slightly anteriorly displaced based on the spacing present. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a large osteochondroma extending up from the anterior aspect of the mandible with increased width of the condylar head and neck area. The condyle is completely out of the fossa. Good joint space is present between the condyle/osteochondroma and the fossa. Posterior open bite is present of at least 2 to 3 mm in the molar areas. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles with the condylar portion on both sides coming beneath the articular eminence. On the right side, the mass moves forward with the condylar head.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates are of moderate size. Septum is a little bit wide. There is some significant vertical asymmetry at the maxillary occlusal plane level with the right side being probably close to 4 mm lower than the left side at the molar area. At the inferior border, there is probably a good 10 mm of vertical height difference. Vertical height of the mandible is greater on the right side as compared to the left side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows good AP balance between the maxilla and mandible. At the occlusal plane level, however, the right side is 5 to 6 mm lower in the second molar area as compared to the left side. At the inferior border of the mandible, there is a vertical difference of about 11 mm back at the angle area, 8 or 9 mm at the mesial of the first molar, and about 4 mm at the cuspid area. Oropharyngeal airway looks adequate, although the space from the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 7 mm. 

CAT scan shows the osteochondroma protruding anteriorly with no medial or lateral extensions. The growth is strictly anterior. 

Bone scan taken 04/26/04 shows that the right condyle is quite hot and active pathology ongoing there. 

Basic Diagnoses

Right TMJ large osteochondroma
Maxillary asymmetry with the right side being significantly lower than the left side
Mandibular vertical hyperplasia and asymmetry
Right posterior open bite of 2 to 3 mm
Maxillary midline shifted 2 mm to the left, mandibular dental midline shifted 3 mm to the left, and chin shifted 7 to 8 mm to the left
Headaches
TMJ pain
Difficulties eating and chewing

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Place appliances on upper arch and align and level the teeth. Do not use any interarch elastics
Place appliances on the mandibular arch and align and level the teeth (no interarch elastics)

Surgery
Right TMJ low condylectomy, recontour the condylar neck to function as a condyle, and reposition the articular disc with Mitek anchor and artificial ligaments
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back on the facial midline and transversely level the occlusal plane
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to transversely level the occlusal plane and correct any transverse discrepancies that may be present

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
