ELISA SOLOMON									07/07/2008

Elisa is 22 years old.  For the most part, she is in good health.  She has had cataract surgery in her left eye and has about 85% loss of vision in that eye.  She has had her wisdom teeth removed.  Primary concerns that Lisa has includes the following. 

Pain throughout the face, jaws, neck, back, and head that is constant.  
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Headaches that are fairly constant.

Elisa believes that her jaw problems began when she was about 14 years old in 1999 of unknown etiology.  Her jaws started to click and pop at that time, but she did not have the headaches then.  Her headaches began when she was probably about 17 or 18 years of age.  More recently, in the last several months, they have gotten progressively worse to where they are constant. 

She takes the following medications:

Allegra.
Cyclessa (BCP).
Trazodone 25 mg q.h.s.
Ibuprofen, Tylenol, and Aleve for pain control. 

She has no problems with earaches or tinnitus, but gets occasional vertigo.  The only other joint areas that bother her could be her neck and her back, although she cannot differentiate whether it is in the bone structures or in the muscles only.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time and also during the day.  She rates her headaches at 8 and they are constant through the entire head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 9, jaw function at 6, diet at 7,  and disability at 5.  

The previous treatments that Lisa has had include the following:

Retainers prior to orthodontics to align and rotate some teeth.
1996 through 1999 orthodontic treatment with retainers following.
She had splint therapy x2 from 2001 and she continues with a splint through 2008.
She had physical therapy from 2007 to 2008.
She has had medications tried.  Elavil was tried, but it gave her tachycardia.  She currently takes trazodone for sleep and to help decrease clenching. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Elisa has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 to 3 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are pretty much aligned on the facial midline.  In profile view, Elisa has slight deficiency in the maxillary projection of probably about 3 mm or so.  Chin appears retruded by about 10-12 mm.  Chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  She has some fullness in the submental area.  Intraorally, Elisa has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth are fairly well aligned and level with just some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has small upper lateral incisors and one on the left side is pegged shaped.  She has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship being a little bit more Class II on the left side than right side.  She is probably 2 to 3 mm Class III.  She has about a 1-mm overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  The tonsils look normal.  The turbinates are moderate in size and create some nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, she has some moderate pain over the TMJs, but minor pain over the masseters, SCMs, shoulders.  On opening, the left joint functions relatively smooth, but on the right side she has a pop at about 35 mm of opening and closing at about 30 mm.  Maximal opening is 50 mm, but opening without significant discomfort to only about 14 mm.  Excursion movements are 12 mm in each direction.
Elisa has an MRI report from an MRI taken July 13, 2007, that shows that she has a disc displaced in the left TMJ anteriorly that reduces with mouth opening.  On the right side, the disc is anteriorly displaced and also is reported to reduce.  Her films are not available at this time. 
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has a pegged left lateral incisors.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  The left condyle and right condyle may have some arthritic changes associated with them.  
Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear.  Nasal septum in the bony area is relatively straight.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged with greater obstruction of the airway on the left side and just slightly better airway on the right side.  
Left TMJ tomogram had been taken in centric relation as the condyle is postured down and forward in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also appears to postured down and forward slightly.  The posterior teeth do not appear to be together.  Articular eminence is moderate in steepness.  The patient may not have been in centric relation when the closed tomograms were taken.  On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints.      
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she is postured forward.  
Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ and lessened internal condylar resorption.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
Class II end-on occlusion. 
High occlusal plane angle.  
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
Left maxillary pegged lateral incisor. 





Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open approximately 2 mm of space around the maxillary left lateral incisor and 1 mm of space between the maxillary right lateral incisor and cuspid.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery.
TMJ reconstruction depending on MRI findings:  
Option 1.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 
anchor.  
Option 2.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses and mandibular advancement.  
Mandibular advancement with sagittal split osteotomies for option 1 and total joint prostheses for option 2.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.  
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts if TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses are used.  
Possible bilateral coronoplasties if total joint prostheses are used. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors with bonding, veneers, or crowns.


