CRYSTAL SPARKS									8/29/05

Crystal is 22 years old, referred by Dr. Gary Schwarz and Dr. James Person from McAllen, Texas.  Crystal is in good health with no major medical problems.  She takes the following medications:

Allegra-D.
Flonase 50 mcg.

She has allergies to carpet, grass and dust.  If she sits on carpet, she will develop a rash on her legs.  Crystal's problems began in about April of 2000 of unknown etiology.  She apparently just developed a locked jaw situation.  Prior to that, she did have some orthodontic treatment.  She wore a Herbst appliance for about 8 months in 1995.  She was in full orthodontic treatment from 1996 through 1998 and completed treatment while she was in the 9th grade.  In 2000, she developed significant problems again and was placed in a splint at that time.  In 2001, Dr. Gary Schwarz did a mandibular advancement for Crystal.  She had orthodontics for the second time.  Shortly afterwards she was through the initial postsurgical phase.  After the mandibular advancement she did feel better for awhile until she got her braces off and then the pain problems started back again.  She has been back in a splint almost continuously since that time.  Crystal has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She has a history of clenching and bruxing of her teeth and there could be some genetic factors because Crystal's dad and grandmother also have similar problems.  She has no problems with headaches.  She rates her TMJ pain on an average day at about a 4 but it can exacerbate itself to about a level of 9.  Average daily pain is at 4, jaw at 0, diet at 2, disability at 0.  

In frontal view, Crystal has fairly good symmetry in the middle upper third face.  The mandible shifted a little bit off towards the right side.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is a little bit off to the right side about 1/2 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right side.  The chin is probably about 4 mm off to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly close to being aligned with each other.  In profile view, Crystal has a little bit AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 mm.  Chin is retruded about 10 mm.  Chin-neckline is a little bit short though the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Crystal has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  There is adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, Crystal has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Upper lateral incisors appear a little bit small in size.  She has a Class II end-on occlusion being probably 5 mm Class II.  She has about a 3 to 4 mm overjet relationship.  She has about a 1 mm vertical overbite relationship.  In centric relation the mandibular dental midline is probably 2 mm off to the right side instead of 1 mm.  The left cuspid is probably 2 mm lower than the right cuspid.  As she bites together she hits prematurely on the right posterior teeth.  As she closes she hits predominately on the molars on the right side first before any of the teeth touch.  Oropharynx appears clear and normal.  The uvula soft palate and faucial pillars are all relatively normal.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Some slight constricture in the luminal valve area but not too significant.  The columella and nostrils look relatively normal.  She has not complained of any significant airway obstruction problem.  The septum looks relatively normal.  She has no history of snoring, daytime somnolence or sleep apnea symptoms.  
CRYSTAL SPARKS				8/29/05				Page 2


To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the masseter muscles and TMJs.  Otherwise, no tenderness around the head and neck area.  The joints seem to function relatively smoothly.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  She has 4 screws in each ramus area.  She has a 2 x 2 retainer on the lower anterior 6 teeth.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The condyles are off the film and cannot be evaluated.  

Left TMJ tomogram films show some decreased joint space.  There appears to be some arthritic changes in the joint structure but difficult to read.  Articular eminence appears fairly steep and long.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some arthritic changes.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Four screws are present in the mandible.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyles but decreased joint space between the condylar heads and the articular eminences.  

Cephalometrically, she has a Class II end-on occlusion with a slight increased occlusal plane angle.  The oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the soft palate level and probably about 4 to 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  Dental model analysis shows that there is a significant tooth size discrepancy to be figured out.  Placing the incisors in the proper position, we still have a Class II end-on occlusal relationship.  Accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch with about a 2 mm increased arch curvature.  In the upper arch, there is just a slight reverse curve of occlusion with the upper arch being almost totally flat.  There is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of approximately 3 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction and moderate degenerative changes of the articular disc.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior deep bite of 3 mm. 
Overjet of 3 to 4 mm. 
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Clenching and bruxism.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm vertically deficient compared to the left side.  
Premature contact on the left posterior teeth before any other teeth touch. 
CRYSTAL SPARKS				8/29/05				Page 3


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch opening at least 2 mm of space around each upper lateral incisor.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider stripping lower anterior teeth removing about 1 mm of tooth structure and retracting.  

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward approximately 10 mm and level the transverse occlusal plane.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it slightly, down graft it posteriorly and level it transversely.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

4.  Restorative dentistry to buildup the maxillary lateral incisors. 