JOHN SOULES										04-15-03

John is 33 years old and was referred by Dr. Paul Pin, Dr. Brian Blevins, and Evan Wilson.

Patient History

He has had previous surgery for tonsil removal, and he has bone spur removal from his left hip.

John has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain, earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, etc. He did acknowledge his joints function very smoothly without any problems.
 
Patient Concerns

Sleep apnea problems
Lower jaw is retruded
Teeth don’t fit together properly
Snoring
Sleep apnea
Restless leg syndrome

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, John has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -1. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned on the facial midine. Left side of the mandible appears might be a little bit vertically short compared to the right side.         

In profile, John has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm. Mandible is AP deficient by about 12 to 15 mm. Chin-neckline is shortened and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. Some fullness in the submental area. 

Intraorally, John has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present. Some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. Has good attached gingival around the lower anterior arch. May have a couple of millimeters of crowding in the lower anterior arch.

In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally and is Class II by about probably around 3 mm. Overjet is about 2 mm. Overbite is about 3 to 4 mm. There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1.5 to 2 mm higher than the right side. Lower arch is probably about a millimeter of vertical difference to 1.5 mm between the left and right side. Uvula is moderately large but not really severe. Posterior faucial pillars appear to be positioned somewhat posteriorly in the oropharynx.

Intranasally, the right turbinate is moderately large. Left turbinate appears quite small. Nasal septum at its base appears to reflect over towards the left side of the nose, but airway is quite large on that side compared to the opposite side. 

TMJs seem to function smoothly.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear moderately large on both sides. Condyles appear quite broad anteroposteriorly but appear fairly well-rounded with just a little flatness on top of the left one. All four third molars are missing, but the rest of the teeth are present and accounted for. No restorations present. 

Waters view shows that the right turbinate is quite large compared to the left one and seems to block a good part of the airway. Sinuses for the most part appear relatively clear. Left side of the mandible appears a little bit short vertically compared to the right side. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite broad anteroposteriorly. Seems almost a little bit large for the size of the fossa but seems to fit in there okay. Articular eminence is fairly steep although moderately long vertically. Good joint space appears to be present around the condylar head.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is very broad anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep and longer on this side as compared to the opposite side. Joint space appears fairly well balanced although might be just slightly decreased posteriorly. Contour of the condylar head looks relatively smooth. 

Open views show good translation of the condyles on opening. 

Dental model analysis shows that the lower teeth are actually a little warped from the impression, so there are some inaccuracies in assessment.  Lower teeth appear a little bit flared. There is a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of about 1.5 to 2 mm. Slight reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Class II end-on occlusion with an anterior deep-bite relationship.

John has been recommended to have a CPAP machine, and he tried the CPAP machine but was unable to tolerate the device. He currently wears a two-piece splint device that holds the mandible forward; however, over time, this is going to play havoc to his dentition. 

Based on clinical examination, dental models, radiographs, and sleep studies, John’s diagnoses are as follows:

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
High occlusal plane angle
Class II end-on occlusion
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of approximately 2 mm
Slight cant in the transverse occlusal plane with the left side being higher than the right side
Snoring
Sleep apnea
Restless leg syndrome

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth, removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and downgraft the maxilla and level the transverse occlusal plane
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

John did say that he has been to see Dr. Paul PIn, and because of the excessive soft tissue in the infraorbital area, Dr. PIn suggested some augmentations in those areas. This could possibly be done at the same time if John would prefer, and he will let us know what is thoughts are in that situation. The infraorbital rims appear inferiorly and posteriorly positioned.
