LEON SPITZ										01/02/2008

Leon is 70 years old and referred by Dr. Ross Sethman, Stillwater OK.  Leon's problems began about 2000 where he had a flareup of the right lingual nerve following some dental work. This lasted a few days to a month but then went away.  Leon is unable to identify if there was any abnormal pain with the initial injection.  In 2002, he had some more dental work done and the right lingual nerve became involved again.  However, he also had some sleep apnea surgery done about a month apart and I cannot differentiate between the two surgeries as to when the pain arose again and became constant.  He notes for sure that after the sleep apnea surgery, the pain got significantly worse.  In 2002 when he had the sleep apnea surgery he had the following procedures performed:
Tonsillectomy.
Adenoidectomy.
UPPP.
Septoplasty.  

This was done in Durango, CO.  

He has been to numerous clinics and has seen many doctors in reference to the current problem.  He has been to Milwaukee, UCLA ENT department, Mayo Clinic in Phoenix, AZ, and many others.  In January of 2006 he was treated in Albuquerque, NM, with an intracranial surgical procedure to address the glossopharyngeal nerve with no improvement.  The doctor there told him that he had misdiagnosed the problem.  Apparently it was a very difficult recovery and there was no improvement.  In mid November 2007 Dr. Sethman blocked the right lingual nerve and this removed the pain and it stayed relatively at a minimal level for about two weeks and then came back again.  

The type of symptoms that Leon has is:
Electrical pain or "cut" tongue type of pain. 
Worse with eating.  
Difficulty talking. 
Pain is generally less if the tongue immobile and increases in intensity with function.

Leon tends to sleep with his mouth open and his mouth gets very dry.  This seems to intensify the situation.  He has a dry mouth spray that he uses but this does not help the situation.  He has difficulty breathing through his nose and is predominately a mouth breather.  At night he can fall asleep fairly easily but wakes up frequently.  This may be due to the pain problems as well as sleep apnea problems.  He does still continue to snore and wake up unable to breathe.  

He has been on the following medications including Neurontin, Tegretol and Lyrica as well as homeopathic medicines without any improvement.  He has had acupuncture.  He has been on numerous pain medications including Percocet, Morphine, Demerol, oxycodone, Lortab etc.  with inability to control the pain factors.  

Additional factors he has are rosacea of the face and has had basal cell carcinoma on his face that have been treated successfully.
LEON SPITZ					01/02/2008				Page 2

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:   
Lyrica, but he is tapering off this since it is ineffective.
"Leptopro" (for blood pressure.)
Proscar.

He has no trouble with earaches.  He gets frequent tinnitus and vertigo, but no hearing loss and no other joints bother him.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  Interestingly, earlier following the onset of this problem when he would eat it would help reduce the tongue pain, but now eating actually increases the pain levels and this changed about two years ago.

He has no TMJ pain.  He rates his jaw function at 0, diet would be at 0 except for the tongue pain created by the food hitting against his tongue.  In addition, he has a constant hypersensitivity in the right temple area that does not hurt except when touched or when something like the wind blows against his temple area will create significant problems.  If he ingests vinegar or sugar, this increases the right tongue pain.  

Leon has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  He has a prognathic position of the mandible and Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship.  He has anterior and right-sided crossbites.  He has full Class III cuspid relationship.  He has had the traditional UPPP procedure with the posterior aspect of the soft palate and uvula removed.  It is not known which method was used but he does have a scar band across the posterior aspect of the soft palate that tends to pull the soft palate inferiorly somewhat down onto the posterior aspect of the tongue.  Pressing gently down on the tongue with a tongue blade created significant electrical kind of impulses through the right side of the tongue.  The pain is primarily in the mid central part of the right lateral aspect of the tongue.  TMJ seems to function relatively smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 
57 mm.  Excursive movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  To palpation he has some mild tenderness over the right temporalis muscle but no other tenderness around the head and neck area.  Leon seems to remember that when he got his first dental injection about 2000 he did get an electrical shock through his tongue at that time.  He cannot remember if during the second time if he received that sensation.  Intranasally, there appears to be some inflammation present.  Turbinates are moderate in size but does appear to be a passable airway.  In his profile view it appears that there may have some maxillary AP hypoplasia.  Relative to his occlusion he is a full Class III on the right side and probably just slightly a Class III on the left side by probably a couple of mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex has a defect on the right side.  He has some crowns on his posterior teeth.  

Waters view shows that the turbinates appear fairly large and they seem to block the nasal airway somewhat.  This may be more towards the posterior aspect.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little flattening on the posterior head and little bit of superior peaking.  Joint space looks fairly good.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.

LEON SPITZ					01/02/2008				Page 3

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears somewhat narrow anteroposteriorly.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  There appears to be good joint space.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both joints.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a skeletal Class III relationship.  The tongue is fairly low.  The airway, however, at the soft palate level is only about 4 to 5 mm.  At the base of the tongue it is closer to about 8 to 9 mm.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level may likely be due to the AP deficiency of the maxilla.  There are some periapical x-rays that were sent.  There does not appear to be any involvement of the inferior alveolar nerve.  There may be some decalcification of the mandibular right first molar.  Leon does have a slight numbness in the nerve.  The procedure performed in 2000 involved the removal of a wisdom tooth, Leon believes.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Left lingual nerve painful paresthesia.
Residual sleep apnea. 
Maxillary AP hypoplasia. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Hypersensitivity to touch in the right temple area.

This patient's primary concerns, however, are with the lingual nerve at this time.  

Etiological factors for the lingual nerve injury could include the following:
Instrumentation injury to the right lingual nerve.
Injection injury.
Central nervous system pathology. 

TREATMENT OPTIONS:
Exploration with release of scar tissue and/or nerve repair.
Consider injection with Botox. 
Consider radiofrequency rhizotomy.
Cryotherapy.
Nerve resection. 