B133
B133 is 45 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. Primary concerns that B133 has include the following:
1. Sleep apnea.
2. Pain in the jaw area.
3. Clicking in the jaw joints.
4. Daily headaches that occur in the morning.

B133 as a child had a retruded lower jaw. He did have orthodontics around the age of 16. He did not really develop any significant sleep apnea problems until he was about 20. He started having snoring problems about the age of 28 and then was confirmed to have sleep apnea at about the age of 38. He eventually was started on a CPAP machine from age 39 to 41. During that time, he had a tonsillectomy and partial uvulectomy performed with no improvement. He began orthodontics again at age 36 to 37. He underwent maxillary and mandibular advancement of 5 mm and an advancement genioplastyy of 5 mm at age 41. He was off his CPAP machine for about two months following the surgery, but then was back on it again until age 43. Two years ago, a mandibular advancement appliance was constructed for him and this did help him. He wore it for about a year to a year and a half and this did help him, but then he developed the TMJ issues and had to go back to the CPAP machine. He also tried a BiPAP that did not work well for him. He is now on a CPAP auto device.

B133 gets daily headaches at about a level of 6 throughout the head that last for 1 to 2 hours in the morning. He relates this to oxygen deprivation. He rates his TMJ pain at about level of 1, average daily pain except for the headaches at 0, jaw function, diet, and disability at 0 in relation to TMJ issues. He has a little decreased sensation in the center part of the lower lip. He takes no medications. He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. No other joints bother him. He does have a history of acid reflux and 3 years ago had a Nissen fundoplication for GERD. He is aware of clenching some during the day time.

He does report severe snoring, mild daytime somnolence, and severe sleep apnea. At night, he usually wakes up at least two times. For the most part, he believes he is a nasal breather.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B133 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 23 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 0. Maxillary midline is just about 1 mm to the right as is the mandibular dental midline. The chin may be about 2 mm or so to the right. In profile view, the maxilla may be 3-4 mm AP deficient and chin appears to be about 10-12 mm AP deficient. Chin neckline is short and there is no definition of the chin neck angle. He has a prominent labial mental fold. The lower two-third of the lower third of the face is short vertically. Intraorally, B133 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. There is crowding in the lower anterior arch and slight over angulation of the lower anteriors. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. The upper teeth are in vertical inclination. He has a Class II end-on occlusion on the right side and Class I on the left side. He is probably 2 mm Class II on the right. He has an anterior deep bite of probably 4 mm. He has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left cuspid being about 2 mm compared to the right cuspid in the upper arch and in the lower arch there is about 1-2 mm difference as well. As he bites together, his teeth touch first on the left side then on the right side. Soft palate and uvula look relatively normal in length. Faucial pillars look relatively normal, but he does have some increased soft tissue thickness bilaterally along the posterior pharyngeal wall posterior to the faucial pillars. Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. There could be some mild to moderate airway obstruction. On opening, he does have a click in the left joint at about 35 mm of opening and at about 30 mm of closing. To palpation, he has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Maximum opening is 33 mm. Excursion movements are 12 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of three bone screws in each side of the mandibular ramus. There are three bone plates, two on the left side and one on the right side yet. The anterior bone plate on the right side has previously been removed. He has dental implants to replace the maxillary left lateral incisor. He has a root canal in the maxillary right first molar and left second bicuspid. The condyles look a little bit arthritic.

Coronal view shows that he has a deviated septum off towards the right side and he has enlarged turbinates. He has a little increased thickness of his sinus membranes, particularly in the right maxillary sinus. Also, the right ethmoids are affected slightly.

Axial view shows that the septum is deviated off towards the right side. Turbinates are enlarged, particularly on the left side and it appears that there is some significant airway obstruction related to the turbinates. He has increased thickening of the sinus membranes particularly in the right sinus.

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle with some anterior beaking. There is some decreased posterior joint space and slight increased anterior joint space. The articular eminence is moderately inclined.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle is a little bit narrow and may be a little bit more arthritic in appearance. Towards the medial side, it is quite narrow anteroposteriorly. There is increased anterior joint space and decreased posterior joint space.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle with a little increased bone deposition at the lateral pole of the condyle. It has a close approximation to the lateral rim of the fossa, but extends lateral to the lateral rim of the fossa. Joint space is much better towards the medial side of the joint.

Right TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that has a little bit better morphology relative to mediolateral width. There is decreased superior and lateral joint space. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a mild increased occlusal plane angle, but appears to have a retruded maxilla and mandible. The maxillary incisors are in lingual inclination. The lower incisors are over angulated. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is actually good with about a 10-11 mm airway space, but at the base of the tongue it measures no more than about 4 mm. The tongue appears to fill a good part of the oral cavity.

Diagnoses for B133 would be as follows:
1. Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs dislocation.
2. Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
3. Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
4. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
5. Hypertrophied turbinates.
6. AP macrogenia.
7. High occlusal plane angle.
8. Vertical inclination of maxillary incisors.
9. Over angulation of lower incisors with mild crowding.
10. Sleep apnea.
11. Left-sided TMJ pain. Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a. Align and level the maxillary arch ( evaluate maxillary implant area for osteotomy. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally. On the left side where the implant is, just tip the cuspid root distally. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Try to expand the lower arch some to help upright the lower incisors.
3. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, down graft the posterior aspect, and expand. c.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. e.	Reduction genioplasty. f.	Removal of previously placed bone plates including three plates in the maxilla and 12 screws and removal of bone plate in the mandible with four screws.
5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B133 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width with some sclerosis on the top. The disc is medially displaced. There is some decreased lateral joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit flattened on top with some sclerosis. The disc is significantly medially displaced. There is decreased lateral joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

In the sagittal views, the images are not labeled, but TMJ-1 demonstrates out lateral the disc is not easily seen. More medial, the disc seem to be anteriorly displaced, although it may be in a pre-click position. There is decreased posterior joint space. The articular eminence is fairly steep and the disc is oriented in somewhat of a vertical orientation. There is increased anterior joint space. The condyle has slight anterior beaking with a little bit of sclerosis around the anterior head and superior aspect. There appears to be early reduction on opening of the disc. There appears to be good translation of the condyle and the articular disc.

Side 2 shows a condyle that appears a little bit larger than the other side and there is a little bit of anterior beaking in it. At the lateral aspect of the joint, the disc is not as readily seen, but does seem to be anteriorly displaced but more medially the disc is quite thickened in the posterior band and appears to be in position indicating a rotational displacement of the disc. The articular eminence is moderately steep. The condyle is somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. In the right joint on opening, there is early reduction and good translation of the disc and condyle. The condyle appears much more narrow and a little bit sclerotic on top on this side as compared to the opposite. There is fluid in the superior joint space and inferior joint space.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis, slightly worse on the right side and articular discs that are anteriorly and medially displaced but with early reduction.

