SHEILA STANLEY									10/26/2005

Sheila is 43 years old, referred by Ronald Phillips, DDS, Lubbock, Texas.  Sheila states she has chronic sinus problems.  She had a total hysterectomy in 1991 and had her tonsils removed as a child.  Sheila is in good health except she does have some thyroid problems.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS
Synthroid 112 mcg q.d.
Singular 10 mg q.d.
Premarin 1.25 mg q.d.
Zoloft 100 mg q.d.

She has had adverse reactions to sulfa, codeine and Mepergan Fortis.  She is unaware of any food allergies and she has no jewelry allergies. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Popping of TMJs.
Neck and back pain.
Headaches. 
TMJ pain.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Teeth and jaws do not fit together.

Even as a child Sheila had problems with pain in her neck and back that her mother would take her to the doctor for.  However, it was not until about 4 years ago that she began having significant popping in her jaw joints with the right side being worse than the left side.  The etiology is unknown.  During that time she developed significant headache problems that were about a level of 8 and these headaches would occur about 3 to 4 times per week and involve the frontal, temple and posterior head area.  She would have significant TMJ pain at about the level of 7 and average daily pain at about a level of 7.  She received a splint about a year ago and this has helped significantly reduce her pain around the head and neck area.  Her headaches now when they do occur is still about an 8 but do not occur as frequently as they did.  The TMJ pain is now about a level of 3 and average daily pain at about a level of 2.  She still rates her jaw function at 7, diet at 5 and disability at 5.  Sheila's mother also has TMJ problems so it is possible there could be some genetic factors.  She has no problems with earaches, vertigo or hearing loss but does get some tinnitus.  The only other joints that bother her are her knees and they are not real significant.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night and feels that she does this during the day as well.

In frontal view, Sheila has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  In profile view, she may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency.  She has some macrogenia.  Chin-neckline has good and perhaps some slight increased length.  Chin-neck angle is moderately well defined.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has generalized fluorodosis.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth through the second molars.  She is slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side, close to a Class I on the left side.  




SHEILA STANLEY 				10/26/2005				Page 2


Lower dental midline shifts off to the left about 1 mm to 1.5 mm.  They are fairly aligned with each other.  The chin is also just slightly off to the left side 1.5 mm.  She does have some wearing and chipping off the lower anterior teeth.  There is probably about a 2 to 3 mm Class II on that right side.  She has a little bit crowding in the lower anterior arch.  A little bit of posterior open bite tendency right now probably due to the splint therapy that she has been on.  The splint she has does open her bite up and positions her mandible forward and is somewhat hidden because of the open bite that has been created with the splint.  It is a lower appliance that she has.  She had only about 1 mm overbite anteriorly.  Prior to the splint she has a lot of myofascial pain problems affecting the temporalis muscles and masseter muscles.  Currently she has high moderate pain to palpation over the shoulders, left TMJ, moderate discomfort over the left styloid area and then milder tenderness over the right TMJ and posterior neck area.  On excursive movement, she occasionally has a pop in one of the jaw joints but it is difficult to figure out which one it was.  Since wearing the splint, the popping has significantly decreased from what it was.  Maximal incisal opening is 56 mm.  She could open to about 40 without too much discomfort.  Excursive movement to the right was 8 mm to the left 8 mm.  She did have an occasional popping noise in the right joint as she would go into excursive movements.  She has a little pop in both sides but inconsistent.  Again, prior to having the splint she had much more significant clicking and popping.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except for the 4 third molars.  The sinuses may be a little bit cloudy perhaps moreso on the right side than the left side.  The condyles are off the x-rays so I cannot evaluate those.  I cannot evaluate the nasal airway.

Waters view shows that the septum is deviated off to the left side but there could be some spurring off to the right side.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  The right side appears a little bit cloudy compared to the left sinus.  The rest of the sinuses appear clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior aspect and a little bit of peaking on the top of the condyle.  The condyle is displaced posteriorly.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Anterior joint space is increased.  The disc is likely anteriorly displaced in the vertical orientation.  

Left TMJ shows a condyle that has some arthritic changes with flattening on the anterior head and some anterior beaking present.  Decreased joint space superiorly.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Anterior joint space appears somewhat decreased.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has skeletal Class III relationship but closer to a Class I cuspid and molar relationship.  She appears to have bilateral posterior open bites present.  Airway space appears good.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.  
SHEILA STANLEY				10/26/2005				Page 3

BASIS DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with reductions.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Mandibular prognathism.
AP macrogenia.
Low occlusal plane angle.
Class III nonocclusion on the right side.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Masticatory dysfunction. 
Mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.
Chronic sinus problems. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Probable blockage of the maxillary sinus ostiums. 
Partial nasal airway obstruction.
Nasal septal spurring.
Probable tooth size discrepancy. (Models were not available at the time of evaluation.)

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Open up 1 mm space between each of the laterals and cuspids to provide room for interdental osteotomies.  
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and move the posterior aspect superiorly.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a clockwise direction.
Partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Nasoseptoplasty. 
Consider possible nasal antrostomies.
Debridement of maxillary sinuses particularly on the right side.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

I also discussed with her the possibility of doing the joints and just the lower jaw osteotomies.  She, however, is concerned about her airway problems and chronic sinus problems which can best be addressed in conjunction with performing maxillary surgery as well.  I did discuss the potential risks and complications associated with the surgery. 

cc:  	Joseph Forsman, DDS
6400 S. Quaker
Lubbock, TX 79413
406-795-6415