JEREMY SPETH									01/17/2008

Jeremy is referred by Dr. Stuart Frost, 4827 E. Southern Ave., #200, Mesa, AZ 85206.  Jeremy is 28 years old and is currently in orthodontic treatment.  He has had previous splint therapy and has also had Botox injections to treat TMJ and jaw joint problems.  Jeremy's problems began about 2006 although he does have an MRI from November of 2005.  Etiology is unknown.  His TMJ problems came on suddenly.  His pain is predominately on the left side.  He rates his TMJ pain at a level of 9, headaches at a level of 9 that occur predominately on the left side in the forehead, temple and behind the left eye.  He gets frequent left-sided earaches that are moderate to severe and he gets occasional vertigo.  He does have some other joint problems.  He rates his average daily pain at about 6, jaw function at about 9, diet at 7, disability at 9.  He currently takes ibuprofen for pain.  His primary concerns are jaw pain and headaches. 

He has been under orthodontic treatment.  His occlusion actually looks fairly good at this time.  Radiographic evaluation shows a Panorex that shows the absence of all four third molars.  He has what appears to be a cementoma around the mandibular right bicuspids at the apex.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  The condyles particularly on the left side may be a little bit arthritic.  Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a retruded maxilla with a posterior vertical maxillary deficiency and an AP retruded mandible.  The oropharyngeal airway is decreased measuring about 6 mm. The occlusal plane is high.  The MRI shows that he has bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction on the left side and with reduction on the right side but the MRI was from 2006.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with reduction on the right side and without on the left side.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Rule out nasal airway obstruction related to hypertrophied turbinates or nasal septal deviation 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Bilateral TMJ MRIs.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Maintain the alignment of the maxillary arch.
Maintain the alignment of the mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Consider possible bilateral TMJ total joint prostheses to advance the mandible and reconstruct the TMJs.
Consider possible articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 
anchors but this will be dependent on the new MRI evaluation.
JEREMY SPETH				01/17/2008				Page 2

Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.  
Bilateral sagittal splits if Mitek anchors can be used to reposition the articular discs.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts if total joint prostheses are required.
Bilateral coronoid plasties if total joint prostheses are required. 
Intranasal surgery if necessary to eliminate nasal airway obstruction.   
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

