PAMELA STEINLE									10/01/2007

Pam is 46 years old and referred by Dr. Cynthia Reed, 1502 E. Iron, Salina, KS, 67401.  Pam has a history of significantly decreased jaw function.  On October 25, 2006, Dr. John Brammer performed the following procedures:
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral scar release.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.

Since that surgery, she has been able to open her jaws significantly better.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Her lower jaw does not know where to go.
Back teeth do not touch at all.
Difficulties eating and chewing.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Nexium.
Yasmin.
Premarin.
Loratadine.

In frontal view, Pam has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  The mandible appears somewhat retruded.  Chin-neckline has fairly good length and chin-neck angle is well defined.  Intraorally, she is missing her lower cuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  There is some spacing between lower lateral incisors and first bicuspids being a little bit greater on the left side than the right side.  Lacking some attached gingiva on the lower anterior arch particularly around the left central incisor.  In the upper arch she is missing the first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  In centric relation she has an anterior deep bite probably of 5 mm.  She has Class II end-on cuspid relationship by probably 4 to 5 mm.  She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch and a reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch.  When she pushes the mandible forward into proper overbite overjet relationship, she has posterior open bites of about 4 to 5 mm on each side.  Turbinates are mildly enlarged and septum may be deviated just slightly to the right side but there does not appear to be any evidence of significant airway obstruction.  She has some decreased sensation to her cheeks particularly on the right side and it has tingling kind of sensations and is hypersensitive to cold currently.  Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm.  Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction.  

Pam preferred not to have x-rays taken here today so we will use her old x-rays.
PAMELA STEINLE				10/01/2007				Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
X-rays taken July 20, 2007 shows that she is missing the mandibular cuspids and maxillary first bicuspids as well as all four third molars.  She has some arthritic appearances of her condyles with some flattening and a little bit of sclerosis.  Bilateral coronoid processes are absent.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

TMJ radiographs show that she has good translation of the condyles.  She tends to posture her right mandible a little further forward than the left side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph is taken with the mandible postured forward and not in centric relation.  The oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good.  She has a reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch, accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch and posterior open bites with the mandible postured forward with appropriate overjet overbite relationship.  There is a lateral ceph taken 08/17/2007 with the mandible in a better centric relation position.  Vertical difference in height of the ramus from one side to the other side and also at the occlusal plane level.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
AP mandibular deficiency.
Bilateral posterior open bite.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Missing mandibular cuspids and maxillary first bicuspids as well as all four third molars.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4 mm.
Mandibular condyle is postured forward with an increased posterior joint space.
Slight medial displacement of the articular disc bilaterally with the left side being worse than the right side but are relatively asymptomatic.
Accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch and reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Open up 2 mm of space around each upper lateral incisor 1 mm mesial and 1 mm distal to correct for the tooth size discrepancy. 
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to buildup the lateral incisors. 
