ROSE MARIE STANZEL								05-27-03

Marie is from Mount Hope, Ontario, Canada.

Patient History

Marie has had two previous TMJ surgeries, and she has had a cervical fusion, a hysterectomy, and some breast lumps removed. 

Marie is currently 61 years old. Marie’s problems began prior to 1983, but it was in 1983 when she began developing pain in the right TMJ area. She was aware of clicking, popping, and grinding prior to that. She saw a surgeon, who wanted to actually do surgery on both joints, but prior to the surgery, she saw a dentist, who felt she had significant functional problems and elected to remove her four second molars to try to get the teeth to fit together better. In 1985, she had a Proplast Teflon IPI placed in her right TMJ only. After that, her problems got worse. Her pain and headaches increased, and her jaw dysfunction increased. On April 23, 1994, the PT IPI was removed from the right TMJ area. This subsequently led to an ankylosis of the right TMJ. On 09/12/1996, she was taken back to surgery, and release of the right TMJ ankylosis was performed. A foreign body giant cell reaction was occurring within the joint. Apparently nothing was placed in the joint during the surgery. Apparently the ankylosis began or at least significantly decreased jaw function began after the PT IPI was originally placed. Marie has had lots of physical therapy performed and has been in splints almost constantly since 1983. 

She has no problems with earaches, gets tinnitus sometimes, and gets light-headed sometimes. She has hearing loss on the right side. She is aware of having clenching and bruxism at night and feels she may also have this during the day. She gets headaches two to three times per week, and they average at about a level of 7 and occur predominantly in the temporal areas. She rates her TMJ pain on a daily average of 6, on an average day, her overall pain is 5, but an average bad day is at 9. She rates jaw function at 8, diet at 6, and disability at 6. She can wake up in the middle of the night with headaches. She usually wakes up with headaches. 

Current Medications

Diuretic
Paxil 10 mg q.d. 
Vioxx 10 mg q.d.
Amitriptyline 

Patient Concerns

Headaches
TMJ pain
Jaws do not function well
Difficult to eat and chew
Occasional dizziness
Difficulties at times with speech

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Marie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1.5 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline. 

In profile view, there may be some slight retrusion of the mandible in the chin area. Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. 

Intraorally, Marie has all of her lower teeth back through the first molars but is missing the second and third molars. Has a crown on the left first bicuspid. Teeth are mildly crowded in the lower anterior arch. Has good attached gingival around the lower anterior teeth.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the first molars but is missing the second and third molars. She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship on the right side and an end-on Class II relationship on the left side. She has an anterior deep bite of probably about 7 to 8 mm. She does have a crown on the maxillary right central incisor. Oropharynx is clear. Nasal airway appears okay, although there is some deviation of the septum, but appears to be clearance of the airway.

To palpation, she has high moderate to severe pain over the TMJs, high moderate over the masseter muscles, styloid areas, and moderate discomfort over the temporalis muscles and medial pterygoid muscles. In the left TMJ, she has crepitus on opening. On the right side, the joint seems to function relatively smoothly. Maximal opening is about 28 mm counting her overbite. Opening without significant pain is 18 mm. Excursive movements are 2 to 3 mm in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all second and third molars. She is also missing the maxillary right lateral incisor and has a three-unit bridge there. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Nasal airway appears reasonably good. She has a root canal in the mandibular left second bicuspid. Styloid processes are fairly long. Joints appear to have arthritic changes associated with them with both having some sclerosis and flattening on the head of the condyles.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle is actually postured forward in the fossa probably about 3 to 4 mm. Virtually no joint space between the condyle and the articular eminence. Some anterior beaking is present. Sclerosis is present on the head of the condyle. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows severe degenerative changes within the joint. There are osteophytic and extrusion osseous products coming off the head of the condyle as well as down from the fossa. It appears there could be almost continuous bone between the flattened articular eminence and the head of the condyle. It appears that she may have had a previous eminectomy as there is virtually no articular eminence on this side. The condyle is postured forward in the fossa again about 3 mm or so. 

On opening, there is very minimal translation of either condyle. In fact, it appears that the left condyle actually goes back into the fossa a little bit more. 

Waters view shows that there appears to be an adequate nasal airway, and the sinuses appear relatively clear. Frontal sinuses are essentially non-formed. 

Cephalometrically, she has a slight skeletal Class II jaw relationship with an anterior deep bite. Oropharyngeal airway from the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall only measures about 3 mm, and from the base of the tongue the posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 9 mm. The tongue appears to fill most of the oral cavity.

Basic Diagnoses

Right TMJ severe arthritis secondary to foreign body giant cell reaction from previous Proplast Teflon implant
Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and severe deformation and non-salvageable
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Earaches 
Right-sided hearing loss

Recommended Treatment

CT scan of bilateral TMJs (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)
Application of arch bars

Other Systems

She has some problems with other joints which include her lower back, neck, right shoulder, fingers, toes, hips, and feet. She has allergies to mosquito bites but has no known allergies to food and no known problems with jewelry. She has recently been diagnosed as having fibromyalgia. 

She does have problems with the bones in her neck, lower back, right shoulder, fingers, hips, feet, and toes. She has had lots of problems with urinary tract infections for the past 15 years but prior to that didn’t really have any problems. She will have some nocturia. Occasionally she will wake up at night with some incontinence problems. In 1996, she had a hysterectomy and a bladder suspension procedure performed. She has two children, ages 37 and 35. She has had no miscarriages and no fertility problems. At the hysterectomy, her surgeon told her that she had fibroid tumors, polyps, and cysts in her uterus. She has been diagnosed with fibrocystic breast disease and has had biopsies taken. She may have some female hormone imbalance problems. She was on estrogen for a while but then with the controversy in reference to potential complications of that medicine, she stopped. She says she doesn’t feel quite as good now as she did when she was taking that medication. She has had a vaginal yeast infection x 1. She had a couple of styes probably around 15 years ago. She has some dry eye problems. She does not smoke now, but a number of years ago, she did have an occasional social smoke. She does have earaches and some vertigo. She does have a cough. She used to have some significant problems with irritable bowel syndrome until she had her hysterectomy, and now she only has an occasional flare-up. She may have some mild problems with constipation. She is not aware of any STDs. She has been diagnosed recently with fibromyalgia. She has had virtually no exposure to birds or cats. She had a dog for about 12 years, but the dog did not eat birds. No exposure to hoofed animals. No implants except for the Proplast Teflon in the right TMJ area. 