ETTER STARKS-COLEMAN							03/22/2007

Etter is 34 years old.  She is referred by Dr. David Kang, 3200 S. Lancaster Rd., Ste. 760, Dallas, TX 75216.  Etter was referred to Dr. Kang for extraction of her full wisdom teeth.  Etter is in good health with no major medical problems.  She had removal of the mandibular right third molar which was mesially impacted and there was difficulties blocking that tooth. Postoperatively, she complained of numbness to the tongue on the right side.  December 1, 2006, she noted some tingling and burning on the right side of the tongue and a funny taste.  It appeared that she could feel pressure at that time.  Further follow-up on December 18, 2006, she had diminished sensation and now appears to have complete anesthesia.  These are notes from Dr. Kang's letter.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
She has no taste on the right side. 
Right side of tongue is essentially numb.
She has a tendency to bite on her tongue particularly at night when she sleeps and also during the day when she is talking.  She puts gauze in the back of her mouth between her teeth so that she will not bite down and chew her tongue at night.  During the day she has learned how to hold her tongue back from between her teeth so that she does not bit it so much during the day.
She has difficulties speaking and saying some words with the current situation.  

She does not have any particular pain associated with it.  The only discomfort or pain that she does have is around one of the teeth where there is a red area and if she pushes on that red gum area it causes pain.  

Intraorally, Etter has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars except she is missing the left first molar.  There is very mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, Etter has all of her teeth back through the second molars as well.  She has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship and about a 2 mm anterior deep bite relationship.  There is an area just on the inside of the gingival margin on the right side just adjacent and slightly posterior to the second molar that is tender.  It feels like something sharp to her which means there could be a small bone perhaps causing that discomfort.  Neuromotor functions of the tongue appear to be intact.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows that all 4 third molars are gone.  The mandibular right third molar area on the Panorex looks unremarkable.   

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Right lingual nerve traumatic neuroma.
Anesthesia to right side of tongue.




ETTER STARKS-COLEMAN 		03/22/2007				Page 2

RECOMMENDED SURGICAL PROCEDURES:
Exploration of right lingual nerve.
Resection of traumatic neuroma.
Nerve repair by direct anastomosis versus synthetic nerve graft.

I did review in detail and repeated several times that the prognosis for the lingual nerve is not as good as other nerves in the area.  I did emphasize that it would be very unlikely for her to get any taste sensation return.  I feel that she is fortunate that she has no pain associated at this time with the lingual nerve injury.  I made it very clear that she may not get much improvement and she could end up being in the same status that she is now.  There is always a potential risk for developing and having increased pain sensation after the surgery.  The fact that she does not have pain now would tend to make me feel that she would have a better prognosis as compared to someone who does have significant pain following this type of injury to the lingual nerve.  She does understand that the pain could get worse for her afterwards.  