SOPHIA STAHL									02/03/2010

Sophia is 11 years old.  Birth date is 04/27/1998.  She is in good health with no major medial problems.  She was referred by Dr. George Adams. 

Primary concerns Sophia has include the following:

Her overbite relationship.
Gummy smile.

She takes no medications and to date has had no treatment.  Sophia has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain.  Jaws work very well.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus nor vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing particularly at night time.  Interestingly, the mother has a history of bruxing as well and wears a night guard.  

In frontal view, Sophia has good facial symmetry and balance.  Upper lip length is 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 5 mm.  The maxillary dental midline and mandibular dental midline are pretty much on the facial midline.  The chin may be just a touch to the left side maybe 1-2 mm.  In profile, the maxilla may be retruded about 2 mm.  The chin may be retruded by 10-12 mm.  She does have a slight head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, Sophia has all of her lower teeth back through the first molars erupted and the seconds are just beginning to come in.  She has mild crowding of the lower anterior teeth and has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has a retained primary “e” on the right side, although the second bicuspid is coming through and she has the rest of her teeth erupted through back through the second molar on the left side and first molar on the right side.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 8-10 mm.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look fairly healthy.  Tonsils are moderately enlarged.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  The turbinates are moderate enlarged.  Columella is wide and the nostrils are moderately narrow.  Sophia gives no history of snoring nor daytime somnolence.  She has no sleep apnea.  She has a moderate sleep disorder that is related to her being a light sleeper.  She predominantly breathes through her nose.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATIONS.  Panorex shows that she has impacted cuspids in the symphysis area of the mandible.  The right one is laying horizontal and the left one is angled about 45 degrees.  She has retained primary “e’s”.  In the upper arch, she an unerupted maxillary right cuspid with a primary cuspid crown still remaining.  The maxillary right second bicuspid is almost erupted in with residual portion of the primary second molar crown remaining.  The third molars are developing in the mandible and also in the left maxilla.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The bony septum looks reasonably straight.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  It be an area of cystic development around the crowns of the impacted cuspids.  They almost overlap each other.  
Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking.  The joint space however looks reasonably good.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle with some slight anterior beaking.  The joint space looks reasonably good.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has moderate mediolateral width.  The joint space looks fairly good.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 or 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a somewhat narrow mediolateral width.  The joint space looks reasonably good.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 mm.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses appear clear, but the turbinates are quite large.  The septum appears reasonably straight in the bony area. 

Axial view shows the sinuses are clear.  The turbinates are quite large.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is slight skeletal Class II jaw relationship.  The Class II end-on cuspid relationship.  There is an increased occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm at the soft palate level and maybe 6 mm at the base of the tongue.  The lower incisors are slightly over angulated.  

Basic diagnoses for Sophia would be as follows:

Maxillary and anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior deep bite of 8 mm.
Horizontally impacted mandibular right cuspid with a dentigerous cyst surrounding the crown.
Left impacted mandibular cuspid.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Wide columella creating narrow nostrils.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm (normal is 11 mm).
Tooth size discrepancy of probably at least 3 mm secondary to small upper lateral incisors. 
Impacted third molars x3.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Surgery Stage 1: Exposure of mandibular cuspids, removal of right cuspid and 
      dentigerous cyst.  Try to erupt the left cuspid into position.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to expand the lower arch slightly to help 			make room for the cuspids.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 			mm of tooth structure from the incisors to keep from flaring them too far forward 			and to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Maxillary osteotomies to remove the anterior aspect superiorly, advance slightly, 			and expand if necessary. 
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
	c.	Removal of impacted third molars x3.
	d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	e.	Reconstruction of the columella. 
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 


The orthognathic surgery would likely be of most benefit for her if it were done at the age of 15.  Depending on her growth where she may developed increased vertical maxillary excess, then we could likely do the orthognathic surgery when she was 14.  Le Fort I osteotomies will inhibit growth and if it is a normal growing maxilla could result in a Class III occlusion.  However, if she has vertical maxillary excess that is continuing to grow, this will enable us to do the surgery a little bit earlier and yet keep the occlusion together because of the continued vertical growth of the maxilla.  
