ALAN SPINDEL									04/12/2008

Alan is 14 years and 11 months old.  Referred by Dr. Yair Zymman.  He takes the following medications:

Symbicort.
Mometasone. 
Desloratadine. 

The primary concerns Alan has are as follows:

Sinusitis.
Difficulties breathing through his nose.
Difficulties getting the lips together.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Alan has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 10 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all aligned on the facial midline.  In profile view, the maxilla may be retruded about 4 to 5 mm.  Chin is retruded by probably about 10 to 15 mm.  Chin neckline is a little bit short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  Alan has a lip incompetence of  about 12 mm.  Lower third facial dimension is excessively long.  Alan has had orthodontic appliances on for approximately 5 years.  Intraorally, he has all of his lower teeth back to the second molars.  The teeth are nicely aligned and leveled.  He has some hyperplasia of the gingival tissues, but has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back to the second molars.  He has some hyperplasia of the gingival tissues in the upper arch as well.  He has a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship and has almost 2 mm of vertical overbite.  He has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  Incisal opening is 47 mm.  Excursion movements are about 6 mm in each direction.
Initially, Alan had a slight anterior open bite of maybe about 2 mm.  With the orthodontics, that problem has been corrected.  Back in 2003, he had vertical maxillary excess at that time, and it has gotten somewhat worse for him.  Intranasally, he has got moderately hypertrophied turbinates.  Septum appears relatively straight.  There is moderate nasal airway obstruction.  Columella is somewhat wide and nostrils are narrow.  He does report moderate snoring, but  no daytime somnolence and no sleep apnea symptoms.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that he has got four impacted third molars.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  
Waters view shows that the bony septum is relatively straight, but turbinates are enlarged.  He has significant cloudiness in the left maxillary sinus, but the rest of the sinuses appear relatively clear. He probably has ongoing sinusitis at this time.
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology and fairly good joint space and moderate inclination of the articular eminence.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology and fairly good joint space with moderate inclination of the articular eminence.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles.  
Basic diagnoses for Alan would be as follows:
Severe vertical maxillary excess.  
Mandibular prognathism (hidden by the excessive vertical growth of the maxilla).
Anterior vertical mandibular excess. 
Probable bilateral condylar hyperplasia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Hypertrophied turbinates.  
Nasal airway obstruction.
Wide columella.
Impacted third molars x4. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 to 3 mm.  
Over-angulation of lower incisors.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the low anterior teeth, removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to compensate for the tooth size discrepancy and to decrease the excessive angulation of the lower incisors.  
Continue to monitor growth until the patient is 16 years old.  
Surgery. 
Bilateral maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly approximately 10 mm.  
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning with ligament repair with Mitek anchors if condylar hyperplasia confirmed.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition it.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.  
Anterior mandibular horizontal ostectomy to vertically reduce and AP augment the chin.
Bilateral turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.