DAWN STEIGER			Telephone Conversation 		01-15-05

Dawn is 37 years old and works in a drug and alcohol rehabilitation center in California. She was involved in an MVA 15 years ago and after that did have some joint problems. Her jaws did make noises for a while, but that is pretty much gone away now. The primary concerns she has are as follows:  
No room for her tongue
Aesthetics with significant facial imbalance
Facial asymmetry that may be worsening
Difficulties eating and chewing
Pain over the TMJ area and behind the lower jaw
Noises in the joints with side-to-side movements
Can’t sing anymore because the tongue feels constricted and pushes against the soft palate

Dawn has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. Only her right wrist gives her problems. She has had previous knee surgeries x 2 on the left knee, and that knee is doing well now. She gets seasonal allergies but is not aware of any problems with jewelry. She does feel her tongue is pushed backwards in her jaws and that there is no room for her tongue. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. She says her mother has a similar kind of jaw problem and has a lot of clicking and popping in her joints. Dawn has no significant problems with headaches. No particular problems with TMJ pain except to palpation. She does get weekly pain problems down through her neck and shoulders that range from a level of 3 to 6. She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 4, and disability at 2. To palpation, she has no tenderness in the temporalis or muscle areas but has pain at a level of 4 directly over the TMJ area and behind the mandible in the styloid area. 

The only medication she takes is Synthroid.

Based on the records provided, Dawn’s diagnoses would be as follows:
Rule out right mandibular condylar osteochondroma/osteoma
Maxillary AP hypoplasia and asymmetry
Mandibular prognathism and asymmetry
AP macrogenia
TMJ pain
Crowding, lower anterior arch
Moderate anterior deep bite 
End-on Class III occlusion by approximately 2 mm
Slight reverse curve of occlusion, upper arch
Accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch
Attrition, lower anterior teeth
Low occlusal plane angulation
Decrease in oropharyngeal airway
Possible bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations

Recommended treatment would be as follows: 

MRI of left and right TMJs

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
DAWN STIGER			01-15-05				Page 2


Align and level mandibular arch 
May need to open up the bite slightly in order to align and level the lower arch. Cuspids are slightly elevated compared to the rest of the posterior teeth and with the incisors so try to level the cuspids appropriately vertically

Surgery
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward, move the posterior aspect superiorly, and level it transversely
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a clockwise direction where the incisors will come forward and the chin will rotate posteriorly slightly
Consider mandibular right condylectomy if growth is continuing to occur
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors if the discs are, in fact, displaced and confirmed by MRI
Consider anterior mandibular horizontal ostectomy to reduce the prominence of the chin if the patient still feels chin would be too strong

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Restorative dentistry to rebuild incisal edges of lower incisors
