JOYCE STEMPAK									02/22/2010

Joyce is 44 years old, referred by Dr. Petra Schubert, 6128 Sherry Lane, Dallas, TX 75225-6301.  Her dentist is Joanne Hoppe.  The only previous surgery she has had is bladder suspension.  

Joyce’s problems with her jaws began probably in her teenage years.  She says her dad, brother, and three sisters have a similar condition with the jaw shifted off towards one side with probably a genetic factor playing a role.  She has had no treatment to date.  She takes no medications.  She rates her headaches at a level of 4 that occur in the temporal area about one time per week.  She rates her TMJ pain at 2, average daily pain at 1, jaw function at 2, diet and disability at 0.  She has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus but no vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also some during the day, but this has gotten worse since she had her upper arch braces placed about a month ago.  She is getting the lower braces on tomorrow. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Joyce has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm to the left and chin is about 6 mm to the left.  In profile view, she may have must some light AP maxillary deficiency at subnasale by maybe 2-3 mm.  Chin actually appears to have fairly good projection.  Chin neckline looks relatively normal in length.  Right ramus is about 2-3 mm towards to the right compared to the left side.  Intraorally, Joyce has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has some spacers in.  She has very minimal crowding in the lower anterior arch.  However, the lower teeth incisor tips are leaning towards the right side and the roots are angled towards the left.  The left posterior teeth are tipped in lingually, and the right teeth are tipped relatively more buccally.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the left side by probably 2 mm and on the right side by probably 4 mm.  She has an end-on incisor relationship.  Posterior maxillary arch appears to be shifted about 2 mm to the right and the lower arch is rotated that way as well.  Joyce has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 1+ mm.  The upper left lateral incisor is smaller in size than the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  Tonsils are moderately enlarged.  She has a very strong gag reflex.  Intranasally, the right turbinate appears very slightly enlarged, but the left one looks relatively normal.  The septum is reasonably straight.  There does not appear to be any significant airway obstruction.  She has no history of snoring, has mild daytime somnolence, but no sleep apnea and no difficulties breathing through her nose.  She has 4 children, ages 17, 15, 12, and 7.  Joyce has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  On opening, the right joint functions smoothly, but with the left side particularly on excursion movements, she has sort of a crunchy noisy joint.  The incisal opening is about 40 mm.  The excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPH EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  The right condyle appears large compared to the left one.  The third molars are absent, but all the rest of the teeth are present.

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are normal in size and the sinuses are clear.  

Axial view shows that turbinates are normal in size with a good airway and the sinuses are clear. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle may have just some very slight anterior beaking in a couple of views, but appears to have reasonable joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  Out laterally, the joint space appears to be less than medially.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with a little bit of anterior beaking.  The condylar head appears slightly larger than the opposite side.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  The articular eminence is shallow compared to the opposite side.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 mm, but there is decreased lateral joint space.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears wider in width than the opposite side.  The vertical height is also greater.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  There appears to be decreased lateral joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Joyce has good oropharyngeal airway.  She has a skeletal Class III jaw relationship.  However, the inclination of the incisors appears reasonably normal.  

Basic diagnoses for Joyce would be as follows:

Bilateral condylar hyperplasia being worse on the right side than the left side but in arrested state.
Mandibular deviated prognathism off to the left side. 
Maxillary hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Class III end-on occlusion being worse on the right side than the left side. 
End-on incisor relationship with significant tipping of the maxillary incisors with the coronal portions shifted towards the right side and root apices shifted towards the left side.  
Mandibular left posterior teeth tipped lingually. 
Headaches. 
TMJ pain. 
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of bilateral TMJs.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Open about spacing between the 
                        upper laterals and cuspids, particularly on the left side where the lateral incisor is 
                        smaller. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room 
                        for interdental osteotomies, if they are necessary.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to tip the mandibular left posterior teeth 			buccally to get them set properly over the basal bone.  This may shift her into a 			cross bite on the left side. 
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible towards the right 
                        side and level it transversely.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla slightly, leveling it 				transversely and correcting for any transverse discrepancies. 
	c.	TMJ surgery if indicated from MRI evaluation.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
