JULIE STELLING									10-01-03

Patient Concerns

Headaches predominantly on the left side
Jaw joint pain being greater on the left side
Earaches 
Difficulties eating and chewing
Teeth don’t fit together very well
Difficulty talking at times because of the pain
Difficult socially because she cannot go out and eat a normal diet and must have primarily soups and extremely soft foods besides the effects of the pain.

Patient History

She gives no history of tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. She is not aware of any snoring problems. Julie’s problems began when she was about 14 or 15 years of age or possibly even earlier than that when she began complaining of headaches. The onset of her problems is unknown. She had orthodontics from the ages of 10 to 15 and then had orthodontics again from the ages of 18 to 20. In 1996, when she was 19 years old, she underwent bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to advance the mandible. Prior to the surgery, the TMJ problems were evident, and she had two splints made prior to the surgery. After the surgery and more recently, she has had another splint made, but this has only made her situation worse. Sometimes she will wake up hurting, but more commonly the pain usually doesn’t start until about 10 to 11:00 a.m. Other joints that bother her include primarily her left hip and her left knee occasionally. She said as a child she fell and cut her knee down to the kneecap, and since that time she has had problems with these joints. She has seasonal allergies, and she has been diagnosed as having asthma but only occasionally has to use an inhaler. She has no really significant problems with that. She has no known allergies to jewelry. She gives no history of clenching or bruxing. She claims no airway breathing problems.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Julie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. A little more fullness on the right side as compared to the left side. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline.

In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is slightly posterior to subnasale with slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably 5 mm or so. She is AP deficient by approximately 15 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short, although chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. Lower third face appears slightly elongated.

Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. Teeth are fairly well aligned. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship and has about 0 overbite and about 2 to 3 mm over jet. Transverse occlusal plane is fairly level. Oropharynx appears clear and healthy. 

Intranasally, she has some deviation of the septum off toward the left side with a spur extending a good length of the septum off to the left side. Turbinates look as though they are rather hypertrophic and somewhat enlarged. When she does breathe, she does make an obvious audible breathing sound as though there may be some obstruction there. 

Julie used to have popping noises in her joints when she was younger, but now her joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.

On the left side of her face, she feels that she sometimes has hypersensitivity there running down through the cheek and lower lip and chin area. She relates this to her previous orthognathic surgery. She gets headaches about five times per week predominantly on the left side at about a level of 8. She occasionally gets them on the right side but a lesser intensity of probably 4 to 6. Her average TMJ pain is at a level of 4, but it can escalate to 6. Average daily pain is around 4. She rates her jaw function at 2, diet at 8, and disability at 3. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly. She does give a history of occasionally having a feeling of locking or something tearing in the left joint particularly if she yawns or sneezes. She feels as though the joint gets dislocated occasionally, although she doesn’t have problems closing her jaws during these episodes. 

Current Medications

Birth control pills
Drixoral
Ibuprofen 1800 to 2400 mg per day

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the turbinates are of moderate size. Sinuses actually appear relatively clear. All four third molars are missing. She has three screws in the right mandibular ramus area. The ones on the left side were taken out as she had some shocking type sensations through the left jaw, and it was felt it might be due to the screws, so they were removed about a year ago. The rest of the teeth are present and look healthy. TMJs look arthritic with the right condyle appearing much smaller than the left side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears quite arthritic. There appears to be some joint space present. Some anterior beaking is present and some significant flattening of the anterior head of the condyle. Difficult to separate on this image the separation between the condyle and the articular eminence. Condyle does appear to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with significant decreased anterior and posterior joint space. The space is quite minimal. Articular eminence is fairly steep, and there also doesn’t appear to be much space anteriorly between the condyle and the articular eminence.

On translation, there is some restriction bilaterally. Both articular eminences appear steep with the right side being slightly steeper than the left side. Significant arthritis is present in both condyles with the right side perhaps being worse than the left side. 

Waters view shows that the turbinates actually don’t appear quite as bad. Septum appears a little bit deviated. The airway may be reasonable. Sinuses appear clear. She has large frontal sinuses. 

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm at the soft palate level and about the same at the base of the tongue. Teeth appear to have reasonably good angulation. She has a high occlusal plane angle. She did have fractured incisal edges on her maxillary central incisors, but they have built up and look relatively natural. She has almost a 3-mm tooth-size discrepancy between the upper and lower arches.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe resorptive arthritis and articular disc dislocations with severe degenerative changes and non-salvageable discs
AP mandibular deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Slight anterior vertical maxillary excess
Class II end-on occlusion
Anterior open bite tendency
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of almost 3 mm
High occlusal plane angle
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are needed at the time of surgery 
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy

CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol) to aid in manufacturing of total joint prostheses

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction
Fat grafts to bilateral TMJ (harvested from abdomen)
Bilateral coronoidectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Other Systems

She has problems occasionally with her left hip and left knee. No urinary tract problems. She gets rather severe pain with her periods if she is not on birth control pills. She has no children or miscarriages. She gets some styes, although rarely, around her eyes that she relates to makeup. She does have dryness of her eyes. She has worn contacts for about 10 years. She does get earaches. She was diagnosed with asthma three years ago. She had bronchitis about three years ago x 1, and she had pneumonia when she was age 14. She has some form of irritable bowel problem, and she relates this, however, to ibuprofen, although she does occasionally have a dumping syndrome kind of problem with diarrhea. She works around a bird, and she has been around this place for about three years. She doesn’t have too much direct contact with it, but she walks by it about 15 times a day, and it sits on an open perch apparently in the hallway of her physical therapy clinic. She has had cats all of her life, and she had one when she was younger that caught mice and moles and rabbits, etc., but not particularly birds. She has had dogs for about 13 to 14 years, but they are indoor dogs. Growing up, her neighbors had cows and horses, but she really didn’t deal with them at all. The only implants she has are screws in the right mandibular ramus area. 