B134
B134 is 47 years old. She had a skiing accident about 20 years ago where she fell, striking her chest and subluxated her mandible. It went back in place on its own. She developed clicking and popping in her jaw joints in her 30s, however, she did not develop pain problems until 4 years ago. Since then, she has had extensive treatments including the following in no specific order:

Lavage of the right TMJ x2 with probable steroid injections. Steroid injections into the right joint approximately 30 times.
Splint therapy x4.
Physical therapy.
Lidocaine infusion. Attempt at electro-rhizotomy to kill the nerve in right TMJ.

B134 is currently on the following medications:
Clonidine 0.1 mg 2 tabs b.i.d. Gabapentin 1200 mg q.h.s. and 600 mg b.i.d. Seroquel 50 mg t.i.d., 300 mg q.h.s.
Effexor XR 150 mg q.d.
Prilosec 40 mg q.d.
Zofran 4 mg b.i.d. Visteril 50 mg t.i.d.
Zantac 150 mg b.i.d. Doxepin 100 mg q.h.s.
Advair inhaler p.r.n.

B134's pain is predominantly confined to the right side, but occasionally the left side will be symptomatic, but the majority of problems are on the right side. She rates her headaches at 7 in the right temporal area, right TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain at 10, jaw function at 7, diet at 8, disability at 10. With the current medication regimen that she is on, B134 has gained 50 pounds in the past 6 months. She gets frequent right-sided earaches and moderate vertigo, but no tinnitus or hearing loss. She has had her shoulders and hands reconstructed. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night as well as during the day, and she feels this is getting worse for her. In addition, B134 has sleep apnea symptoms which have been present for approximately 2 years. B134 states that she has severe snoring and moderate daytime somnolence. She was diagnosed with sleep apnea 2 years ago of a moderate degree. She has moderate to severe difficulties sleeping at night. She smokes about a half a pack of cigarettes per day and has done this for about 30 years. She has had previous sinus surgery and a septoplasty.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B134 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. She has some slight increased fullness in the right TMJ area and perhaps the right angle area. Upper lip length is about 22 mm and upper tooth lip relationship is probably about -2 to 3 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is shifted 2 mm to the left. The chin is shifted about 3 to 4 mm to the left. In profile, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably 4 to 5 mm and the chin about 4 to 5 mm as well. Intraorally, she is missing mandibular right first and second bicuspids and on the left side she is missing probably a first bicuspid. In the upper arch, she is missing the left bicuspids and molars, and on the right side she is missing the molars. She is basically a Class I cuspid on the left side, but Class III cuspid on the right side. She has an end-on incisor relationship and cross bite tendency probably on the left side. She has a cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 2 mm higher than the right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. Soft palate may be somewhat elongated. Fascial pillars and tonsils appear relatively normal. Nasal septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side. Turbinates appear moderate in size, but there does not appear at least clinically to be any significant nasal airway obstruction. B134 is currently on a CPAP machine. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the right temporalis, right medial pterygoid, and high moderate over the right masseter, and severe pain over the right TMJ. Maximal incisal opening is 27 mm, but that is with significant pain. Excursion movement to the right about 3 mm, to the left only 2 to 2.5 mm. B134 does have a partial denture that she can wear in the upper arch. B134 appears to have a component of macroglossia.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
The septum appears reasonably straight. Turbinates are moderate in size and there appears to be good airway. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Panorex shows she is missing mandibular left first bicuspid, mandibular right first bicuspid, second bicuspid, and all the molars, but the first molar has been replaced with an implant. In the upper arch, she is missing the left bicuspids and molars, and on the right side she is missing bicuspids and molars, but she has 2 implants replacing the bicuspids on that right side. Sinuses appear relatively clear. There is a little flattening on the anterior condyle on the left joint. Right joint shows significant arthritic changes and difficult to evaluate any joint space. It appears there may be a little bit of reactive bone around the joint. Left TMJ coronal tomograms shows that the condyle appears slightly arthritic, but not too significant. Joint space looks almost excessive. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably at least 4 mm. Right TMJ coronal view shows significant degenerative changes with erosions of the fossa and of the condyle. Some areas appear to have bone-on-bone contact. There is heterotopic bone growing down around the lateral pole of the condyle. There is significantly decreased joint space. Left TMJ sagittal views show a condyle with increased vertical joint space. Articular eminence is moderate in inclination and not very long in length. The condyle appears to be somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa. The condyle appears to have reasonably good shape. There is a little bit of flattening and degenerative changes at the lateral aspect of the joint. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a joint that is severely arthritic. There is reactive bone in the fossa and significant degenerative changes at the condyle. Out laterally, there appears to be heterotopic bone that has developed around the condyle, particularly around the posterior aspect. There is decreased joint space and just severe degenerative changes. The articular eminence is shallow and eroded. Lateral cephalogram shows that B134 has a significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway and at the soft palate level, the AP dimension is only about 3 mm. At the base of the tongue, it is about 7 mm. She has a slight skeletal Class III jaw relationship.

Basic diagnoses for B134 would be as follows:
Severe degenerative arthritis with heterotopic bone formation and anklyosis of the right TMJ.
Left TMJ mild arthritis, deformation of the articular disc with medial dislocation.
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia. Class I cuspid relationship on the left side, Class III cuspid relationship on the right side.
Missing maxillary bicuspids and molars with two dental implants in the bicuspid areas in the right maxilla. Missing mandibular left first bicuspid and mandibular right bicuspids and molars with the first molar replaced with an implant. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm at the soft palate level and 7 mm at the base of the tongue (normal dimensions in those two areas are 11 mm).
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches. Severe myofascial pain. Hyperplastic soft palate.
Sleep apnea syndrome with requirement of CPAP management.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Medications: Pain management.
Reevaluate and eliminate unnecessary medications that she is currently on. CT scan of jaw and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla. Bilateral coronoidotomies. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty. Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars. Dental reconstruction.

She apparently tried to commit suicide at one time. She was on numerous pain medications and states she was not aware of it, but did attempt suicide. She is going to be seeing a new psychiatrist very soon and hopefully we will be able to eliminate many of the medications she is currently on. I did give her a prescription for the following medications:

Norco 10, dispensing 120, 1 tablet q.4 to 6 hours p.r.n. pain. Klonopin, dispensing 60 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., ½ tablet b.i.d.
She is to keep me informed of her progress.

B134 MRI AGE: 47/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width and, in fact, almost excessively wide. The articular disc is in position over the top of the condyle, but is medially displaced. There is decreased joint space at the lateral rim of the fossa. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 mm. The disc itself appears thickened.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle appears arthritic and appears to have lost some vertical volume. There appears to be reactive bone in the fossa and some other degenerative material within the joint space. Joint space appears narrow in some areas. The condyle appears sclerotic in some areas.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Out laterally, the condyle is a little flattened anteriorly and there may be just some slight anterior beaking towards the lateral aspect, but not too significant. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is excessively thick, but in fairly good position. It may be just slightly forward at the lateral aspect of the joint, but more medially it appears to be in a little bit better position. The joint space is increased because of the thickness of the articular disc. On opening, there is reasonably good translation of the condyle and the disc, and the disc remains in proper position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a joint that is severely arthritic. The condyle appears to have lost some vertical height. There is some anterior beaking. There appears to be a bone deposition in the fossa and in the condylar head and perhaps some heterotopic bone formation present. There is no identifiable disc present. On opening, there is some translation, but there appears to be reactive kind of tissue in the joint space. There is flattening of the articular eminence evident, and this could possibly be due to previous surgical intervention.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ relatively normal anatomy, but with an increased thickness of the articular disc and perhaps slight anterior positioning at the lateral aspect of the joint. Right TMJ severe arthritis affecting both the condyle and the fossa with a possible free bony fragment in the joint.
Right TMJ appears to be indicated for a total joint prosthesis.

