SHALON STONE									08/21/2008 

Shalon was in an auto accident on December 23, 2006.  She sustained a lacerated liver.  She hit her head on the side window as well as the steering wheel.  She has had pain and problems and in her jaws since that time.  Almost immediately after the accident, Shalon began having clicking and popping in her jaw joints.  She was on splint therapy beginning in January 2007 with a lower splint, and then in April 2007 a more aggressive lower splint was used.  In August 2007, she had her final splint constructed.  Wearing the splints became quite painful for her.  She could not wear the splint all the time because of the pain.  In June 2008, she developed a closed lock situation.  Primary concerns that Shalon that has at this time include:

Cannot open her jaws. 
Cannot chew normally. 
Constant pain.  

The only medication she takes nambumetone.  Shalon gets headaches in the temporal and back of the head area at about a level of 6.  She gets headaches about 2 to 3 times per week.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 7, diet at 7, and disability at 8.  She gets occasional earaches, but no tinnitus or vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She usually feels the best in the mornings and then the pain tends to get worse during the day and evenings.  She is aware of clenching during the daytime, but is not sure if she does it at night, but may be.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Shalon has fairly good facial symmetry and balance.  Upper lip length is about 17 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, she has good facial balance.  Chin neckline looks normal and chin angle is well defined.   Intraorally, she has had her lower first bicuspids extracted and the lower teeth retracted backwards.  In the upper arch, she has also had the first bicuspids extracted.  She is fairly close to being a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She may be Class II by a couple of millimeters.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 5 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Nasal airway shows turbinates that are moderate in size, but transverse with the nose appears to be really good and she appears as though she has adequate nasal airway.  To palpation, she has high moderate to very high moderate pain over the masseter muscles, TMJs, styloid areas, and posterior neck and shoulder areas.  On opening, she has a click in the right joint about 15 mm and a closing clock at probably 5 to 10 mm.  Left side is smooth.  Maximal incisal opening is 27 mm, but only about 19 mm without discomfort.  Excursion movement to the left 10 mm, to the right 3 mm.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch.  She is missing the lower first bicuspids and upper first bicuspids.  Her sinuses appears relatively clear.  There are some mild bony changes in the left joint.  
Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Septum is relatively straight.  Turbinates are moderate in size, but there appears to be adequate airway.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows the condyle is somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  There may be some decreased posterior and posterosuperior joint space.     
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with a decreased superior joint space, but somewhat increased anterior joint space.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints with it being probably a little bit greater on the left side as compared to the right side.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a little bit of a skeletal Class II jaw relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite.  Oropharyngeal airway is good at the soft palate level, but decreased at the lower base of the tongue.

Diagnoses would be as follows:    

Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and a closed lock situation
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation but with reduction.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.  
Myofascial pain. 
Impacted third molars x4. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Place orthodontic appliances on the maxillary teeth.    
Place orthodontic appliances on the mandibular teeth.  
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to maintain the occlusion and allow the ramus and condyles to move inferiorly to make room for the articular discs.  
3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
