SYLVIA SUAREZ									08/14/2009

The patient presents for followup evaluation.  She is now 6 years and 1 month post surgery for bilateral TMJ total joint prostheses.  

She had back surgery on February 4, 2009.  She is doing fairly well since that surgery, however, in the last few months, she has developed some pain in her jaw area predominantly on the left side.  She also is on Actonel and hormone replacement.  She was on Skelaxin, but is not taking that currently.  She was concerned because of being on the Actonel that she also could be developing some jaw problems.  She has no problems with headaches or TMJ pain.  In a usual day, she has no pain around the head and neck area.  She rates her jaw function at 2, diet at 3, disability at 0.  Incisal opening is 39 mm which is 11 mm greater than what it was before surgery.  Excursion movement to the right about 2 mm, to the left 1 mm.  Joints function smoothly.  She has a good Class I occlusion with a 3 mm overbite relationship.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the left temporalis, left medial pterygoid, left TMJ area, left retromandibular area, left SCM, and left shoulder.  She gets occasional earaches, occasional tinnitus, occasional vertigo (two times in the past three months), but has no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her back and her ankles.  She is aware of clenching at night time and wakes up with soreness in her jaws.  She points more to the masseter muscle area.  This is indicative of nocturnal clenching and probably the primary reason for her pain factors as they appear all to be related to myositis of those above-stated muscles.

Radiographic evaluation with I-CAT and a concentrated I-CAT examination of the TMJs reveals good alignment of the segments and good adaptation to the cranial base of the fossa component and the mandibular component.  There is no evidence of heterotopic bone formation around either prostheses.

DIAGNOSES:
Mild myositis of left temporalis muscle, left medial pterygoid muscle, left SCM and left shoulder muscles. 
Nocturnal clenching. 
Mild tenderness over left TMJ. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:  Medication:  Klonopin 1-mg tablet, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x5.  I talk to her that when it becomes time to get off the medication that she will need to taper off, reducing to a half tablet q.h.s. for 2 weeks and then to a quarter tablet q.h.s. for 2 weeks, and then a quarter tablet every other night for 2 weeks and then stop.  This should allow her to progressively get off the medication without having withdrawal problems.  She understands.  She is to call me in 2 weeks to let me know if the Klonopin has improved her discomfort.  