AMBER STILLS									10/08/2010

Amber is 38 years old and referred by Dr. Andrew Park.  Amber’s TMJ problems began she believes in her teenage years.  She was a tomboy when she was younger and had some accidents including a bike accident and she was also involved in an MVA where she struck her nose and jaws.  She also was in an MVA when she was 19 and struck her face on the steering wheel.  About 2 months ago, Amber was driving her sister’s car and ran into the back of another car that ran into the back of another car that hit the back of another car.  The airbag imploded and struck her face and this increased her pain factors significantly.  When she was in her mid-20s, the problems got worse and she eventually had some TMJ surgery done in approximately 2000 with bilateral disc repositioning with some kind of anchoring technique.  She subsequently had orthodontics done.  She also had some periodontal problems and had three periodontal surgeries performed.  In 2003, she had bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to correct her bite.  In 2006, she had an additional chin procedure, rhinoplasty, and questionable whether any intranasal work was done.  

Amber gets daily headaches at about a level in the temporal areas bilaterally.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 7, diet at 5, disability at 3.  She gets earaches predominantly in the right side as well as occasional tinnitus and she has some frequent problems with vertigo particularly when she bends over.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day.  She has decreased sensibility to the lower lip and chin.  The left frontal branch of the facial nerve also is weak compared to the opposite side.  

CLINICAL EVALUATION.  In frontal view, Amber has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm.  The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline and the mandibular dental midline is also.  The chin is slightly off to the left 1 to 2 mm.  In profile view, she has some maxillary AP deficiency of probably about 4 mm.  The chin may be about 10 mm retruded.  The chin neckline is somewhat shorter, although the chin neck angle is well defined.  Intraorally, Amber has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars and all of her upper teeth back through the second molars.  She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 2 mm higher than right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated at the base a little bit towards the right side.  The right turbinate appears enlarged as does the left, but there may be a little bit more obstruction on the right side than the left side, at least anteriorly.  There is severe pain over the TMJs, high moderate pain over the masseters, moderate pain over the temporalis and mild tenderness throughout the rest of the head and neck area.  The maximal incisal opening is 33 mm, opening without pain 20 mm.  excursion movement to the right is 3 mm, to the left 5 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has 3 screws in each ramus from the sagittal split osteotomies that were done.  She has a bone plate in the chin area.  She has some kind of pin placements, probably Mitek anchors, although I cannot identify the wings in both TMJs.  The turbinates are quite large.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses appear clear and healthy.  The inferior turbinates appear quite large and seem to block most of the airway.  

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight.  The turbinates are significantly enlarged and seem to block the airway significantly.   The sinuses appear clear.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has had severe condylar resorption.  The anchor used is eroded through the top of the condyle.  The joint space appears reasonable yet.  The condyle is quite narrow mediolaterally.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly significantly probably 4 to 5 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears quite arthritic.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  There is an anchor that appears to be positioned more towards the medial side of the joint than the lateral.  The vertical joint space is quite narrow, more so at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The condyle is narrow mediolaterally.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 4 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe resorption.  The articular eminence also is very shallow.  Vertical joint space appears fairly reasonable.  The anchor in the condylar head is almost eroded out through the top.  The remaining head of the condyle is sclerotic.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes, although not quite as much resorption as the opposite side.  There is an anchor in the neck of the condyle.  There is sclerosis on the head of the condyle and in the fossa.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows some intrusion of the maxilla and mandible.  She has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  The oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 5 to 6 mm at the base of the tongue.
Basic diagnosis for Amber would be as follows:

TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts 			total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. 
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
	d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.


