DIANA STRONG									05/22/2009

Diana Strong was referred to me by Dr. Richard Kraut, DDS, 111 E. 210th Street, Bronx, NY 10467.  Apparently, Diana had a malocclusion and slightly retruded lower jaw.  In 2003, she began orthodontic treatment that lasted through 2005 by Dr. Jeremy Orchin.  On December 4, 2004, she had orthognathic surgery with Dr. Jeff Posnick.  This included maxillary osteotomies, bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies, and a genioplasty.  She has had some significant problems since that time.  The other treatment she has had includes physical therapy and chiropractic treatment.  She does have a history of bruxism.  She currently takes the following medications:

Synthroid 100/88
Zocor 10 mg q.d.
Singulair 10 mg q.d.
Motrin 6 to 8 tablets per day. 
Ambien 5 mg p.r.n. at bedtime. 

She has chronic headaches at a level of 8 in the frontal and temporal areas as well as the posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 4, diet at 8, disability at 8.  Incisal opening is 45 mm, and she could open to about 25 mm without pain.  Excursion movement to the right is 10 mm and to the left 5 mm.  To palpation, she has very high moderate to low severe pain in the temporalis, masseters, SCMs, posterior neck, shoulders and TMJs.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss and no other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime.  She feels best in the mornings, but her pains and problems begin with jaw function.  She drinks about 3 to 4 cups of coffee per day and likes chocolate as well.  

The primary concerns that she has includes the following:

Jaw joint pain.
Limited jaw opening. 
Numbness in the chin and lower lip area.
TMJ, muscle, and jaw dysfunction.
Difficulties speaking, chewing, kissing, swallowing.
Facial and neck muscle spasms and locking.
Hypermobility. 

CLINICAL ASSESSMENT:  She has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Nasal tip is deviated about 2 mm off to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline is 1 mm to the left of the facial midline as is the chin.  Uvula is moderately elongated, but the rest of the oropharyngeal structures look relatively normal.  Intranasally, she does not appear to have any nasal airway obstruction.  She reports no snoring or sleep apnea, although she does report mild daytime somnolence.  She is missing the maxillary first bicuspids.  She is also missing 4 teeth that have been replaced by implants and crowns that include the maxillary left first molar, left mandibular second bicuspid, mandibular right first and second molars.  She is Class I cuspid on the left side and end-on Class II on the right side by about 3-4 mm.  She has a 1 mm vertical overbite. 
RADIOGRAPHS.  Panorex shows the presence of 4 bone plates in the maxilla with multiple screws.  She has bone plates in the chin area and 3 bone screws on each side in the ramus area.  Screws in the ramus area appear to be in close proximation to the inferior alveolar nerve.

Coronal view shows that she has had a previous turbinectomy performed.  Sinuses appear reasonably clear.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and turbinates are relatively small.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with some arthritic changes.  There is some mild degenerative changes in the fossa as well.  There appears to be a little bit of anterior beaking in one area and a little sclerosis.  Joint space appears reasonable.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have some anterior beaking towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  More medial, the condyle looks better and the joint space appears reasonable.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is actually larger than the fossa and extends maybe about 3 mm lateral to the fossa.  There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly just a minimal amount.  There is probably a good 3 mm of the condyle that extends beyond the lateral rim of the fossa.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit more arthritis.  There appears to be decreased lateral joint space.  More medially, the joint space appears somewhat better balanced.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows she still has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue. 

The patient drinks 4-5 cups of  coffee per day and does enjoy chocolate.  When I got her relaxed, she opened to 45 mm which shifted the mandible to the right of 10 mm and to the left of 5-6 mm.  This shows that she likely has no adhesions in her joints.  Joints seem to move in those directions relatively smoothly.  

Basic diagnoses for Diana would be as follows:

Bilateral masseter myositis. 
Possible TMJ pathology with possible disc dislocations (will need to see the radiologist’s report.
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Slight malocclusion. 
Paresthesias to bilateral inferior alveolar nerves with injury either at the ramus area or at the genioplasty area with injury to the alveolar and/or mental nerves. 
Rule out contributory cervical pathology. 
Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Eliminate coffee and chocolate from the diet. 
Medications.
Magnesium 250-mg tablets, 4 tablets in the morning, 4 tablets in the evening.
Discontinue Ambien. 
Klonopin 1-mg tablet q.h.s.  (The patient will check to see if she has already tried this medication and if she has any remaining on hand).
Consider antibiotic (i.e., doxycycline 100 mg 1 tablet b.i.d.)
Consider anti-inflammatories such as Celebrex, Relafen, etc. 
Consider bite splint. 
The patient needs new retainers and suggest Hawley type or wraparound type retainers without occlusal coverage. 
Consider TMJ surgery dependent on radiologist’s interpretation of MRI and response to above medications. 
Appropriate evaluation and treatment of her cervical problems.

Diane is to keep me informed of her progress so we can monitor and make additional alterations as well as review the radiologist’s MRI report.  





DIANA STRONG									05/26/2009

Meeting with Dr. Carl Glastad.  MRI review.  Bilaterally she has osteoarthritis.  In the right joint, the disc appears to be in reasonably good position.  On the left side, it is very difficult to identify the disc.  It may be degenerated.  There is limited translation of the left condyle indicative of perhaps adhesions within the joint.  Clinically, her translation is 10 mm to the left and only 5 mm towards the right. 
