BENJAMIN SU									09/06/2006

Ben is 14 years old and is referred by Dr. Truong.  Ben has a lower jaw that is growing excessively and is larger than the upper jaw.  He is unable to bite and chew.  He would like to have his jaws and teeth straightened and aligned.  He is in good health with no multiple medical problems.  He takes no medications and has no allergies.  He does get a little bit of clicking in his jaw joints primarily on the left side.  He has no problems with headaches or TMJ pain.  He rates his jaw function at 1, diet at 1 and disability at 1.  No other joints bother him.

He does breathe through his mouth when he sleeps.  Also, he breathes through his mouth during the day.  He has some mild snoring.  

In frontal view, Ben has fairly good facial symmetry in middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm.  Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline and chin line are fairly well aligned with each other.  AP position of the chin is actually reasonably good.  It has a long lower third face.  Lower lip is extruded.  He has about a 6 to 7 mm lip incompetency.  Intraorally, Ben has all his lower teeth back through the second molars present.  Left molars, in particularly bicuspids are in significant lingual inclination.  The right side has some of the same characteristics but not quite as severe.  He has significant spacing between the lower cuspids and first bicuspids and a little bit of minor spacing between the incisors but not too significant.  He has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, Ben has all of his teeth back through the second.  Ben has a 6 mm anterior open bite.  The bite is worse on the left side than the right side.  He has a super Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and about 1.5 Class III occlusal relationship on the left side.  On the right side, he has occlusion from his upper cuspid through his second molar and his lower second bicuspid and first and second molars.  On the left side, his occlusion is primarily on the first and second molars.  He has a fairly large diastima between his central incisors of probably about 3 mm.  He has anterior and left posterior crossbite.  Anterior crossbite is at least 12 mm but probably more.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear pretty much normal.  He has his tonsils and they appear relatively normal.  Intranasally, the septum looks reasonably straight.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged and may cause some airway constricture.  The luminal valves may be a little bit snug also.  He may do a little snoring at night but has no daytime somnolence and no sleep apnea symptoms.  TMJs function fairly smoothly.  No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  Maximal incisal opening is 54 mm.  Excursive movements are 9 mm in each direction.  No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area and joints function smoothly.  The left sided mandible appears to be about 4 to 5 mm longer vertically than the right side.  Transversely, the maxilla is fairly flat and level.  In the mandible, however, the occlusion on the left side is at least 2 mm lower than the occlusion on the right side in the cuspid bicuspid area.  Tooth size analysis reveals a Bolton's difference only 1 mm but could be just slightly greater than that perhaps 2 mm, maybe 3 at the most.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  All the other teeth are present.  There is spacing in the lower arch.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  Condyles are off the screen but the condylar neck on the right side appears excessively long. 
BENJAMIN SU				09/06/2006				Page 2


Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Mandibular dental midline and mandibular shifted significantly off towards the left side.  Left inferior border of the mandible appears significantly lower than the right side.  

Cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla appears AP deficient and the mandible is prognathic with open bite and high occlusal plane angle.  There is a vertical difference at the inferior border of the mandible.  The oropharyngeal airway looks fairly good although he does have a little bit of adenoid tissues still remaining in the nasopharynx. 

Dental model analysis shows that the maxilla and mandible have actually fairly balanced width when placed into a Class I cuspid Class II molar relationship.  In the upper arch, the right first and second molars are out of alignment with the first molar being tipped into palatal inclination and the second molar tipped labially.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ condylar hyperplasia with the right side being significantly worse than the left side.
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Severe Class II occlusion. 
Anterior and left posterior crossbite.
Significant masticatory dysfunction.
Anterior open bite of 6 mm.
Class III occlusion by 12 mm on the right side and by 10 mm on the left side.
Multiple spacing between the lower teeth in the cuspid and bicuspid area.
 Decreased angulation of lower incisors.
 Impacted third molars times 4.
 Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Partial nasal airway obstruction.
 Severe increased curve of Wilson.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Tip posterior teeth labially to upright them over the base of bone.  Open up space bilaterally between the cuspids and first bicuspids to equal the size of additional bicuspid tooth (7 mm width.)  Close up the spacing between the bicuspids and molars. 
Surgery.
Bilateral high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible posteriorly in a counterclockwise direction.
BENJAMIN SU				09/06/2006				Page 3


Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, expand and correct transverse asymmetry.  
Surgical removal of impacted third molars times 4.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Consider bilateral mandibular body ostectomies if it is preferred to eliminate the space instead of placing additional bicuspid size tooth bilaterally. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry.
 Place implants into the space between the cuspids and first bicuspids.
Placement of crowns. 

