LYNN STRICKLAND								03/17/2010

Lynn presents for follow-up evaluation.  She is now 10 years and 11 months post surgery.  Lynn did fairly well for about 10 years and then about a year ago she developed headaches.  She would get them about once a month.  She would treat them by getting a Toradol injection, taking Mobic, and usually an antibiotic such as a Z-Pak or Levaquin.  After 2 or 3 days, this would relieve her headaches and she would be good for another month.  About 2 weeks ago, she  began developing significant tiredness, headaches in the temporal area, neck and shoulder pain, her equilibrium has been significantly affected, and she has vertigo and significant problems with nausea.  She has left-sided fullness and pressure in the ear and tenderness around the jaw and jaw joint area.  She does have retainers that she wears at night.  About 3 or 4 years ago, Dr. Scott Schoen in Little Rock, Arkansas, apparently advanced her mandible forward.  She was stabilized with what appears to be 1 screw on the right side and a bone plate on the left side.  Her occlusion looks good at this time.  

The headaches she gets once a month she rates at a level of 8 to 9.  She rates her TMJ pain on the best days at 2 and on the worst days at 4.  Her average daily pain is a level of 3 on her better days and 8 when she has her headaches.  She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 5, disability at 8.  She feels she cannot work now because of her vertigo and nausea problems.  When she gets up, she is having more difficulties maintaining her balance and has to hold on to things.  Her occlusion looks good.  To palpation, she has severe pain over the masseters, TMJs, retromandibular areas, SCMs, posterior neck and shoulder areas and milder tenderness over the temporalis muscles.  She has numbness in her lower right lip and chin area since her mandibular surgery that was performed about 3 or 4 years ago.  She has a feeling of fullness in her ears, no tinnitus, but does have vertigo and nausea.  She believes she does clench her teeth at night and may also do it during the day.  She is in a stressful job situation.  She takes the following medications:

Synthroid 75 mcg per day.
Ambien 5 mg q.h.s. that she has been on for several years. 
Flexeril 5 mg q.h.s. that she has been on for several years. 
Mobic 7.5 mg 2 to 3 times per week.
Toradol 60 mg IM q.monthly.
Z-Pak or Levaquin periodically.

She and her husband are not really aware of any significant facial swelling that she has.

Radiographic evaluation shows that she has bilateral TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  She does have reactive heterotopic bone that has formed on the posterior aspect of both condyles.  This possibly could be creating her symptomatology.  When I originally saw her, her symptoms included significant problems with vertigo which were cleared by the TMJ surgery.  Therefore, I feel there could be a correlation with her current symptoms with the heterotopic bone formation. 
I gave her the following instructions:

Stop taking the Ambien and Flexeril.
Klonopin 1 mg tablets, dispensing 30 tablets, one tablet q.h.s., refill x5.
Meclizine 25 mg tablets, dispensing 40 tablets, one tablet q.6 hours p.r.n. vertigo/nausea, refill x3.
Darvocet N-100, dispensing 40 tablets, 1 tablet q.6 hours p.r.n. pain, refill x3.

She is to call me in 1 to 2 weeks to let me know of her progress.  

Diagnoses for Lynn are as follows:

Bilateral TMJ heterotopic bone formation and fibrosis.
TMJ pain, myofascial pain, and headaches.
Vertigo and nausea. 
Malpositioned bone screw right mandibular posterior body inferior border area 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Medications as described above.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ debridement of removal of heterotopic  bone and fibrotic tissues
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	c.	Removal of bone screw from right mandibular posterior body inferior border area.