KERRIANNE STOKES								04/21/2010

Kerrianne is 20 years and 8 months of age.  She was referred by Dr. Cynthia Banderet at Orchard Dental, 2630 Mascoutah Avenue, Suite A, Belleville, IL 62221, phone #618-234-8411.

Kerrianne’s problems began at the age of 11 when she developed a clicking in her jaw joints of unknown etiology.  She had orthodontics from the 2000 to 2001, and it was at the completion of the orthodontics that the joint noises were first noted.  Her condition has gotten progressively worse over the years.  She currently has constant headaches at a level of 7 that occur in the temporal areas bilaterally.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 7, diet at 8, and disability at 6.  She gets occasional earaches, but no tinnitus nor vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her shoulders and her wrists.  She does suffer from anxiety.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime and clenching during the day.  Her pain is worse in the morning, it is better in the afternoons, and then gets worse again at night, but it is in the mornings when she wakes up that it is the worse.  She does take the following medications:

Naproxen 550 mg q.d.
Hydrocodone 7.5 mg b.i.d. 
Tri-Legest FE (BCP).
Albuterol p.r.n. 

She has had previous right shoulder surgery.  

In frontal view, Kerrianne has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, she has good facial balance and symmetry.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars in both the upper and lower arches.  She has good attached gingiva.  She is close to being Class I occlusal relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  To palpation, she has high moderate to lower severe pain throughout most of the head and neck area except for the SCMs and posterior neck she has just mild tenderness and just in her right shoulder she has moderate tenderness.  On opening, she has a click at 10 mm in the right joint and a closing click at 5 mm.  The left joint functions smoothly.  She does state that if she tries to open extremely wide she will get a very loud pop sometimes in the left TMJ area.  The maximal incisal opening is 42 mm, opening with significant pain 21 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 4.5 mm, to the left about 2.5 mm.  In the excursion movements, there were no clicks indicative of no reduction of either disc.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy with the uvula just being mildly elongated and the fascial pillars moderately constricted.  The turbinates appear to be quite irritated and inflamed and at least moderately enlarged.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  She may have some mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space.  She has a little bit of anterior beaking present.  She has decreased vertical joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  There is increased anterior joint space.  There are arthritic changes in the condyle with a little sclerosis on the head and a little bit of anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence is fairly steep.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There appears to be some decrease vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 1 to 2 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  It appears to have some decreased vertical joint space, particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Coronal view shows that she has a moderate enlargement of the turbinates, particularly on the left side.  Sinuses appear clear.  

In the axial view, the sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged, and particularly the left side appears it may be a little obstructive. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has fairly good facial balance and has an adequate oropharyngeal airway.  

Basic diagnoses for Kerrianne would be as follows:

Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with significant deformation and non-reducing.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with reduction.
Relative mandibular hyperplasia. 
Severe TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism as well as daytime clenching.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Medications:  Klonopin 1 mg tablets, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics:  Apply orthodontic appliances to maxillary and mandibular arch 	with appropriate arch wires.  
2.	Surgery. 
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone plate stabilization. 
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 