SHERRI TAYLOR								11/15/2011

bartlomiej.nierzwicki@tmcmed.orgSherri is 43 years old, birth date 07/08/1968.  Referred by Dr. Bartlomiej Nierzwicki, MD, DMD, Ph.D., Department of Oral Maxillofacial Surgery, 2301 Holmes Street, Kansas City, MO 64108.  His e-mail address is bartlomiej.nierzwicki@tmcmed.org.  
Addresses:  Dr. Sean Cooney, 30 Fenton Drive, Fenton, MO 63026.  Dr. Gary Shanker, 12111 Tesson Ferry Professional Center, St. Louis, MO 63128.  Dr. Melissa Johnson, 714 Gravois Road Suite 210, Fenton, MO 63026.   

Sherri’s primary concerns are as follows:

TMJ pain.
Chronic severe migraines.
Jaw muscles painful and fatigued.
Ears ring and are painful.
Loses balance.
Temples hurt.
Shakes from talking.
Cannot wear hearing aids.
Significant pain when chewing.

Sherri is hearing impaired and is further limited because she cannot wear her hearing aids.  She takes the following medications:

Fioricet 2 tablets in the morning.
Percocet 5 mg two in the afternoon.
Flexeril 1 tablet about 6:00 or 7:00 in the evening.
Ativan 0.5 mg q.h.s.

Sherri reports that her TMJ problems began when she was about 28 years old of unknown etiology.  In 1996, she had steroid injections into the TMJ joints.  She had orthodontics from 1997 to 2000.  She had jaw surgery in 1991 that apparently involved maxillary and mandibular osteotomies as well as a genioplasty.  The orthognathic surgery was performed by Dr. Michael.  Dr. James Metz is her dentist.  She did wear splints in 2007 and also 2011.  

Sherri rates her headaches at a level of 10 in the temple area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 10, jaw function at 8, diet at 7, disability at 9.  She gets frequent earaches, occasional tinnitus and almost continuous vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her back and her left sacrum.  She is allergic to STEROIDS and DARVOCET.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime.  

In frontal view, Sherri has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is 1 mm to the right and chin is probably about 2 to 3 mm to the right.  The nasal tip is 2 mm to the right.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded 6 to 8 mm and chin is retruded 15 to 18 mm.  Chin neckline is very short and chin neck angle is not defined.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  In centric relation, her mandibular dental midline is actually 2 mm off to the left side and chin may be just slightly to the left.  When she goes into centric occlusion, her mandible shifts to the right.  She has a 3 mm over jet relationship and about a 1 mm vertical over bite.  Transversely, the maxilla is fairly level.  Oropharyngeal tissues are relatively normal, although with function she has a little bit better elevation on the left posterior aspect of the soft palate than the right side.  She is predominantly a mouth breather at nighttime and also some during the day.  Intranasally, the turbinates are quite large and they are engorged and have a purplish color.  The septum may be just deviated slightly towards the right side.  Most of the nasal airway appears to be blocked with the turbinates.  She has almost a full Class II cuspid relationship.  To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the masseters, temporalis muscles, retromandibular area, and moderate pain over the TMJs, shoulders, and mild tenderness over the medial pterygoids and posterior neck area.  The maximal opening is about 39 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is probably about 3 mm and to the left probably no more than 2.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of  3 bone screws in each ramus from previous orthognathic surgery.  There are 4 bone plates in the maxilla.  There is a chin plate present as well.  A 3 x 3 retainer is seen in the lower anterior arch.  All 4 third molars are missing.  Both condyles are severely arthritic and small in size vertically and anteroposteriorly.  

Coronal view shows that there is some thickening of the sinus membrane on the floor of the left maxillary sinus.  The nasal septum is deviated off towards the left side with a septal spur present.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the right side.  

Axial view shows that the right turbinate is quite large and appears to block off the airway on that side.  The left turbinate is moderately enlarged and there is some airway there.  Right sinus is clear but the left sinus has thickening of the mucosal lining on all sinus walls. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite small with loss of vertical and anteroposterior volume.  There is anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  Joint space appears reasonably good.  Out laterally, the condyle is quite flattened and eroded.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite small in size.  There is decreased vertical joint space on this side compared to the opposite side.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is significant loss of vertical and anteroposterior condylar volume.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost significant vertical volume and is narrow mediolaterally.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 mm.  The joint space actually looks reasonably adequate, although the condyle appears quite arthritic.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with significant condylar resorption vertically and mediolaterally.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 to 5 mm.  There is decreased superior and lateral joint space.  The condyle appears quite arthritic.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has significant maxillary AP and posterovertical hypoplasia as well as mandibular AP hypoplasia.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 4.5 mm at the base of the tongue and 6.5 mm at the soft palate level.  She has a skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship.  Sherri has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Sherri would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis with articular discs anteriorly dislocated and severely degenerated and deformed.  
Maxillary AP, posterovertical, and transverse hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
High mandibular occlusal plane angle.
Class II occlusion.
Posterior yaw in the mandible with it being shifted to the left side about 3 to 4 mm, although the maxilla is relatively symmetric.
Hypertrophied turbinates with nasal airway obstruction.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal 11 mm).
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Previously placed bone plates in the maxilla x4 and screws x16.
AP macrogenia.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Place brackets on all teeth including the 			second molars.  Open up 1 mm of space between the upper lateral incisors 			and cuspids to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.  Tip lateral incisor 			roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental 			osteotomies. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Place brackets on the second molars to 			help align them into the arch.  
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses with the chin point advancing 21 mm.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a 					counterclockwise direction and advancing the incisal edge approximately 			8 mm.
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
	e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	f.	Consider possible AP reduction genioplasty with anterior mandibular 			horizontal osteotomy.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
5.	Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors with bonding, 	veneers, or crowns.  