MICHAEL SWINNEY								01/21/2010

Michael is 16 years 11 months and 3 weeks old.  Referred by Dr. Kevin Porter, 2453 E. 11th Street, Odessa, TX 79762.  Michael is in good health with no major medical problems.  Michael’s primary concerns are as follows:

Jaws lock.
Jaws click and pop.
Pain when eating.

Michael has had his wisdom teeth removed in June 2009.  Michael’s joint problems began when he was about 12 years old in 2007 of unknown etiology.  He has had no treatment to date.  Michael rates his headaches at a level of 5 and they occur in the temporal area and are worse when he eats.  He rates his TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 7, diet at 7, disability at 3.  He gets earaches and tinnitus occasionally as well as vertigo.  Other joints that bother him include his left wrist, knees, and ankles.  Being a hockey player though may contribute to some of his joint problems.  He has been diagnosed with ADHD.  He is not aware of clenching or  bruxism.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Michael does have good facial symmetry and balance.  He has got problems with his masseter muscles.  In profile, he has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Michael has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  There is some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship bilaterally, and he has about a 2 mm vertical overbite.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side and turbinates are moderate in size.  To palpation, he has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, he has clicking in both joints and actually multiple clicks on the right side and does not click quite as much as usual on his left side.  The incisal opening is 55.  The excursion movements are 11 mm in each direction.  The opening clicks are somewhere around 15 mm and there are closing clicks around 10 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Sinuses look clear.  Turbinates appears moderate in size.  Bony septum at least appears straight.  Difficult to evaluate the joints. 

Coronal view shows that he has hypertrophied turbinates particularly on the right side.  Sinuses look reasonably clear with just a little bit fluid with a little retention cyst in the right sinus along the medial wall.  The septum is deviated with a spur off towards the left side and then deviates off a little bit towards the right side near the superior aspect of the septum. 

Axial view shows that the right turbinate is moderately enlarged, and the left one appears a little bit normal.  Sinuses appear relatively clear except for a little mucous retention area in the posterior medial recess of the maxillary sinus. 

Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that is narrow anteroposteriorly.  There are some degenerative changes present.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  The anterior joint space is increased.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is narrow anteroposteriorly, but not quite as much as the opposite side.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  The joint space appears adequate with some slight increase anteriorly. 

Left TMJ coronal view shows flattening on the condylar head.  The joint space appears reasonably good, although slightly decreased at the lateral aspect of the joint. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little bit better shape than the opposite side and there appears to be an adequate joint space.  There is some slight decrease at the lateral aspect of the joint. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Michael has fairly good AP and vertical facial balance and appears to have a good Class I and skeletal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 8 mm at the base of the tongue and probably about 6 mm at the soft palate level. 

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. 
Mandibular hyperplasia.  
TMJ pain.
Headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. 		b.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies to maintain the occlusion and allow the condyle to 			move down and forward to create space for the articular disc.  
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 