MARILYN SUMMERS								5/16/05

Marilyn is 44 years old, referred by Dr. Duane Keller, St. Louis, MO.

She had a hysterectomy in 1989.  No other surgeries.  She takes the following medications:

Duragesic patch 50 mcg/hr.
Zoloft 100 mg q.d.
Wellbutrin XL 150 mg b.i.d.
Tylenol ES p.r.n.
Motrin p.r.n.

She does have a history of anemia in the past but has currently no problems with that.  She has not had problems with anemia since her hysterectomy.  Prior to her hysterectomy, she had bleeding problems that created that situation.  Marilyn's problems began on April 19, 2004.  She was a nurse in the Developmental Center and a patient residing there attacked Marilyn and hit her with some metal medical cases and threw her on the ground and kicked her.  She had a lot of generalized bruising and cuts but the main injury was to her jaw that was dislocated during the altercation.  She had to wait until she was off work to go see the Workers' Compensation doctor.  This doctor looked Marilyn over and sent her home on Darvocet.  About a week later, Dr. Edith Fraley was the Workers' Compensation doctor who then referred her to Dr. Tom Loughary.  
Dr. Loughary made an appliance to try to recapture the disc on the left side.  This was ineffective, but he did work for 3 to 4 months trying to recapture the disc.  Dr.  Loughary referred Marilyn to Dr. Duane Keller.  The Workers' Compensation referred her to Dr. Noble in St. Louis who performed an arthrogram.  Apparently the arthrogram showed that she had a displaced disc on the left side with a perforation.  Dr. Keller also made a splint for Marilyn but has been unable to get Marilyn comfortable.  

Marilyn gets earaches on the left side greater than the right side, bilateral tinnitus, and vertigo and hearing loss on the left side.  Other joints that bother her include her hips, right elbow, knees with the left being worse than the right one.  She says her left ear feels full all the time.  She has no known allergies.  She is aware of clenching daytime and nighttime.  Marilyn has had to do some significant changes in her lifestyle since injury and is no longer able to work, drive and must eat a soft diet.  She has gained approximately 50 pounds since the injury.  She has constant headaches that function at an average of 7 involving the frontal, temporal and posterior head area.  They frequently escalate to a level of 10.  Her headaches are worse in the mornings when she wakes up then may get worse after that.  Her average daily level of pain and headaches is a level 7.  She rates her jaw function and diet at 7, disability at 8.  She gets tingling throughout the facial area and jaw area.  She also gets tingling and numbness in her hands.

In frontal view, it appears that Marilyn's maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  She tends to posture the mandible significantly off to the right side so that midlines are off by probably about 5 to 6 mm.  She has a crossbite on the right side and buccal crossbite on the left side due posture of the mandible.  She has significant muscle spasms.  It is very difficult to do a intraoral evaluation, but the uvula appear to be relatively normal and the soft tissues appear to be relatively healthy in the oropharyngeal areas as best as I can tell.  
MARILYN SUMMERS			5/16/05				Page 2

The soft palate looks relatively normal in length and faucial pillars appear relatively normal.  Intranasally, turbinates appear to be relatively normal in size.  However, the nasal septum deviates severely off toward the left side and appears to obliterate that nasal airway. She does have severe snoring problems.  She has to sleep propped up.  She will wake up at night sometimes due to the snoring and often times secondary to pain.  She does not sleep very well at night.  She has severe daytime somnolence.  It is rather difficult to determine the occlusal relationship because of the severe posturing of the mandible off towards the right side.  She is a slight Class III on the left side with the splint in place and the midlines line up quite a bit better with the lower midline being only about a mm off to the right at the maxillary midline.  She is a little bit Class III on the left side as well with the splint in place.  Her mouth is propped open with the splint.  The splint fits from the bicuspids posteriorly and the anterior six teeth are out of the splint.  With the splint in place she has about 3 to 4 mm anterior open-bite.  Marilyn has an incisal opening of about 10 mm.  Excursion movement to the right as best as I can estimate would be around a 6, to the left she probably has 0 abilities to shift in that direction.  To palpation, she has high moderate to severe pain in the masseters, medial pterygoids, styloid areas, SCMs and left TMJ.  She has moderate pain to palpation in the temporalis muscles, shoulders, and right TMJ.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:  
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She appears to have all of her mandibular teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars except on the left side she is missing maxillary left first molar.  All four third molars are absent.  Sinuses look reasonably clear as best as they can be seen.  She appears to have some arthritic changes in both joints, but again difficult to tell.  

Waters view show that the bony septum deviates a little bit off to the left side posteriorly.  However, the posterior septum cannot be seen.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Left maxillary sinus appears significantly smaller then the right maxillary sinus.  Ethmoids and frontal sinuses appear relatively clear. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is postured significantly forward in the fossa.  Articular eminence is very shallow but elongated.  Condyle shows a little sclerosis in the head of the condyle and there appears to be anterior beaking present.  The condyle is postured probably a good 4 mm anterior in the fossa.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is positioned superiorly and posteriorly in the fossa with what appears to be significantly decreased joint space.  Articular eminence is somewhat shallow but steeper than the opposite side.  The condyle appears a little sclerotic.  Opening view shows virtually no movement and very constricted opening if any at all.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship.  The left condyle is postured significantly forward compared to the right side.  Oropharyngeal airway appears good.  Occlusal plane appears relatively normal in angulation.  Sinuses do appear to be over-angulated particularly at the lower anteriors.  
MARILYN SUMMERS			5/16/05				Page 3

Arthrogram of left TMJ indicates the condyle is anteriorly positioned in the fossa significantly and there is a subluxated disc as well as a perforation.  The date of the arthrogram was January 6, 2005.  The ordering physician was Dr. Michael Noble.  

MRI evaluation show that she has anteriorly displaced articular disc without reduction and limited mouth opening bilaterally.  Arthritic changes with mild spurring on the anterior aspect of the condyle was noted bilaterally as well.  The MRI was done May 21, 2004.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc dislocations with severe deformation and nonsalvageable. 
Mandibular deviated prognathism (primarily due to severe muscle splinting.)
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Severe myofascial pain.
Class III nonocclusion in part due to splint therapy.
Missing maxillary left first molar. 
Severely limited incisal opening (10 mm.)
Severe emasculatory dysfunction.
 Daytime and nocturnal clenching. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Medications. 
Klonopin 1 mg tablets 1 tablet q.h.s. to try to decrease nocturnal clenching.

Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.

CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fatgrafts (harvest from the abdomen.)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

6.   Restorative dentistry to replace the missing maxillary left first molar. 
