LALITA TAWJAREON								02/01/2010

Lalita is 36 years old.  She has had TMJ problems since the age of 19 in 1993 related to wisdom teeth removal.  Prior to that, she had no TMJ problems.  Following that incident, she was unable to play her clarinet after that.  She did have orthodontics from grade 4 through 9.  Since 1993, she has been under the care of multiple TMJ specialists and has had multiple splints with an estimated 10 previous splints.  Her current splint has been made by Dr. Keller and is helping her some.  In the past, she has had physical therapy, chiropractic treatment (which worsened her problems) and acupuncture.  During the past year, her jaw has shifted and she has had increased pain, headaches, and jaw dysfunction.  

Medications she currently takes include:

Diclofenac, an anti-inflammatory.
Vicodin p.r.n. 
Robaxin p.r.n. 

She gets headaches at about a level of 5 in the temporal areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain at 10, jaw function and diet at 8, disability at 7.  She gets continuous earaches and has tinnitus and vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her SCMs, hips, fingers, feet, and back.  She has problems with her sternoclavicular joints that developed as a result of an injury sustained at work in April 2009.  She has continuous problems with those joints.  She is also aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also during the day.  

CLINICAL EVALUATION.  In frontal view, Lalita has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1-2 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned with one another.  In profile view, she has fairly facial balance.  The mandible appears to be retruded by about 5-8 mm.  The maxilla may be retruded by 2-3 mm.  Intraorally, Lalita has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She is fairly close to being a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  She has about a 1 mm overbite relationship.  The transverse occlusal plane is fairly level.  Oropharyngeal tissues look fairly healthy.  Fascial pillars, however, are moderately constricted.  Nasal airway is difficult to visualize, but seems reasonably good.  Luminal valves are somewhat constricted.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the right TMJ and the other areas are fairly normal.  On opening, she has some noise in the left joint at about 35 mm of opening and she may have closing noises at about 30 mm.  On the right side, she has some opening noises at about 20 mm and closing at probably around 5 mm.  She does have noises in her joints on opening.  The incisal opening is 46 mm, opening without significant discomfort about 20 mm.  The excursion movements are about 11 mm in each direction.  She has muscle spasms on the left side of her face that affect the left buccinator and perioral muscles as well as perhaps her eyelids to a lesser extent.  This is only on the left side.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the four third molars, but the rest of the teeth are in place and look reasonably healthy.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  There may be a septal spur present.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  Joints look a little bit arthritic.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that has flattening on the anterior head.  The articular eminence is fairly steep.    

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head and a little bit on the posterior head as well.  There are a little bit more degenerative changes on the anterior aspect of the condylar head as compared to the opposite side.  The joint space looks better posteriorly on the right side as compared to the left side. 

Left TMJ coronal view shows a joint that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The joint space looks fairly good, although there appears to be a small osteophyte in the mid portion of the condyle.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows that the lateral rim is fairly flat.  The joint space looks fairly good.  

Coronal view shows that she has large turbinates that appear to be blocking the airway.  The sinuses appear clear.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  

Axial view shows that the turbinates are quite large.  The nasal septum is fairly straight and sinuses are clear.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a little bit of a retruded maxilla and mandible with a high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway just measures about 4 mm at the base of the tongue area and soft palate area.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction but with probable systemic disease process present.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts 			total joint prostheses.
	b.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 				direction. 
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.


