TRUDY TALLON								07/18/2011

Trudy is now 61 years old.  She is 7 years and 9 months post surgery for bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses and fat grafts.  She rates her headaches at a level of 6 in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area, but almost daily escalate to about a 9 for probably 1 to 2 hours.  Stress, any kind of body movement or jaw movement, talking, eating causes headaches to escalate daily to about a level of 9 or so.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 6, but it does escalate to about a 10 every day.  Jaw function is at 6, diet at 7, disability at 5.  She takes the following medications:

Advil 3 tablets q.h.s. which is significantly helps her airway breathing.
Oxycontin 40 mg b.i.d. 
Oxy-IR 10 mg 4 per day.
Celebrex 400 mg q.d.
Zantac 150 mg q.d.
Gravol 1/2 tablet q.d.
Bisacodyl 5 mg per day (laxative).
APO-hydroxyzine 25 mg p.r.n. allergies.
Stool softener.

She gets earaches and sometimes gets lightening zaps through the jaw ear area.  She gets tinnitus occasionally.  She has moderate occurrence of vertigo and no hearing loss except when her headaches get really bad.  In March 2011, she had some breathing problems that she developed and was hospitalized for 10 days.  They were unable to find any reason for the breathing problems after extensive testing.  I am not sure if they evaluated for sleep apnea.  She does tend to sleep in an upright sitting position.  She says when she takes 3 Advil at night she can breathe without snoring but without it she tends to snore a lot.  She says she has frequent problems with facial swelling, although she does not exhibit any significant swelling today.  She says sometimes her eyes swell shut and she gets swelling throughout her face.  She has developed a lot of new allergies and gets hives.  She is hypersensitive to chlorine in swimming pools, pets, plants, etc.  She notes that she does have a degenerated spine.  Other joints that bother her include her knees, fingers, hips, and spine and aggravates the pain with changes in barometric pressure.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing at nighttime or during the day.  

To palpation, she has rather severe pain to palpation in the temporalis, masseters, TMJs and retromandibular area and moderate pain in the medial pterygoids, SCMs, and posterior neck.  The incisal opening is 29 mm with excursion movement to the right 1 mm and to the left 2 mm.  Her incisal opening has decreased another 3 mm since last fall.

Radiographically, there appears to be heterotopic bone on the medial side of the right mandibular prosthesis.  Also, I believe that she is developing multiple hypersensitivities that may include sensitivities to the metals in the prostheses.  
Basic diagnoses for Trudy would be as follows:

Heterotopic bone on medial side of right TMJ prosthesis.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. 
Multiple hypersensitivities to chemicals, metals, plants, and animals.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Medical grade CT scan of TMJs and jaw joints including coronal, axial, and sagittal views.
Consider debridement of right joint and perhaps left joint if heterotopic bone formation confirmed.
Continue to monitor the patient.  