GAYLE SWANSON									05/22/2010

Gayle is 64 years old and her birth date is 09/22/1945.  She apparently has no TMJ issues.  She does get headaches about 3 times a month in the morning and at night in the back of the head.  She does get some moderate neck and shoulder pain.  She rates her TMJ pain at 0, headaches at 3 when she gets them, but on the average day she has no pain problems.  She rates her jaw function and diet as normal and her jaws create no interference in her abilities to carry on normal life activities in any way.  Relative to her airway, she has some moderate nasal airway obstruction.  She has mild snoring.  She has moderate daytime somnolence.  She has sleep apnea of a moderate degree.  She has mild difficulty sleeping at night.  She used to wake up at night unable to catch her breath until she was placed on a CPAP machine.  She has severe high blood pressure without medications, but with medications she is controlled at about 130/85.  She currently is on a BiPAP machine.  Her primary concerns are as follows:

High blood pressure.
She has side effects from the medications she requires.
Sleep apnea.

She currently takes:

Benicar 40 mg.
Norvasc 10 mg.
MG/GM cream C-E21/E34.
C-testosterone 4.

Basic diagnoses for Gayle would be as follows:

Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior deep bite.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Sleep apnea.
Hypertrophied turbinates with nasal airway obstruction. 
Large nasal spur off the right side of the septum.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch. 
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction, 			advancing 8 mm at the incisal edge and down grafting it posteriorly 4 mm.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 				counterclockwise direction 12 mm at pogonion.  
	c.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	d.	Nasal septoplasty to remove the large septal spur.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 