BAILEY SUTTON								02/21/2011

Bailey presents for evaluation on referral by Dr. James Dyer, 306 Highway 377 North, Argyle, TX 76226, phone #940-240-5400.  Bailey believes her TMJ problems began at about the age of 13 of unknown etiology.  She had orthodontics in third grade from about the age of 9 to 10 and then again from 12 to 14. Her bite has shifted back into a Class II and appears to be getting progressively worse for her.  She gets headaches at about level of 3 in the temporal area at least two times a week.  She rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 4, diet at 4, disability at 2.  To palpation, she has mild tenderness over the masseters, TMJs and retromandibular area.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  She does have scoliosis with pain in her lower back.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime.  

In frontal view, she has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 5 mm.  In profile, she is slightly retruded in the maxilla of only about 2 to 3 mm, but the chin is retruded about 10 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look good.  She has a Class II occlusion by about 5 mm.  She has a zero vertical over bite relationship.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows she has four impacted third molars.  It is difficult to evaluate the TMJs.  Turbinates appear moderate in size and sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are large particularly on the right side, although the sinuses are clear and the septum appears reasonably straight.  

Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged with the right one larger than the left one and the sinuses are clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with some anterior beaking and there may be some vertical condylar resorption that has occurred.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost some vertical volume.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking, although not quite as much as the opposite side.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows that has the condyle has moderately good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm and there is decreased lateral joint space.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows decreased vertical joint space in the lateral joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  The condyle has fairly good width.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the mandible is retruded.  The maxilla is maybe slightly AP deficient and a slight vertical excess anteriorly.  Oropharyngeal airway looks good.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ AICR.  
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP hyperplasia but slight anterior vertical hyperplasia.  
Impacted third molars x4. 
Hypertrophied turbinates being greater on the right side than the left side.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJ. 
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors if dislocation confirmed on MRI.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Consider maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect superiorly and 		advance slightly.
	d.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  