KATHERINE SUN								05/20/2011

Katherine is 13 years old.  Birth date 01/31/1998.  She is referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich, 3105 Legacy Drive, Suite A, Plano, TX 75023.  

Katherine and her parents have noted that her bite problem has been getting worse.  Her primary concerns are as follows:

Cross bite.
Upper and lower jaws mismatch.
Chin deviates to the left.

Katherine is in good health.  She has no major medical problems.  She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  No joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  The only medication she currently takes is Zyrtec for allergies.

In frontal view, Katherine has good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip is 22 mm and upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 to 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm to the left and chin about 6 mm to the left.  In profile, she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  The lower lip is a little bit protrusive.  The chin is AP deficient by perhaps about 4 mm.  Intraorally, Kathyrn has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars erupted in.  She has adequate attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch.  She has some slight spacing in the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper jaw, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has an increased curve of Wilson in the upper jaw.  She has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by about 3 mm and on the left side she is a Class I.  She has about a 1 mm vertical overbite.  She has a cross bite extending from the lateral incisor back to the second molar.  As Katherine shifts her mandible towards the right side about 3 to 4 mm at the incisor area, this significantly improves her facial symmetry.  The inferior border of the mandible on the right side is about 3 to 4 mm lower than the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Tonsils are just slightly enlarged, but not too significant.  The septum is deviated off a little bit towards the right.  The right turbinate appears moderately enlarged and appears to be touching against the septum.  On the left side, there appears to be an enlarged turbinate, but the airway appears a little bit better.  She is predominantly a nasal breather when she sleeps.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  The joints function smoothly.  The incisal opening is 53 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is about 8 mm and to the left about 6 mm.  

Katherine’s problems began maybe about 2 years ago of unknown etiology.  The family does report that she did have a seizure when she was 18 months old.  The seizure was caused by an elevated fever.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four developing and unerupted third molars  The rest of the teeth are all present.  The right mandibular condylar head and neck appear larger and longer than the left side.  

Coronal view shows that she has enlarged turbinates that fill most of the nasal airway.  The sinuses look clear.  

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight, but the turbinates are quite large and obliterate most of the airway.  The sinuses appear clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Joint space is narrow and articular eminence is relatively shallow.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  Condylar head and neck appear elongated.  The joint space appears somewhat narrow and articular eminence is relatively shallow.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that may be a little bit narrow mediolateral.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is much wider in width and taller in length.  There is some moderately decreased joint space towards the medial side of the joint.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  The joint space there looks fairly nice.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class III relationship with significant over-angulation of the maxillary incisors.  She does have good oropharyngeal airway.  The inferior turbinates appear quite large and extend beyond the hard palate and in closer approximation to a moderately enlarged adenoid mass.  The lower incisors are slightly over angulated as well.  

Basic diagnoses for Katherine would be as follows:

Right mandibular condylar hyperplasia (active growth).
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Maxillary AP prognathism and asymmetry.
Class III end-on occlusion on the right side.
Cross bite on the left side.
Impacted third molars x4.
Severely over angulated maxillary incisors.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Extract maxillary first or second bicuspids (Dr. Goldreich’s preference).
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch retracting the maxillary incisors 				approximately 5 mm.  Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots 			distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Right mandibular high condylectomy.
	b.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back on the facial 			midline.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the maxilla transversely correcting 		the transverse discrepancies.  
	d.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
	e.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
	f.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.  
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  