MICHAEL TOBASH									10/02/2006 

Michael is 40 years old, referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich and also Dr. Carl Becker.  Mike's primary concern is severe sleep apnea.  He is currently on a CPAP machine and has had different CPAP machines and also different masks to try to help his situation.  Mike has to sleep on his stomach and it makes it difficult to keep the CPAP mask in position.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: 
NovoLog insulin.
Effexor 225 mg.
Concerta 36/72 mg.  

He does have type I diabetes.  Mike is not aware of having any TMJ problems.  He tends to breathe through his mouth when he sleeps.  He has severe snoring.  He has mild daytime tiredness now.  He believes his sleep apnea began sometime in the summer of 2000.  His sleep apnea has been diagnosed as severe.  He does wake up at night frequently unable to catch his breath.  He has moderate jerking of his arms and legs at night.  

Mike has already had surgical procedures including correction of the deviated nasal septum and also reduction of his turbinates.  Mike has been on orthodontic appliances now for about 16 months.  He has already seen three other doctors in reference to his situation.  

In frontal view, Mike has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 28 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is almost 4 mm.  Maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to the left side.  Mandibular dental midline may be a little bit closer to being on the midline as is the chin.  Chin-neckline is very short and not well defined.  Mike has a head postured forward neck position.  Maxilla appears to be maybe 3 to 4 mm AP deficient and the chin appears to be about 15 mm AP positioned.  As Mike postures his mandible forward as far as he can which is probably about 7 mm at the chin area, it does improve his overall facial profile.  Intraorally, Mike has all of his teeth back through the second molars present.  It appears slight accentuated curve of Spee is present in the lower arch.  In the upper arch he has a reverse curve of Spee with the upper anterior 6 teeth being significantly lower than the posterior teeth.  He has all of his upper teeth present.  He has an end-on Class II cuspid relationship on the right side and just a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the left side by probably about 10 mm but on the right side he his closer to 4 or 5 mm Class II.  The lower arch is fairly symmetric.  In the upper arch, the left cuspid is probably 2 to 3 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.  Intraorally, his uvula is moderately elongated but not too significant.  The soft palate is somewhat elongated.  The faucial pillars are quite constricted and may be a major contributing factor to his sleep apnea.  The tongue appears relatively large compared to the size of the oral cavity.  Intranasally, Mike has had previous turbinectomies and he has had a septoplasty.  The septum is still deviated off towards the left side and he does have a little septal spur at the base of the septum.  For the most part his nose is pretty open particularly on the right side.  It is wide open all the way back.  He does have some constricture of the luminal valves a little bit more so on the left side than the right side.  


MIKE TOBASH				10/02/2006				Page 2

Holding those opening he can breathe a little bit easier but it did not make a significant difference.  He does have anterior deep bite of probably about 8 mm.  TMJs function smoothly.  Mike does not have any complaints about TMJ problems.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars but all the rest of the teeth are present.  He has reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch and an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.  Sinuses look clear.  The condyles look large but no evidence of any pathology.  

Waters view shows that the bony septum at least appears fairly straight and the turbinates particularly on the right side appears relatively small and on the left side there could be a little bit of enlargement and perhaps some slight decreased airway space on that side but difficult to tell.  Sinuses look relatively clear. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it but there appears to be good joint space surrounding it. 

Left TMJ images are hard to decipher.  On one view where it can be somewhat seen seems to be in reasonably good position with a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it but reasonable joint space.  The other view is unreadable.  On opening, there appears to be good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Mike has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship.  There is decreased oropharyngeal airway of about 4 mm at the soft palate level and probably 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  The soft palate appears elongated.  The tongue actually is assuming a low position in the mouth with probably almost 15 mm of space between the dorsum of the tongue and the palate.  However, the tongue is postured posteriorly in the oropharynx.  Tooth size analysis shows that there is only about ½ mm difference.  However, hand manipulating the models shows that there appears to be probably maybe 1 to 2 mm tooth size difference.  It may have been to due with the fact that the teeth may be just a little bit wider anteroposteriorly and somewhere particularly below the anterior teeth.  Mike believes that he does have nocturnal clenching and bruxism.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
AP maxillary deficiency.
Vertical maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
Hyperplastic soft palate.
Severe constricture of faucial pillars.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Severe sleep apnea.
Severe snoring.





MIKE TOBASH 					10/02/2006			Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Be sure there is adequate space between the upper laterals and cuspids to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Consider placing a step in the upper arch wire so that the cuspid will be aligned a little bit better with the posterior teeth and the laterals and cuspids aligned at a slightly lower occlusal plane.  
Continue to align and level the mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward about 4 mm and down graft it about 3 to 4 mm posteriorly and 2 mm anteriorly.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a slight counterclockwise direction approximately 12 mm. 
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) with lateral inversion flaps.  
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
 
I did review with him all the various aspects about the surgery including the risks and potential complications and he understands.  I answered all the questions he had today. 

I gave him a prescription for Lortab 5, dispensing 20 tablets 1 tablet q.4h. p.r.n., no refills.