DEBRA THOMAS									05/22/2008
Debra is 54 years old.  Referred by a former patient, Vanessa Hicks.  The only previous surgery she has had is a hysterectomy.  She takes the following medications:
Crestor.
Evista.
Amitriptyline. 

She has had an adverse reaction to codeine.   Previous surgeries Debra has had include a hysterectomy in 1981 and a tonsillectomy in 1960.  Primary concerns that Debra has includes the following:

Moderate to severe pain right side of face in TMJ and ear area. 
Frequent migraines. 
Right-sided pain that extends from the right temple into the nasal area. 
Numbness on the right side of the face. 

Debra has a history of migraine headaches when she was young, and in fact, they started in her teenage years.  After her hysterectomy, they went away, but since about 1990 she has had about 4 or 5 she termed hemiplegic episodes that affected the entire right side of her body making her numb and requiring trips to the emergency room.  She gets some earaches on the right side, mild tinnitus, but no vertigo.  Other joints that bother her are predominantly her hips and her neck and she has been diagnosed as having osteoporosis.  She is aware of clenching during the day.  Debra has some moderate snoring problems and moderate daytime somnolence.  She has sleep apnea problems, particularly when she takes amitriptyline where she wakes up unable to get her breath.  She has difficulty sleeping at night secondary to her pain problems.  She is aware that at night she oftentimes breathes through her mouth. 

She gets headaches predominantly in the right temporal area at about level of 9.  She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 7, average daily pain at 7, jaw function, diet, and disability all at 7.  She gets numbness in her right cheek area and sometimes when she gets her more severe headaches, she will have some droopiness on the right side of her face.  Facial nerve does work normally at this time.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Debra has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.   Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 1 mm.  Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left side.  Chin may be just slightly off to the left side as well 1-2 mm.  In profile view, Debra has some AP maxillary deficiency of a probably a good 4-5 mm.  Chin is deficient by probably about the same amount.  Chin neckline is not defined.  Intraorally, Debra has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspid on the left side, but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has some moderate crowding in the upper anterior arch with the lateral incisors being blocked labially.  She has basically a Class I relationship bilaterally.  She has a crossbite on the left side.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal.  Intranasally, the septum appears to be deviated a little bit off towards the right side, but there is a little bit of spurring off the left side at the base of the septum.  Turbinates appear relatively normal in size with the right maybe being just mildly enlarged.  There does not appear to be any significant, or just perhaps mild, nasal airway obstruction.  Debra has had her wisdom teeth removed.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the right masseter, right styloid area, and bilateral posterior neck areas.  She has moderate tenderness over the pterygoids, left masseter, and TMJs.  She has an audible crepitation in the right joint and has some finer crepitation in the left side.  Maximal incisal opening is 36 mm, but she can get to about 25 without severe pain.  Excursion movements to the right side is 6 mm and to the left side 5 mm.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all third molars and the maxillary left first bicuspid.  Sinuses look relatively clear. She has a root canal in the maxillary right first bicuspid.  She has crowns on most of the posterior teeth in the upper arch, on the first and second molar in the mandibular right arch, and on the first molar on the left arch.  She has significant arthritic changes in the condyles.  
Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear.  Septum is reasonably straight.  Turbinates appear moderate in size, and she appears to have an adequate nasal airway.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is arthritic with some sclerosis on top and some anterior beaking.  There is moderate inclination of the articular eminence.  There is decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is arthritic with some anterior beaking.  There is decreased joint space vertically and posteriorly.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is moderate translation of both condyles. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has an AP maxillary deficiency of both the maxilla and mandible, and she has a slightly increased occlusal plane angle.  The soft tissues in the chin area are almost twice as thick as they are in the upper lip with the upper lip thickness being about 9 mm and the tissues in the chin area being 18 mm.  The oropharyngeal airway is significantly reduced with an airway dimension of only about 4 mm at the soft palate level and perhaps 3 mm at the base of the tongue (normal dimension 11 mm).  
Basic diagnoses for Debra would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 11 mm).
Left posterior crossbite.  
Crowding of lower anterior arch.
Crowding of upper anterior arch.
Missing maxillary right first b.i.d..
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 


Recommended treatment would be as follows:	

Presurgical orthodontics (the patient may or may not want to have this done).
a.  Align and level maxilla arch. 
b.  Align and level mandibular arch. 
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral coronoidotomies.
       4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 