HANNAH TERRY									04/29/2008

Hannah is 16 years old.  Referred by Dr. William Bell.  She has had her tonsils removed.  She otherwise is in good health with no major medical problems. She takes no medications.  Her primary concerns are as follows:  
Retruded chin.
Extended nose.
Difficulties breathing through the nose.
Headaches.
Soreness in the jaw joints.

Hannah gets headaches at about a level of 4 in the temporal areas about two times per week.  She does not have any pain directly in her TMJs, although she says sometimes they do get sore.  On  an average day, she gets a pain level of about 4 and it appears to be mainly in the jaw area.  She rates her jaw function at 8, diet at 2, disability at 3.  She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  The other joints that bother her include her hips and her back, but she is a cheerleader and a flyer.  She is not aware of clenching.  The patient reports that she has had multiple traumas to her nose.  She does have pain along the lateral aspect of the nose perhaps as a result of recent injury.  The nose is extremely wide at the base of the nasal bones and is deviated off to the right side approximately 2 mm.  She has significant difficulties breathing through her nose and is basically a mouth breather.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Hannah appears to have fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4.5 mm.  The maxillary and mandibular incisors are pretty much aligned with each other, and, with the facial midline, the nasal tip is just slightly off to the right side about 10 mm.  Chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline, but maybe just slightly to the right 1 to 2 mm.  In profile view, the upper lip is probably 6 to 8 mm AP deficient.  Chin is retruded by probably 18 to 20 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Lower third face appears elongated.  Lip incompetence measures about 6 mm.  Hannah has an obtuse nasolabial angle and upper lip supralabrale is about 3 mm posterior to subnasally.  Intraorally, Hannah has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  The teeth appear to be nicely aligned and leveled.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anteriors.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Hannah has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has an anterior open bite of about 1 mm.  She appears to have just a slight cant in the occlusion with the right side being maybe 1 mm lower than the left side.  To palpation, Hannah has no tenderness around the head and neck area except around the TMJs at about 2 1/2 to 3 and in the styloid areas about 1 1/2 to 2.  On opening, she may have a very soft click at about 25-30 mm.  It is difficult to identify an overt click however.  Her oropharyngeal tissues look normal.  Turbinates are fairly good size.  The septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  The right turbinate appears to touch against the septum.  Both turbinates appear to create a fair amount of airway blockage.  The columella is wide and nostrils are narrow.  Luminal valves are somewhat constricted.  Hannah does not complain of snoring problems, but she does have mild to moderate daytime somnolence.  She is not aware of any sleep apnea situation.  Incisal opening is 54 mm.  Excursion movement is to about 8 mm in each direction.  
Hannah had orthodontic treatment from the age of 10 to 14 by Dr. Pickering.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four developing but unerupted third molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch and a 1-to-1 retainer in the upper arch.  Sinuses appear clear.  
Waters view shows that there is some deviation in the bony nasal septum with a little bit of spurring off to the left side.  Turbinates appear large, particularly on the right side which seems to obliterate the airway on that side.  Sinuses appear clear.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has good morphology.  There is a little flattening on the anterior aspect.  There appears to be decreased joint space vertically and posteriorly.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little sclerotic on top with a decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Anterior joint space is somewhat increased.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a head postured forward neck position.  She has an AP maxillary deficiency and anterior vertical maxillary deficiency.  She has an AP mandibular deficiency.  Oropharyngeal airway actually looks quite good considering the jaw position.  The oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is about 14 mm and at the base of the tongue is about 7 mm.  
Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Rule out TMJ articular disc dislocations.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
AP microgenia.
Slight Class II end-on occlusion on the right side, Class I on the left side.  
Anterior open bite.
Impacted third molars x4.
High occlusal plane angle.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
External nasal deformity.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:	
 
MRI of left and right TMJ. 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery.  
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors, if disc displacement is confirmed by MRI.
Maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect superiorly, posterior aspect inferiorly to decrease occlusal plane and to advance it forward..
Bilateral mandibular osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Augmentation genioplasty.
Reduction turbinectomies.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
External rhinoplasty. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.