CHRISTIANNE TEAGUE							12/30/2009

Christianne is 17 years old, birth date 4/9/1992, referred by Dr. Jeffrey Chimenti, ENT specialist, in The Woodlands, Texas.  Christianne had orthodontics from the age of 10 to 13 including two phases of treatment.  She began developing headaches when she was 14 in the ninth grade of unknown etiology.  She has had no treatment except for some physical therapy that was initiated about 5 weeks ago.  The physical therapy has helped her with her headaches.  When she has the physical therapy, the headache intensity decreases for about 3 days.  She had sinus surgery in 2006 and she had her wisdom teeth removed in 2005.  

She gets daily headaches at about a level of 6 in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally.  She rates her TMJ pain at 2, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 2, diet at 1, disability at 1.  She takes the following medications:

1.	Synthroid 625 mcg per day. 
2.	Solodyn 90 mg q.d.
3.	Singulair 10 mg q.d.
4.	Nasonex p.r.n. 

She gets earaches bilaterally, but no tinnitus or vertigo and has no hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She does have hypothyroidism, but takes the Synthroid for that.  She does have a history of recurrent sinus infections and ear infections.  She does have some GI issues as well.  She has been to see a neurologist and has tried various medications, but nothing has been effective without putting her to sleep.

In frontal view, Christianne has good facial symmetry and balance.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxilla, mandible, and chin midline are all fairly aligned with each other.  In profile, she has good facial balance.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has some crowding on the lower arch.  She does have a 2 x 2 retainer in the lower arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  She has a 2-mm vertical overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy and normal.  Intranasally, the septum may be a little bit deviated off towards the left side with a little deviation back towards the right at the base of the septum, but for the most part it is relatively straight.  The turbinates appear just mildly enlarged, however, she does not have any significant nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the temporalis muscles, TMJs, and milder tenderness over the retromandibular area.  Maximal opening is 55 mg and she could open to 28 without discomfort.  Excursion movements are about 11 mm in each direction.  

Basic diagnoses for Christianne would be as follows:

1.	Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs laterally displaced and slightly 
            anteriorly at the lateral aspect of the joint. 
2.	Relatively mandibular hyperplasia. 
3.	Bilateral TMJ pain. 
4.	Bilateral headaches. 
5.	Myofascial pain. 
6.	Earaches. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Bilateral TMJ injections with Marcaine to evaluate effect on headaches. 
2.	Surgery.  
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion.