RANDELL CRAIG THOMAS							03/08/2006

Craig is 25 years old.  His history began with his current problems 09/29/2005.  He was getting some dental work done and his mouth was open for awhile.  They put a prop in his mouth to try and finish some things up and heard a pop in the jaw joint.  Since that time he has had significant difficulty particularly with opening his jaws and with residual pain factors ongoing.  The only treatment he has had for his joint problems to date includes medications.  He had electrolysis procedure performed.  Electrolysis did not really help at all.  Medications have not really helped either.  When he does take the anti-inflammatory medication this does seem to help him and his pain levels are lowered.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: 
Amitriptyline 25 mg 4 tablets at bedtime.
Oroproxin 600 mg 1 to 2 tablets per day. 

He has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He does have a significant allergy to penicillin and penicillin-related products.  No one else in the family has TMJ problems that they are aware of.  The problem began around 09/29/2005 involving dental work.  The mouth was propped open somewhat and that is when they heard a click or pop in the left jaw and has had significant pain ever since.  

He has no trouble with headaches.  He rates his TMJ pain of 4, average daily pain at 4.  Jaw function is at 6, diet at 6, disability at 6.  

In frontal view, Craig has good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is probably about 2 to 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline or maybe just a mm to the left.  Mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline but he only has 3 lower incisors.  The chin is pretty much aligned on the facial midline as well.  It appears that the right mandibular lateral incisor was previously extracted but the rest of the incisors are there.  In profile view, Craig has fairly good facial balance.  The lower jaw may be retruded maybe 6 to 8 mm.  Intraorally, Craig has all of his lower and upper teeth back through the second molars.  It is pretty close to Class I cuspid molar relationship bilaterally.  He has a deep bite of about 5 mm.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.  Maximal incisal opening is 25 mm.  Excursive movements are about 1.5 mm in each direction.  Craig has no problems with headaches.  He rates his TMJ discomfort at 4, facial pain and headaches 1, jaw function at 6, diet at 6, disability at 6.  To palpation, he has mild tenderness over the masseters, TMJs and a little bit around the right styloid area.  The joint seems to function fairly smoothly except he can hear a little bit of a glitch in the left joint at times.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except for the right mandibular central incisor.  He has horizontal impacted third molars in the mandible and vertically partially erupted third molars in the maxilla.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Condyle is hard to visualize.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  The bony septum appears straight.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  
THOMAS CRAIG RANDELL		03/08/2006				Page 2


Left TMJ tomogram shows what appears to be some arthritic changes in the condyle in this joint.  Decreased superior and posterior joint space.  It appears that there may be some erosion on the anterior aspect of the condyle.  Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little flattened anteriorly but hard to evaluate on this x-ray.  There appears to be decreased superior joint space and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately long.  On opening, there is severe restriction of translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiographic shows that there is maybe a slight I skeletal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm.  The base of the tongue is closer to 10 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Left TMJ arthritis with condylar erosion and articular disc dislocation with severe deformation and adhesions. 
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with deformation and adhesions. 
Bilateral closed lock (maximum 25 mm of opening.)
TMJ pain.
Masticatory dysfunction. 

TREATMENT OPTIONS: 
Option #1: 
Bilateral TMJ arthroscopy to try and release adhesions and improve jaw opening and function.
Option #2:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion.
Option #3:
Bilateral TMJ total joint prosthesis.
Bilateral TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen.)