PETER THOMPSON									10-15-03

Peter is 40 years old and referred by Dr. Bill Schmohl, 6 Loch Lomond Drive, San Rafael, CA  94901-2507.

Patient History

He has had previous nose surgery for nasal fractures x 2. Otherwise, Peter is in good health.

Patient Concerns

Teeth don’t fit together
His front teeth keep getting chipped and have to be rebuilt
Difficulties eating certain foods
Difficulties breathing through the nose
Severe snoring when he sleeps

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Peter has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is almost -4 mm. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline appear to be pretty much on the facial midline. Maxillary midline may be just a little bit off to the right side about a millimeter. Nose is somewhat deformed from previous trauma with the inferior nasal bones being shifted off significantly toward the left side and then coming back onto the midline at the nasal tip.

In profile view, Peter has some AP deficiency of the maxilla. Vertical maxillary deficiency and over-closure of the maxilla accentuates the depression in his nasal bones. Chin may be just slightly strong. Chin-neckline is fairly long, but chin-neck angle is not well-defined. 

Intraorally, Peter has all of his lower teeth teeth back through the second molars. Mandibular left second molar is in significant lingual inclination. Teeth appear to be well-worn. Has some retraction of his gingiva but appears he may have had a gingival graft there to help stabilize that situation. He has had gum grafts done at least twice in the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, he is missing the first bicuspids but has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars. Has a Class III cuspid-molar relationship bilaterally. Has a left posterior crossbite and a right posterior crossbite. Has an end-on incisor relationship. Has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch and maybe a slight accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch as well. Has slight hypereruption of the right cuspid compared to the first bicuspid. Intraorally, oropharynx appears clear. He has his tonsils present. Seems to be some moderate transverse narrowness of the oropharynx. Uvula is a little bit hyperplastic. 

TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly.

Intranasally, Peter has significant deformation of the nasal septum. Anteriorly, it is deviated significantly off toward the left side, and more posteriorly it is deviated severely off to the right side causing nasal airway obstruction on both sides. Turbinates don’t really look too hyperplastic, and most of the obstruction appears to be associated with the septum itself.
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex reveals sinuses look clear. Septum appears quite wide associated with the severe deviations to both sides. Turbinates particularly on the right side look a little bit large, but this may be just due to the severe nasal septal deviation. Condyles look a little bit flattened on the anterior heads but otherwise look pretty good. Missing upper first bicuspids and all four third molars, but the rest of the teeth are present. He has crowns on a couple of the teeth on the right side including the lower right first molar and the upper right bicuspid.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has very strong anteroposterior dimension. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Appears to be good joint space around all sides. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a bit flattened on the anterior side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Good AP dimension. Appears to be a balanced joint space around the condyle.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. Styloid processes are seen and are moderate in size.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear to be equally opacified throughout the head area. Airway looks actually reasonably good, but we can’t see the cartilage which is where most of the obstruction seems to be. He has a large septal spur that appears up above the inferior turbinate that may be causing some major obstruction. 

Cephalometrically, he has a mild skeletal Class III jaw relationship. Ceph was taken in the open bite position so it doesn’t detect the occlusion in centric relation. Oropharyngeal airway appears decreased, and at the soft palate level only measures about 5 mm, but at the base of the tongue measures about 14 mm. Tongue appears to fill the majority of the oral cavity in this particular view. Tongue might be a little bit more posteriorly displaced if the jaws were together. 

Pete reports that he is tired a lot during the day and particularly in the afternoons. He used to have a lot of trouble falling asleep when driving. He doesn’t drive in the afternoons or the evenings because he falls asleep. He may have some concerns with sleep apnea perhaps. Apparently his wife has noted apneic episodes when he is sleeping. In fact, the snoring is so bad that she sleeps in a different room. Although the tongue fills the entire oral cavity, it doesn’t appear excessively large per se.

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary deficiency
Vertical maxillary deficiency
Class III end-on occlusion
Bilateral posterior and anterior crossbite
End-on incisor relationship
Missing maxillary first bicuspids extracted for previous orthodontic treatment
Severely deviated nasal septum
Significant nasal airway obstruction
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Hypertrophied soft palate and uvula
Severe snoring
Daytime somnolence
Sleep apnea syndrome
External nasal deformity secondary to previous trauma (x 4)

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Place brackets on all of the teeth. Open a slight space around each of the upper lateral incisors to equal about 0.5 mm to 1 mm. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies that will be necessary at surgery
Align and level mandibular arch. Please brackets on all of the teeth including the second molars

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to bring the maxilla forward, downgraft it, and expand it
Nasal septoplasty
External nasal reconstruction including cranial bone graft
Harvest cranial bone graft
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
