MARLI THOMAS								11/28/2011

Marli is 36 years old, birth date 01/24/1975.  She is referred by Dr. Roberto Piteri Filho from San Paolo.  Marli is not sure when her jaw problems began but maybe in her early 30s.  She had orthodontics from the age of 30 to 33.  The etiology of her TMJ problems is unknown.  Primary concerns Marli has are as follows:

Headaches.
Grinding of the teeth.
Difficulties eating and chewing (she can chew only on the left side).
Fracturing of her front teeth from clenching and grinding.  

Marli rates her headaches that occur a little bit more frequently on the right side than the left side at about a level of 4 in the temporal areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 5, diet at 3, disability at 2.  The medications she takes are:

Yaz.
Aspirin p.r.n. headaches.

She has no trouble with earaches, but gets occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  She has no hearing loss and no other joints bother her.  She is not aware of any allergies.  She does react to cheap earrings.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at nighttime and she also does this during the day.  She has some mild snoring and is predominantly a mouth breather, particularly at nighttime but also during the day.  She occasionally wakes up unable to catch her breath.  She states that one side of her nose is completely blocked off and this is contributory of her mouth breathing.  

In frontal view, Marli has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 2.5 mm.  The maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to the right as is the mandibular dental midline.  The chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The nasal tip is about 2 mm off to the left side.  The chin may actually be about 2 mm off to the left side.  In profile, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of about 4 mm.  The mandible has fairly good projection.  The chin neckline is relatively normal in length and the chin neck angle is moderately well defined.  Intraorally, she is missing mandibular first molars.  The second and third molars have drifted forward with significant mesial inclination of the molars.  She has a malrotated left second bicuspid that is 90 degrees rotation.  The mesial marginal ridges of both mandibular first molars are significantly lower than the distal marginal ridges of the second bicuspids.  The lower anterior, particularly the central incisors appear as though there are abrasions on the incisal edges.  She has fairly good attached gingiva, although there is some slight stripping around the roots of the four central incisors and bilateral first bicuspids.  In the upper arch, she appears to have all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the left side by about 2 mm and likewise on the right side.  She has an open bite on the right side including the second bicuspids back through the second molars.  In the first molar area, the open bite is probably close to at least 5 mm.  She has a cross bite on the left side from about the maxillary first bicuspid and mandibular second bicuspid posteriorly.  On the left side, she has a cross bite tendency from about the maxillary first bicuspid, lower second bicuspid onto the second and third molars.  She has just a slight open bite in the bicuspid area of about 1 to 2 mm.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 1 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated severely off towards the right side essentially occluding that side of the nose.  The left side appears to be wide open.  There is probably a major nasal airway obstruction on the right side.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the masseter muscles, left retromandibular area and moderate tenderness over the right retromandibular area.  She has some crepitation in both TMJ joints on opening.  As she opens, she pops out over the articular eminences and then does manipulate her jaw a little bit to get back into her centric occlusal relationship.  The maximal incisal opening is 61 mm, opening without discomfort 47 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 10 mm and to the left 11 mm.  In the excursion movements as well as opening, she has crepitus noises in her joints.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of maxillary third molars, but the rest of the teeth are present.  She has root canals on all four incisors and the left side second bicuspid.  In the lower arch, she has a root canal on the left central incisor.  She has an open bite on the right side extending from about the maxillary first bicuspid, lower second bicuspid through the second molars.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  The septum appears to be deviated off towards the right side.  The right nasal airway appears blocked, but the left one appears wide open.  The first molars particularly are in significant mesial inclination.  There is some dense cortical bone between the roots of the second molar and the second bicuspid.  This is greater on the left side as compared to the right side.  There is a defect in the alveolar crest area bilaterally.  There is actually a reverse tooth size discrepancy of 2 mm, however, the maxillary crowns are quite broad and over inclined.  The buccal lingual thickness is greater than normal.  The transverse deficiency in the maxillary arch is close to 8 to 10 mm  in the molar area.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  The septum is deviated off to the right side.  The right turbinate is moderately enlarged, but the left one looks relatively normal in size.  

Axial view cut is done relatively low so the maxillary sinus is really not observed.  The right turbinate appears enlarged.  There appears to be an obstruction over the nasal septum against the lateral nasal wall anteriorly almost at the piriform area.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  There is a little bit of flattening on the anterior head and just some slight anterior beaking beginning to develop.  There is decreased superior and posterior joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head may be just starting to develop a little bit of anterior beaking.  There is decreased vertical and posterior joint space.  The anterior joint space is increased.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is a little bit of projection and almost an osteophyte type formation off the inferior aspect of the condylar head.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla appears somewhat retruded and she appears to have almost a skeletal Class III relationship.  The oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the soft palate level and about the same at the base of the tongue.  Further down just above the hyoid area, the airway dimension is about 5 mm.  There is space between the dorsum of the tongue and the hard palate of about 5 mm.  

The orthodontist that Marli will use is Dr. Sidney Craft, 9303 Pinecroft #240, The Woodlands, TX 77380.  

Basic diagnosis for Marli would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis, but articular discs that are likely anterior and medially displaced.
Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia.
Mandibular slight AP hypoplasia.
Class III end-on occlusion (2 to 3 mm).
Bilateral posterior cross bites.
Open bite on the right side extending from the first bicuspids through the molars with the greatest open bite at the first molar area of 5 mm.
Slight open bite in the bicuspid area on the left side of 1 to 2 mm.
Missing mandibular first molars and maxillary third molars.
Significant mesial inclination of the mandibular second and third molars.
Dense cortical bone on the alveolar ridge between the second bicuspids and second molars.
Significantly deviation of the nasal septum off to the right side causing nasal airway obstruction.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
TMJ pain.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
History of clenching and brusixm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially 			and cuspid roots tipped distally to provide room for interdental 				osteotomies.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch with consideration of opening space 			between the mandibular second bicuspids and second molar to equal the 			size of a bicuspid (6 to 7 mm) versus trying to upright the molars by 			tipping the roots mesially.  This could be difficult because of the cortical 			bone on the alveolar crest of the ridge.  
	c.	Consider building up the second bicuspid and second molars to get the 			crowns into a functional position minimizing the orthodontic movements.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Correction of the TMJ pathology that could include either articular disc 			repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors versus total joint 			prostheses. 
	b.	Mandibular advancement of about 5 mm with total joint prostheses versus 			bilateral sagittal split osteotomies.
	c.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and expand it as well as 			upright the incisors.
	d.	Nasal septoplasty.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
5.	Restorative dentistry to maximize the occlusal fit.  