STACY THREADGILL							08/31/2011

Stacy is 30 years old, birth date 04/02/1981.  Stacy began having clicking and popping in her right jaw joint several years ago.  At the age of 25, she developed a closed lock situation.  In 2006, Dr. Pedro Franco performed a right TMJ disc repositioning procedure with a Mitek anchor and that side has done fairly well.  She then developed some clicking on the left side.  She did not have any clicking in her left jaw joint for about 6 months to a year, but about 3 weeks ago she developed a closed lock situation.  She had previous orthodontics at the age of 14 to 15 for about 8 months.  She had her wisdom teeth extracted at the age of 18.  She has had no other treatment for her jaw situation to date.  

She gets headaches 5 to 7 days a week at about a level predominantly in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, but has no pain on the right side.  She rates her average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 8, diet at 9, disability at 5.  She gets occasional earaches, but no tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her knees and her back (she has had previous surgery on her back).  She is unable to wear cheap earrings.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing her teeth.

In frontal view, Stacy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 28 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is 1 mm to the left and chin may be off to the left side about 3 mm.  In profile view, Stacy has some maxillary AP discomfort by probably about 4 or 5 mm.  The chin appears retruded about 12 to 15 mm.  The chin neckline is shortened and the chin neckline is not well defined.  Intraorally, Stacy has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled with good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side being 4 mm Class II and on the left side she is probably 2 mm Class II.  She has anterior deep bite of 1.5 mm.  She has a small upper lateral incisor particularly on the left side.  She has some spacing between the upper left cuspid, first bicuspid.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The septum appears reasonably straight with just some slight protrusions laterally on both sides of the nose coming in fairly close approximation to the turbinates.  She may have a mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction.  She does tend to have a head postured neck position.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles and the styloid areas.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly, but she says prior to getting locked up that she did have some crepitus kind of noises in the right joint.  The maximal opening is 28 mm, excursion movement to the right 8 mm and to the left 10 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is very painful, opening without pain 18 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Right TMJ demonstrates the presence of a Mitek anchor.  There is arthritis in this joint with somewhat elongation of the head of the condyle and flattening with some anterior beaking.  Left TMJ shows a condyle that has better morphology, but appears posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  

Coronal view shows the septum appears reasonably straight.  Sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged and appear to block a good part of the airway.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses appear clear and turbinates appear moderately enlarged. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology with some flattening on the anterior head particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  There is decreased posterior joint space and superior joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  Imaging is compatible with an anteriorly displaced disc.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is somewhat arthritic.  There is some anterior beaking present.  The joint space is decreased towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  There is a Mitek anchor present.  The condyle does appear arthritic.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has some flattening around the lateral pole of the condyle and some peaking up of the condyle in the mid condyle portion.  There is decreased superior joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 or 4 mm and there is decreased joint space there as well.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows the presence of a Mitek anchor in the condyle.  The condyle has some arthritic changes as does the fossa particularly at the lateral aspect of the rim of the fossa.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 4 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Stacy has a retruded maxilla and mandible with a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  She has a significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of only about 2 mm at the soft palate level and 4 mm at the base of the tongue.  Stacy has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1.5 mm higher than the right side.  

Stacy states that she has significant daytime tiredness.  She can sleep 10 to 12 hours a day and still wake up being tired.  Because of this, I will recommend that she get a sleep study. 

Basic diagnoses for Stacy would be as follows:

Left TMJ articular disc dislocation with closed lock situation and mild arthritis.
Right TMJ arthritis and previous placement of Mitek anchor. 
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia and slight anterior vertical hyperplasia.
AP mandibular hyperplasia. 
Class II end-on occlusion being a little bit worse on the left side than the right side.  
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Small maxillary left lateral incisor.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1.5 mm higher than the right side.
Mandibular dental midline shifted 1 mm to the left, chin 3 mm to the left.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm (normal AP dimension is 11 mm).
Significant daytime somnolence.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Sleep study.
2.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
3.	Surgery Stage 1.
	a.	Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor.
	b.	Left mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy to maintain occlusion and 			create space in the joint to accommodate the disc.
	c.	Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.
4.	Presurgical Orthodontics for Stage 2 Surgery.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up 1.5 mm of space around the	 		maxillary left lateral incisor.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially    
                        and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case 
                        they are necessary.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
5.	Surgery Stage 2.
	a.	Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to advance the 			mandible in a counterclockwise direction and level it transversely.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a 					counterclockwise direction and transversely level the occlusal plane.
	c.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
6.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
7.	Bonding to build up the maxillary left lateral incisor.  

Stacy had scoliosis and in 1996 had stainless steel Harrington rods placed in her back.  She is concerned as to whether or not she can have an MRI taken.  I told her that we would check with the MRI facility and see if that presents any problem.  

Stacy is only interested in having her left TMJ issue resolved.  She does not want to pursue the treatment of her sleep apnea at this time, thus the reason for the 2 stage surgery.  If she decides to pursue the treatment of the her sleep apnea, Stage 2 would be implemented including the orthodontic treatment.