RONALD TEUSCHER								02/08/2008

Ron is 38 years old, referred by Dr. Duane Keller, 3929 Bayless Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63125.  Basic concerns that Ron has includes the following:

1.  Moderate pain.
2.  Limited jaw opening. 
3.  Ringing in the ears, hearing loss, and distortion. 
4.  Sleep apnea symptoms.
5.  Difficulties breathing through the nose.
6.  Predominantly mouth breather, particularly at night.
7.  TMJ pain.
8.  Headaches.

Ron was hit in the jaw in 2003 with an elbow that dislocated his jaw and it finally went back into position.  In 2005, he began developing significant symptoms with clicking and popping beginning on the left side.  He has had splint therapy with Dr. Keller, but this did not help much.  Ron currently takes the following medications:

	1.  Lisinopril 40 mg per day.
	2.  Verapamil 180 mg per day.

Ron has been diagnosed with atrial tachycardia and this is the reason he takes the verapamil medication.  Ron gets headaches in the temporal, posterior head, and the top of the head area at about a level of 5 bilaterally.  He rates his TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 5, diet at 3, disability at 4.  The headaches occur about 5 days per week.  He does get some earaches, tinnitus left side worse than the right side, but no vertigo.  He does have a mild high frequency hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He does have atrial tachycardia.  He is aware of clenching at nighttime.  Ron had a sleep study done about 5 years ago and was diagnosed with moderate sleep apnea and obesity.  He has lost about 20 pounds from 305 down to 285.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  Upper lip length is 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 3 to 4 mm off towards the left side.  Chin is slightly off to the left side probably about 2 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is further off to the left side than the chin midline.  In profile view, Ron has some AP mandibular deficiency.  Intraorally, Ron has all of his lower teeth back to the second molars.  The left first bicuspid is completely blocked out of the arch.  The posterior teeth on the left side are tipped lingually.  He has an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch and the posterior teeth on the left side look significantly lower than the ones on the right side by probably about 2 mm.  In the upper arch, Ron has all of his lower teeth back at least to the second molars.  Left cuspid is probably about at least 3 to 4 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  Upper arch is a little bit more symmetric.  Ron has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and on the left side he has a Class II end-on relationship with a crossbite involving the first bicuspids.  Ron has an anterior deep bite of almost 8 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  Uvula is moderately enlarged.  The soft palate, faucial pillars, and tonsils all 
RONALD TEUSCHER			02/08/2008                  Page 2

look relatively normal.  Intranasally, the nasal septums deviate off towards the left side.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged and probably causing some obstruction.   Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the TMJs, but no other particular tenderness around the head and neck area.  Size opening is 50 mm including the vertical overbite of 8 mm.  Excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The rest of the teeth are present.  He has root canals on the right first and second molars in the maxilla and mandible.  Sinuses look clear.  Condyles look a little bit arthritic.  He has an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.  

Waters view shows that the bony septum is deviated and actually looks like it may have had a fracture through it.  Turbinates appear large and appear to obliterate a good part of the nasal airway.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows the anterior head is quite flattened and there is some anterior beaking present.  There is some peaking of the condyle up into the fossa area.  There is significantly decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence has a moderate inclination and appears relatively short in length.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that likewise has a lot of flattening on the anterior aspect of the condylar head and some peaking superiorly and some beaking anteriorly.  Joint space may be decreased posteriorly and superiorly.  Articular eminence is a little bit steeper on this side as compared to the opposite side.  On opening, there is moderate translation with the condyles coming down towards the superior aspect of the articular eminences.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows slight skeletal Class II jaw relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway actually looks fairly good with a 10 mm space at the soft palate level and probably 11-13 mm at the base of the tongue.  Ron has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 1.5 mm.  Ron has a got a Class II division 2 malocclusion.  There is a reversed curve of Spee in the upper arch of about 2 mm and an accentuated curve on the lower arch with the incisors being at least 2 mm higher than the posterior teeth on the right side and probably 4 mm higher than the posterior teeth on the left side.

The basic diagnoses for Ron would be as follows:

1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations. 
2.  Class I cuspid molar relationship on the right side.  Class II cuspid, Class I molar
                 relationship on the left side. 
	3.  Anterior deep bite of 8 mm.
	4.  Mandibular left first bicuspid blocked labially out of the arch.
	5.  Accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch. 

RONALD TEUSCHER		02/08/2008                                  Page 3



	6.  Reversed curve of Spee in the upper arch.
	7.  Mandibular left cuspid 3-4 mm posterior to the right cuspid. 
	8.  TMJ pain.
	9.  Headaches.
	10.  Sleep apnea. 
	11.  Deviated nasal septum off to the left side. 
	12.  Hypertrophied turbinates. 
	13.  Nasal airway obstruction. 
	14.  Hyperplastic soft palate and uvula. 
	15.  Moderately decreased oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level. 
	16.  Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 1.5-2 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

	1.  Presurgical orthodontics.
a.  Align and level maxillary arch.  
b.  Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to reposition the left first bicuspid back into the arch by rotating the left cuspid forward and shifting the incisors around to the right side. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower incisors too far forward.
	2.  Surgery.
a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. 
b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies.
c.  Nasal septoplasty.
d.  Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
e.  UPPP procedure. 
3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.