SHOHREH TOUTOUNCHI								06-09-04

Shohreh is 24 years old and is a self-referral. 

Patient History

She has social anxiety problems. She can get sinus tachycardia associated with that. She has had a rhinoseptoplasty performed before with a revision. She takes Paxil 25 mg 1 per day. Shorhreh’s problems began about 2-1/2 months ago when she was doing some manipulations of the jaws. Then about a month after that she began getting clicking and popping in her jaw joints. Her previous history includes orthodontic treatment from the age of 16 to 19. She has tried some splint therapy, but that has not worked very well for her. It may have relaxed her muscles some, but she did not feel that it was helping this situation. She currently takes Paxil 25 mg per day and Advil occasionally for headaches. She gets earaches sometimes but no tinnitus and does get vertigo when she gets significant pain problems. No other joints bother her. She has no known allergies and no problems wearing jewelry. She does have a social anxiety disorder. With her current problems she states she spends most of her time in her room. After her problems began, she was aware of clenching at nighttime, but she doesn’t feel as though she is clenching at this time. She gets headaches daily that she rates at about a level of 5 that occur bilaterally in the temporal areas. She rates her TMJ pain at about a level of 3. Her average overall daily pain is about a level of 5 but can escalate to 7. Rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 6, and disability at 8. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, she has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline.

In profile, she has good facial balance vertically and anteroposteriorly. Good chin-neckline and good chin-neck angle definition.

Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth. Teeth appear to be nicely aligned and leveled. In the upper arch, likewise is missing the first bicuspids. Has a good solid Class I cuspid-molar relationship, and she has about a 3-mm anterior deep bite relationship.

To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the masseters, temporalis, TMJs, moderate pain over the SCMs, styloid areas, posterior neck, and milder pain over the shoulders. Maximum incisal opening is 48 mm, and she can open to about 35 without significant discomfort. Excursive movement to the right is 9 mm and to the left 10 mm. On opening, she has very noisy joints, and it appears that the opening clicks in both joints are somewhere around 15 mm and closing clicks are at about the same.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four first bicuspids. She has a 3x3 retainer on. Sinuses appear clear. I cannot evaluate the nasal airway. Condyles appear a little bit flattened anteriorly; otherwise joints are relatively unremarkable. 

Waters view shows that the nasal airway looks reasonably good, although there is a slight deviation of the nasal septum. Sinuses appear relatively clear. She has large frontal sinuses that are clear. Jaw appears relatively symmetrical. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears flattened anteriorly. Decreased posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some flattening anteriorly. Condyle appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is a little bit more shallow on this side as compared to the opposite side. Decreased superior joint space as well. Increased anterior joint space.

On opening, there is very good translation in both joints.

Cephalometrically she has basically a skeletal Class I occlusion. Airway looks adequate. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction
Class I occlusion and skeletal relationship
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Previously extracted maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids for orthodontic reasons and also all four third molars are missing
Anxiety disorder

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Apply orthodontic appliances to maxilla and mandible

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain current occlusion but allow the condyles to move downward and forward to make room for the articular discs within the joint space

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
