HIEN TRAN										12-11-03

Hien is 37 years old and referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich and Dr. Al Bishop.

Patient History

Dr. Bishop originally started doing Hien’s orthodontics, but she has moved to the Plano area, and Dr. Goldreich has taken over her care. She has had some previous foot surgery. Otherwise she is in good health. Hien has had previous orthodontics in her early 20s and had four bicuspids extracted at that time. She then went to see Dr. Bishop about 2-1/2 years old, and he examined her. Hien was concerned about some spacing in the upper arch. Dr. Bishop suggested to Hien that she have a surgical consult for some other concerns which are as follows.

Gummy smile
Overbite relationship
“Shy” chin
History of jaw clenching probably related to her jaw malalignment
Difficulty eating and chewing because of the significant lip incompetence (10 mm)
Difficulties breathing through the nose

Hien relates no problems associated with headaches, TMJ pain, popping or clicking in the jaw joints, earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or difficulties eating and chewing. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Hien has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 20 mm, and upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 5 mm. In smiling, she shows about 4 or 5 mm of gingiva.

In profile view, she has a little bit of fullness in the upper lip, although she could stand the subnasale area to possibly come forward no more than a couple of millimeters. Chin appears to be AP deficient by 10 to 12 mm. Chin-neckline is somewhat short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. She has hyperfunction of the mentalis muscle and has some associated wrinkling in the chin area.

Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids, and third molars are not observed. Teeth appear to be fairly well-aligned and leveled. She does have full braces back through the second molars in both arches. She could have just a very slight reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch. She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. 

In the upper arch, she is also missing the first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars, and the third molars are not observed. She has just a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship being just a little bit worse on the left side than the right side. As she slides the lower jaw forward a couple of millimeters, she goes into a little bit better Class I cuspid-molar relationship. Could possibly have a little bit of a tooth-size discrepancy but will evaluate that in just a little while. Transversely, the left cuspid may be about a millimeter higher than the right cuspid. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all a little bit off to the left side 0.5 to 1 mm. intraorally, the soft palate and uvula all look normal as does the oropharynx. No evidence of any intraoral lesions.

Intranasally, she has fairly good size turbinates bilaterally, although she is not really aware of breathing through her mouth when she sleeps except when she does get congested. 

To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area except very minor tenderness over the TMJs at about a level of 1 on a scale of 0 to 10. On opening, she does have a hypertranslation of her condyles, and she does pop out over the articular eminences, but I do not feel that there are any problems with a TMJ articular disc dislocation.
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four first bicuspids and all four third molars. She has extensive reconstruction including root canals on the mandibular right first molar. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear moderately large, although septum appears to be relatively straight. Condyles look relatively normal in architecture. I don’t see any other significant pathology present. A little bit of bone loss around the maxillary left lateral incisor.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit flattened on the head of the condyle. A little bit decreased posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space appears reasonably balanced, although the disc may be relatively thin to support the slight decrease in joint space. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows flattening of the anterior head of the condyle. Better joint space on this side, although the posterior joint space appears a little bit decreased. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint looks a little bit better than the opposite side. 

Opening shows hypertranslation of the condyles bilaterally. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Jaws appear relatively symmetric. Turbinates appear quite large and appear to obliterate most of the nasal airway. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a Class II skeletal relationship although the occlusion is a little bit closer to Class I. She has a high occlusal plane angle. Turbinates are prominent. Oropharyngeal airway looks adequate at both the soft palate and also the base of the tongue area. She has hyper functioning here with the lips forced together a little bit, and you can see the hyperfunction of the mentalis muscle in the chin area. She does have an excessive tooth-to-lip relationship and probably would have significant lip incompetence if the lips were completely relaxed. Clinically, with her lip relaxed, she does have about 10 mm of lip incompetence.

Hien has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of about 3 to 4 mm. In addition, she has very prominent mesial ridges on the central incisors. Hien has a history of jaw clenching probably related to her jaw malalignment. 

Basic Diagnoses

Anterior vertical maxillary excess
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
AP microgenia
Anterior mandibular vertical excess
Class II end-on occlusion
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of approximately 3 mm
Slight overangulation of lower incisors
Slight vertical inclination of maxillary incisors
High occlusal plane angle of 20 degrees (normal 8 degrees)
Lip incompetence
Hypertrophied turbinates 
Difficulties breathing through the nose
Hyperfunction of the mentalis muscle secondary to lip incompetence
Missing all four first bicuspids (extracted for orthodontic reasons) and all four third molars

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure and retract

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly and anteriorly and move the posterior aspect inferiorly to level the occlusal plane
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the inferior border
Bilateral inferior turbinectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
