RICHARD TONGE									12/13/2010

Richard is 32 years old.  Referred by Dr. Farhad Moshiri, 777 S. New Ballas Road, Suite 305-W, St. Louis, MO 63131.  Relative to TMJ issues, Richard has been aware of  some clicking noises in his left joint and some sort of locking sensations on the right side for the past few months of unknown etiology.  He did have orthodontics when he was age 14 and this is when he began to realize that his bite was opening.  He did have four bicuspids extracted.  Primary concerns he has include the following:

Bilateral posterior open bites.
Only front teeth touch.
Chewing is very difficult.
He is concerned about his imbalance and profile.
Difficulty breathing through the nose.  

Richard has no problems with headaches, rates his TMJ pain at 1, overall facial pain and headaches at 0, jaw function at 3, diet at 2, disability at 2.  He has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss  His right hip bothers him at times.  He does have depression.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  The only medication he takes is bupropion 150 mg b.i.d.  

In frontal view, Richard has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is probably about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 1 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular midline.  Chin might be just slightly to the right about 2 mm.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded by about 8 to 10 mm.  Upper lip supralabrale is probably 5 to 6 mm posterior to subnasale.  The chin is probably 12 to 15 mm AP deficient.  The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is moderately defined.  He does have some AP mid face hypoplasia of probably 4 to 5 mm.  As Richard postures his mandible forward probably close to 8 to 10 mm, it significantly improves his overall profile and with support to the upper lip gives a nice facial balance.  Intraorally, he is missing the lower probably first bicuspids.  On the right side, he is missing the second molar and the third molar is drifted forwards towards the first molar position.  On the left side, it appears that the third molar is missing.  He has moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch and a lingual inclination of the lower incisors.  He has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he has had first bicuspids also extracted, but has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars.  The second molars are actually in significant buccal inclination particularly on the left side.  He has moderate crowding in the upper anterior arch.  Richard occludes only on his incisors and right cuspid with the rest of his teeth out of occlusion.  He has about a 3 mm open bite on the right side and probably at least 5 mm open bite on the left side.  He has anterior and bilateral posterior cross bite.  The posterior cross bite is worse on the left side than the right side.  He does have a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 1.5 mm higher than the left side.  The left posterior teeth are about almost 3 mm lower than the right side.  He has an end-on Class III occlusal relationship.  His tongue appears to postured out through the open bite area particularly on the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal, although the uvula may be just mildly hyperplastic.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear enlarged.  The septum appears relatively straight.  There is probably some at least moderate nasal airway obstruction.  The transverse width of the nose is quite narrow.   He has occasional snoring.  He has moderate daytime somnolence and occasionally he wakes up unable to catch his breath.  He is predominantly a mouth breather when his sleeps at night.  His wife says that when he does breathe through his nose he does sound very congested.  He also breathes a lot through his mouth during the day.  To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the masseter muscles, left TMJ, and the retromandibular areas.  On opening, he has a click in the left joint at 25 mm and a closing click at 5 mm.  The right side functions relatively smoothly.  On opening, however, he deviates towards the right side about 3 mm.  The maximal incisal opening is 50 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 9 mm and to the left 7 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four first bicuspids as well as the maxillary third molars, left mandibular third molar, and right mandibular second molar with the third molar drifted significantly forward with a mesial inclination.  He has bilateral posterior open bites, being significantly greater on the left side than the right side.  On the left side, the posterior teeth are probably at least 3 mm or more depressed as compared to the same posterior teeth on the right side including the bicuspid and the molars.  The transverse width of the nose appears quite narrow and turbinates are moderately enlarged compared to the size of the transverse width of the nose.  Right condyle appears extremely narrow in anteroposterior dimension.  Articular eminences are moderately steep.

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged, though the septum appears reasonably straight.  The sinuses are full of fluid and increased thickness of the sinus membrane being a little bit worse on the left side than the right side.  He does report that he has had a cold for the last few days.  

Axial views show that the turbinates are quite large and seem to obstruct most of the airway.  He has a significant increased thickening of the sinus membranes in both maxillary sinuses with the left side being worse than the right side.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that posteriorly postured in the fossa.  There is increased anterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  He has a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is extremely narrow anteroposteriorly and posteriorly positioned fossa with an increased anterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle is a little bit thicker at the most lateral and lingual aspects. 

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good width to it.  There is decreased superior and lateral joint spaces.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly probably 3 to 3 mm.  Lateral pole is significantly lower compared to the medial pole by probably 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have a little additional growth out from the lateral pole of the condyle.  There is decreased vertical and lateral joint space.  Lateral pole is significantly lower compared to the medial pole by probably 4 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Richard has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  He has a restricted oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension at the soft palate level of about 4 mm and at the base of the tongue at about 4 mm up high and lower down it is only about 3 mm.  He has an end-on incisor relationship and bilateral posterior open bites.  There is a definite vertical difference in the heights of the posterior teeth.  

Basic diagnoses for Richard would be as follows:

Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class III end-on occlusion.
Anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites.
Bilateral posterior open bites, being worse on the left side than the right side.
Rule out ankylosed posterior teeth in the mandible bilaterally.
Missing all four first bicuspids and mandibular right second molar and all four third molars.
Hypertrophied turbinates with a nasal airway obstruction.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Moderate crowding anterior maxillary and mandibular arches.
Slight transverse cant in the maxillary occlusal plane with the left side being about 1.5 mm lower than the right side.
Mandibular posterior occlusal plane on the left 3 mm lower than the right side.  


Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots 		distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
	b.	Align and level the lower arch.  Try to elevate the left posterior teeth 2 to 3 mm to 		equal the height on the right side.  Consider using TADs in the maxilla to stabilize 		the upper teeth if interdental traction is to be considered.  If mandibular teeth are 			ankylosed, then proceed to plan C.
	c.	Align and level lower arch but place a vertical step between the left cuspid and 			bicuspid so that the bicuspid and molars are aligned at a lower occlusal plane 			level.  Tip bicuspid root distally and cuspid root mesially to make room for 			vertical interdental osteotomy.  
	d.	Be careful aligning the mandibular right third molar into the second molar 				position so as not to retract the dentition on the right side as the right cuspid is 			already 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  Could consider uprighting the 			mandibular right third molar opening up a space equal to a bicuspid which may 			help advance the right cuspid forward slightly to provide better arch symmetry.  
2.	Surgery. 
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward.
	c.	Left mandibular body osteotomy if necessary to elevate the left posterior teeth to 			level the occlusal plane. 
	d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, expand, and down graft the posterior 			aspect.
	e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
3.	Post surgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  