BLAKE TONJES								01/26/2012

Blake is 17 years old, birth date 02/01/1994, referred by Dr. Jim Baker in Oklahoma City.

Blake’s TMJ problem began in September 2009 when he fell, hit his chin, and knocked his front teeth out of alignment.  Almost immediately after that injury, he developed left TMJ pain.  Blake has been through a tremendous amount of treatment since that time and includes but not in any specific order: 

Splint therapy x2 from January 2010 through January 2011 and then again in August 2011.
Orthodontics beginning in September 2011.
Steroid injections x5 in the left TMJ.
Physical therapy x2.
Narrow stimulators.
Acupuncture.
Craniosacral massage.
Iontophoresis.  
Stellate ganglion blocks.
Pain pumps.
Prialt (snail venom).
Surgery on March 2011 for a left disc plication.

Blake’s primary concerns at this time are constant severe left TMJ pain.  Blake gets headache at about level of 4 in the left temporal area.  He has constant severe pain in the left TMJ at an average of about 8 but it ranges from 6 to 10.  His average daily pain is an 8 with a range of 6 to 10.  He has good jaw function and rates that at 0, diet at 4, disability at 8.  He gets occasional left sided earaches, but when they do occur they are quite severe in pain.  He has no tinnitus, gets occasional vertigo, and he feels he has some hearing loss.  The only joint that really bothers him is his right ankle.  He has no known allergies, but does have an eosinophilic condition.  He did have a problem with what was termed autonomic dysfunction and had fainting episodes that occurred daily and was treated for about 5 months until it was finally under control.  He was born with spina bifida.  He also is a tiptoer.  

Blake has moderate snoring, moderate daytime somnolence, but no sleep apnea.  He is predominantly a mouth breather at night and most of the time during the day as well.  He is on the following medications:

Lexapro.
Abilify.
OxyContin 40 mg q.i.d.
Oxycodone 20 to 25 mg q.4 hours.
Marinol (THC) 12.5 mg b.i.d. 
Mirtazapine 15 mg p.r.n.  

During his surgery in March 2011, apparently the condyle was shaved off a little bit probably to make room for the disc.  Since then, it has been reported that the condyle has shortened even further.  

CLINICAL EVALUATION.  In frontal view, Blake has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  The maxillary midline is about 1 mm to the left as is the mandibular dental midline.  Vertical height of the inferior border of the mandible on the right side is about 10 mm lower than the inferior border on the left side.  The chin is about 7 mm to the left.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 6 mm on the left and 7 mm on the right.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 5 to 6 mm.  The chin is retruded about 12 to 15 mm.  The chin neckline is somewhat short.  Lip incompetence is almost 16 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left maxillary cuspid and mandibular cuspid being 3 mm higher on the left than the right side.  Blake has about a 2 mm vertical over bite relationship.  He is fairly close to being a Class I cuspid relationship, but he is missing the first bicuspids.  Mandibular first bicuspids have been extracted for orthodontic reasons.  The spaces fortunately are still there. Intranasally, turbinates are moderate to severe in size.  Septum appears reasonable straight.  He probably has moderate to severe nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, he essentially has no pain around the head and neck area except for some mild tenderness over the left TMJ.  Blake has an incisal opening of 52 mm, but he has a zero opening relative to abilities to open without pain.  He has pain throughout the entire opening cycle.  Excursion movements are 6 mm in each direction.  The excursion movements create significant pain for him as well.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The mandibular first bicuspids bilaterally are absent.  He has a root canal on a maxillary first molar and the right central incisor.  The vertical height of the mandibular body on the left side measures about 39 mm and on the right side in the first molar measures 42 mm.  Vertical height of the ramus and condyle on the left side measures about 65 mm and on the right side measures about 78 mm.

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are quite large and appear to block off a good portion of the nasal airway.  Sinuses however are clear.  

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight and sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are quite large and appear to block a good bit of the functional airway.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone some changes as there are osteoarthritic changes within the joint.  However, the vertical joint space is actually greater than normal.  There appears to be a little area of calcification and maybe just some dense fibrotic tissue within the joint space.  There appear to be some degenerative changes in the fossa.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is elongated and much longer than normal.  It has a odd configure to it at the top with the condylar head being narrower than the condylar neck.  The thickness of the condylar neck on the right side measures about 10 mm whereas on the left side it measures about 7 to 8 mm.  The articular eminence is relatively normal.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is smaller in size and arthritic, however, the vertical joint space is significantly greater than normal.  There appear to be some degenerative changes in the fossa and perhaps there has been some heterotopic bone that has been deposited in the fossa part.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is excessively long in vertical height possibly compatible with an osteochondroma.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 or 4 mm.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  There is a little bit of an odd curvature to the condylar head and neck.  The condylar neck is significantly wider on this side measuring 10 to 11 mm, whereas the condylar head at the same level on the left side measures only about 7 to 8 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla was AP deficient and anterior vertically hypoplastic.  The mandible is AP deficient.  There are two occlusal plane levels with about a 3 to 4 mm vertical difference from the left side to the right side.  The vertical height of the mandible on the right side extends almost 11 mm below the inferior border of the left side.  

The mother told me that Blake has had suicidal tendency because of his severe pain.  He has asked for a gun to end his life.  He is in just desperate need of help.  

Based on clinical, radiographic, and MRI analyses, Blake’s diagnoses are as follows:

Left TMJ severe reactive arthritis.
Right mandibular condylar osteochondroma.
Maxillary AP hyperplasia but vertical hyperplasia as well as transverse asymmetry with the left side shorter than the right side.
Mandibular AP hyperplasia but transverse asymmetry with the right side being significantly longer (10 to 11 mm) than the left side.  
Transverse cant of the occlusal plane with the right cuspid 3 mm lower than the left cuspid.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm (normal airway dimension 11 mm).
Missing mandibular first bicuspids.
Severe left TMJ pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Cut power chain and 				maintain the lower first bicuspid spaces.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Left TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts 		total joint prostheses.  
	b.	Right mandibular low condylectomy and articular disc repositioning with 			Mitek anchor.
	c.	Right mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy to advance the mandible.
	d.	Maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly and advance.
	e.	Fat graft to left TMJ (harvest from the abdomen).
	f.	Left coronoidotomy.
	g.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	h.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy.  
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
5.	Placement of dental implants to replace the missing mandibular first bicuspids.
6.	Restorative dentistry to place crowns on the implants.  
 