KAITLIN TRAMMELL							04/22/2011

Kaitlin is 16 years old, date of birth 05/04/1994.  Referred by Dr. Robert Nowlin, 6400 Cobbs, Suite 700, Waco, TX 76710.  

Kaitlin’s primary concerns are her profile.  She feels her chin is prominent relative to her other facial structures.  Her bite apparently used to be worse than it currently is, but she has had three states of orthodontics, stage one from the age of 8 to 9 years, stage 2 from approximately 12 to 14 years of age, and then recently in February 2011 she had appliances placed on for the third time.  Kaitlin has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 0.  She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She has seasonal allergies and also she is allergic to cats and dogs and to Tide detergent.  She does not have any problems wearing jewelry.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing at nighttime.  She takes Advair, Allegra, and BCP.  She had her tonsils and adenoids removed in third or fourth grade.  She has no problems with snoring, has mild daytime somnolence related to being a teenager and no sleep apnea problems.  She is not aware of mouth breathing when she sleeps.  

In frontal view, Kaitlin has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 0.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much aligned with each other.  The maxilla is retruded about 4 to 5 mm.  The chin actually has fairly good AP position and is a little bit strong compared to the lower lip.  The chin neckline has good length to it.  Intraorrally, Kaitlin has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  The teeth are fairly well aligned.  She has a little bit of spacing between the lower anterior teeth.  She has good attached gingiva on the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, Kaitlin has all of her teeth present back through the second molars.  She has an anterior cross bite.  She has a slight Class III cuspid relationship by about 1 to 2 mm.  She has a reverse deep bite of about 1 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Tonsils and adenoids have been removed.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the left side.  The turbinates are moderate in size and appears to be obstructed more so on the left side.  Joints function smoothly.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the styloid areas, but the rest of the structures are negative.  The maximal opening is 51 mm.  The excursion movements are 8 mm in each direction.  Kaitlin has had her wisdom teeth removed.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except for the four third molars and the extraction sockets are still evident.  

Coronal view shows that the septum, at least on the bony septum, is reasonably straight.  There is a little osteophyte off to the right side.  Left middle and inferior turbinates are quite large and appear to obliterate most of the left nasal airway.  The right turbinate has a more normal size to it.  

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight, but the left turbinate in particular is large.  She has a small mucocele in the left anteromedial aspect of the maxillary sinus.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Joint space looks well balance.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Joint space looks well balance.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow mediolaterally, but joint space looks fairly good throughout the joint.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow mediolaterally, but joint space looks fairly good throughout the joint.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Kaitlin has a skeletal Class III relationship.  She likely has a lower occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway actually looks reasonably good.  Kaitlin has tooth size discrepancy of 0.5 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Kaitlin would be as follows:

Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
Slight mandibular prognathism.
Slight Class III occlusion by 2 mm. 
Anterior cross bite.
Multiple diastemas between the lower anterior teeth.
Hypertrophied turbinates with nasal septum deviated off to the left side.  

Recommended treatments would be as follows:

1.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 	cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are 	necessary.
2.	Continue to align and level the mandibular arch.  Consider placing TADs in the 	lower arch to facilitate advancing the entire posterior occlusion forward to close 	the spacing between the incisors and actually perhaps increase the angulation of 	the lower incisor, thus creating a larger Class III occlusal relationship. 
3.	Surgery:  Option 1.
	a.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward in a 			clockwise direction. 
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
4.	Surgery:  Option 2.
	a.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and into 			the best occlusal fit.
	b.	Partial inferior turbinectomies.
5.	Surgery:  Option 3:  AP reduction genioplasty, but this may yield a very poor 	result aesthetically and functionally.
6.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
