CHANVATEI TRAN									01-27-04

Chanvatei is 30 years old and referred by Liz Copeman, 301 Commerce Street, Ste. 3635, Ft. Worth, TX.
												
Patient History

Chanvatei has no major medical problems. She gives no history of earaches and does get occasional tinnitus and vertigo but no hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She gets some seasonal allergies. No problems wearing jewelry. She feels that she probably does clench and grind her teeth at nighttime and sometimes during the day as well. The onset of her TMJ problems is unknown, but she states that she can remember having clicking and popping in her joints as long as she can remember. The etiology is unknown. She had an underbite problem with the upper teeth biting behind the lower teeth. Dr. Bryan Blevin at Monarch Dental began making her appliances in 2002. She has had three or four appliances designed to push her upper front teeth forward using jack screws on a removable appliance. Her teeth now are pretty much end-to-end in the incisors, but her back teeth don’t touch at all. She can only eat with a lower splint in place. Without the splint, she essentially cannot eat or chew. She gets headaches about two or three times a week in the frontal and temporal area that average probably around a 7. She gets occasional migraines. She used to have severe migraine problems in school, but since she has finished school, they have not been as much of a problem. She rates her TMJ pain at 0, overall facial pain on an average day at 2, and she rates her jaw function at 9 without the splint and at 2 with the splint. Diet she rates at 9 without the splint and 2 with the splint, and disability at 5. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Chanvatei has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Mandible may be somewhat asymmetric. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted 1 to 2 mm to the right. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other. Both are a little bit off to the right side. 

In profile view, maxilla appears maybe a little AP deficient. She has an acute nasolabial angle. Upper lip supralabrale is probably 4 to 5 mm anterior to subnasale. Chin appears a little bit strong, and chin-neckline is a little bit long. AP maxillary deficiency and the upper lip just below subnasale is about 2 to 4 mm. 

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the third molars present. Lower incisors appear to be in lingual inclination. Appears to have good attached gingiva around the teeth. In the upper arch, she has her teeth back through the second molars. Cannot see any third molars. In centric relation, her bite has been jumped anteriorly, but she only has about a millimeter vertical overbite relationship. She has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship on the left side and just slight Class III on the right side. She has bilateral posterior open bites. Appears to be occluding only on her maxillary central and right lateral incisor and the mandibular central and lateral incisors. Mandible appears vertically longer on the left side by probably 2 to 3 mm. At the angle, it may be about the same. There is some transverse arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being almost 2 mm lower than the right cuspid. In the bicuspid area, there is about a 2-mm vertical difference as well. Mandibular arch also has some slight asymmetry with the right side being about 1 to 1.5 mm higher than the left side but not as significant as in the maxillary arch. She has no problems with nasal bleeding. Oropharynx appears clear. 

To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the left TMJ and left styloid area. Incisal opening maximum was about 54 mm, and she could open pretty wide without having significant pain or discomfort. Excursive movements were about 11 mm in each direction. Of interest, she had clicking in the right joint at about 40 to 45 mm of opening and closing click at about 35. On the left side, she had a softer click I believe on opening at about the same level but a closing click. One time when she was opening and closing her jaws, there was an audible click that occurred on the left side. She tends to have more tenderness on the left side.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of maxillary third molars, but the lower third molars are erupted in position. Sinuses look relatively clear. Nasal airway looks good. Left condyle looks significantly larger than the right condyle. Increased size in a vertical dimension as well as anteroposterior dimension. 

Waters view shows there is some slight elongation on the left side of the mandible vertically. Angles are quite prominent vertically and transversely. Nasal airway looks okay. Sinuses appear relatively clear. 

Left TMJ tomograms show a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa. The anatomy is a little bit strange here, and it is difficult to tell where the articular eminence is. Posterior and superior joints spaces seem thin. Perhaps some flattening on the head of the condyle and may be some anterior beaking present.

Left TMJ tomograms show a condyle that appears larger than the other side and appears a little bit large for the fossa. There is some anterior beaking present. Joint spaces don’t look too bad. They seem a little bit better balanced than the opposite side.

On opening, there is very good translation of both joints. 

Cephalometrically, she appears to have a Class III skeletal relationship. The upper incisors are slightly overangulated, and the lowers have been decreased in angulation, thus the ability to jump the crossbite anteriorly. Appears to be an openbite essentially all the way back through the second molars with only incisors touching. Oropharyngeal airway looks very good. Tooth-size analysis reveals a Bolton’s difference of about 1 mm. In trying to align the upper and lower dental models, there is some transverse excess in the maxillary arch, particularly in the cuspid, bicuspid, and to a lesser extent the first molar area. There is a significant premature contact between the first bicuspids in this position. The upper incisors on the model as well as cephalometrically appear to be significantly overangulated, and the lowers are in a vertical inclination.

Basic Diagnoses

Mandibular deviate prognathism
AP maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary excess
Rule out left condylar osteoma/osteochondroma (benign growth)
Bilateral posterior open bite
Mandibular dental midline shifted to the right a couple of millimeters
Significant overangulation of the maxillary incisors
Vertical inclination of the mandibular incisors
Transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being 2 mm higher in the maxilla and 1 mm to 1.5 mm higher in the mandible 
Malaligned mandibular third molars with no opposing maxillary third molars
Headaches
Vertigo
Tinnitus

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Try to decrease the transverse widths of the cuspids a couple of millimeters if possible. Close spacing. Tip lateral roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch. Try to increase lower incisor angulation and decrease the slightly increased curve of Spee

Re-evaluate to be sure that there is not any further abnormal growth occurring in the left condyle

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to upright the anterior teeth to decrease the current overangulation, transversely level the maxilla, advance it forward slightly, particularly at point A, and correct any transverse problems that may be present
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to shift the mandibular back to the left and into proper functional and occlusal relationship
Extract mandibular third molars

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
