STEVE TOMLINSON								02/01/2010

Steve is 40 years old and referred by Dr. William Hang, 101 N. Westlake Blvd, Suite 202, Westlake Village, CA 91362.  To the best of Steve’s knowledge, his TMJ problems began when he was about 30, however, he has been aware that his lower jaw has always been retruded.  He had orthodontic t treatment when he was 13 to 16 years of age.  He has had no treatment for his jaw problems.  He does get problems associated with his right joint where he gets some earaches, but no ear pathology has been present.  His jaws get fatigued when chewing, the right side worse than the left side.  In addition, he has severe sleep apnea problems.  Steve gets headaches that he says are right in the center which means perhaps some frontal and temporal involvement at about a level of 6 and he gets about 2 headaches per week.  He rates his TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 0, jaw function at 0, diet at 0, disability at 0.  He takes no medications.  He gets earaches but no tinnitus nor vertigo.  No other joints bother him.  He is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time.  Steve has severe snoring, moderate daytime somnolence, severe sleep apnea, and severe sleep disorder.  He breathes predominantly through his mouth at night time and also during the day.  He says at night sometimes he feels as though he cannot catch his breath for an hour.  Steve has an AHI index of 62 events per hour.  His mean apnea duration was 39 seconds with the longest duration of 146 seconds.  His O2 desaturation went to 81% and he spent 25% of his sleeping time below 90%.  Steve does have a CPAP machine, but is having difficulties tolerating it.  He feels that it pumps him so full of air that it gives him some GI problems.  He feels like he has difficulties moving at times after he wears that machine.  

CLINICAL EVALUATION.  In frontal view, Steve has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 27 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  The maxillary and mandibular midline are pretty much aligned with each other.  The chin may be just slightly to the left side about 2-3 mm.  In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is probably a good 4 mm posterior to subnasale and probably 6-8 mm AP deficient.  The chin is probably about 18 mm AP deficient.  The chin neckline and angle are not defined.  Intraorally, Steve has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has some large lingual tori that fill most of the floor of the mouth.  He has crowding of the lower anterior arch with a lingual inclination of the left central incisor.  He has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  Steve has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  He has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  His uvula is moderately elongated, but the rest of his oropharyngeal structures look relatively normal.  Steve did have inferior turbinectomies and a septoplasty performed on September 30, 2009.  Intranasally, it appears that has reasonably good airway.  To palpation, he has some moderate pain over the TMJs and retromandibular area and milder tenderness over the masseters, medial pterygoids, and SCMs.  He has crepitus in the TMJ joints, worse on the right side than the left side.  In excursion movement, he had a pop in the left joint.  Maximal incisal opening is about 49 mm, opening without discomfort 30 mm.  Excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that he is missing the four third molars, but the rest of the teeth are in place.  Sinuses appear clear.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  The joints appear arthritic.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates appear moderate in size, although the septum appears reasonably straight.  

Left TMJ coronal tomograms shows a condyle that has undergone some condylar resorption with loss of vertical height of the condyle.  There is significantly decreased joint space and a little sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone some loss of vertical height, but not quite as significant as the opposite side.  The joint space appears more compressed than the opposite side.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 3 or 4 mm.   

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite small in size and is sitting at the posterior aspect of the fossa where there is decreased joint space posteriorly and superiorly.  There is significantly increased anterior joint space because of the small condyle.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  There is some anterior beaking on the head of the condyle. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is arthritic and somewhat sclerotic with anterior beaking.  There is decreased superior and posterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows Steve has a retruded maxilla and mandible and high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway is about 2 mm at the soft palate level and about 4-5 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Steve does state that he remembers even when he was a teenager he had some clicking and popping in his jaw joints.  He remembers that he had a real deep overbite relationship and that the roof of his mouth and gums would bleed if he would bite down all the way.  

Basic diagnoses for Steve would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
High occlusal plane angulation.
Severe sleep apnea.
Earaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts 			total joint prostheses.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			rotation. 
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.


