ANGIE TRAN									11/13/2006

Angie is 25 years old, referred by Dr. Sandra Armstrong.  Angie has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, earaches tinnitus or vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night.  She takes no medications.  She had orthodontics around 2003 for about 2 years by Dr. McClendon in Houston.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
She shows a lot of gingiva particularly when smiling.
Difficulty in keeping lips together when eating.

In frontal view, Angie has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 7 mm.   In profile view, she has an acute nasal labial angle.  Upper lip appears somewhat protrusive.  She has some lip incompetence of about 9 mm.  AP chin deficiency of probably 8 to 10 mm.  In the lower arch, she has had first bicuspids extracted and the lower teeth retracted.  She has the rest of her teeth back through the third molars although the third molars particularly on the right side are in mesial inclination.  She has a crown on the mandibular left first molar.  Left first bicuspid is somewhat submerged.  In the upper arch, she is also missing the first bicuspids.  Upper incisors appear a little bit with minimal eversion.  She does have some significant wearing on her cuspids.  She has some maxillary third molars in place as well.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side being probably 3 to 4 mm Class II.  On the left side she is probably just 1 to 2 mm Class II.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 to 4 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy and relatively normal.  She does have a bifid uvula.  Intranasally, it appears she has an adequate airway.  The left turbinate is a little bit enlarged compared to the right side.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  She has a glitch in the right TMJ on closing.  On opening, she seems to function smoothy and on excursion she seems to function relatively smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 48 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 8 mm, left 9 mm.  She has good jaw function.  No dietary restraints and no disability related to her jaw problems.  Her left eye may be about 2 mm higher than the right eye.  When Angie smiles, she exposes 5 mm of her gingiva. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 first bicuspids.  Third molars are erupted in place.  The right third molar is in significant lingual inclination.  She has a root canal in mandibular right first molar.  She has periapical pathology at the tips of the associated tooth.  Difficult to evaluate the sinuses.  Left turbinate appears large.  Difficult to evaluate the TMJs.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are fairly large particularly the left one.  Bony septum at least is relatively straight.  It appears fairly symmetric.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  



ANGIE TRAN				11/13/2006				Page 2

Right TMJ likewise shows some narrowness in the superior and posterior joint spaces.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is moderately good translation in both joints.  Styloid processes are evident.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Angie has an anterior vertical maxillary excess and AP microgenia.  She appears to have a high occlusal plane angle.  Inferior border and occlusal plane angles appear to be at unequal levels.  Oropharyngeal airway looks very good.  Turbinates appear to extend posterior to the palate.  She does appear to have some maxillary protrusion. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP maxillary excess.
AP mandibular excess.
AP microgenia.
High occlusal plane angles.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Missing all 4 first bicuspids, extracted for previous orthodontic reasons.
Malaligned third molars x4.
Hypertrophied left turbinate.
 Mild decreased nasal airway on the left side.
 Anterior deep bite of about 4 mm. 
 Periapical pathology at the apex of mandibular right first molar.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
MRI of left and right TMJs.
Evaluate mandibular right first molar and treat appropriately.  
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the maxilla superiorly and posteriorly.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the maxilla upwards and posteriorly.
Reduction turbinectomies.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
Surgical removal of malaligned third molars x4.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
