MELANIE TOLDT									08/22/2008

Melanie is 24 years old.  Referred by Dr. Greg DeFelice, 5429 Harding Highway, Mays Landing, NJ 08330.  The only previous surgery Melanie has had is removal of her wisdom teeth.  She takes:

Meloxicam 7.5 mg b.i.d.  
Skelaxin 800 mg only occasionally.
Loestrin 24 Fe tablet daily.

Melanie’s problems began to the best of her knowledge in 2007 about 18 months ago.  This is when she was 23.  Up to that point, she thought her bite was pretty good.  At that time, though, she noted her bite was beginning to shift.  About a month after that, she began developing some pain and discomfort in her jaws and her headaches began.  The treatment that Melanie has had to date includes orthodontics in 1998 for 4 years.  She then saw Dr. Stoopier in May 2007 at the University of Pennsylvania.  Dr. Stoopier placed her on splints and medications without any improvement.  She has gone to see at least 10 different doctors in reference to her current situation including orthodontist, oral surgeons, TMJ specialists, etc.  

Primary concerns that Melanie has includes the following:

Change in the bite.
Headaches. 
TMJ pain. 
Chin becoming more retruded.
Clicking in the joints.
Earaches.
Speech impairment. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, she has some asymmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about.5 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline also is pretty much on the facial midline.  The chin is also fairly close to being on the facial midline.  She has a little more fullness in her left cheek as compared to her right check.  She tends to posture her mandible a little bit off towards the right side when she just naturally positions her jaw.  In profile view, the upper lip and maxilla appear to be retruded  by probably 3 to 4 mm.  Chin is retruded by approximately 12 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is moderately well defined.  Intraorally, Melanie has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has a little bit of soft tissue coverage over the distal second molar on the right side.  Teeth appear relatively nicely aligned and level.  She has adequate attached gingiva, although somewhat thin around the lower incisors.  She still has the _______ on her lower incisors.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She occludes on the left side on the second molar and the distal first molar.  The rest of the teeth are out of occlusion.  She has about a 2 to 3 mm vertical open bite on the right side and about 1 mm anteriorly.  She is about 3 mm Class II cuspid.  She has about a 2 mm overjet.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Although Melanie reports no difficulties breathing through her nose, her turbinates appear quite large.  She does have some lip incompetence of about 7 mm.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the styloid area, left TMJ, moderate tenderness over the masseters, right TMJ, and shoulder area.  On opening, she has a click in the left TMJ at about 15-20 mm and a closing clock of probably about 10 mm.  The right side seems to function relatively smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 33 mm, opening without discomfort 18 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 7 mm and the left 9 mm.  Transversely, the maxilla appears fairly level, but the mandible appears low in the right cuspid area about 1 to 2 mm.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the four third molars.  Right condylar head and neck appears elongated.  Left condyle appears arthritic.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  
Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear.  The septum is straight.  The turbinates appear just moderate in size.   
Left TMJ tomogram shows that Melanie probably was not in centric relation when this x-ray was taken as the condyle appears to be postured downward and forward in the fossa.  Articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  The condyle appears a little bit smaller vertically and anteroposteriorly.     
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit different shape and not too significant.  The condylar head and neck appear elongated.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  On opening, there is reasonable translation of both condyles.   
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some anterior vertical maxillary excess and AP maxillary deficiency and posterior vertical maxillary deficiency as well as AP mandibular deficiency.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 to 7 mm at the soft palate level and about 6 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Melanie used to have a lot of urinary tract infections.  She had a procedure to enlarge the urethra and this has essentially eliminated those for her.  She got them for about 2 years at around the age of 21 to 22.   She has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 1 mm.  Model analysis further shows that Melanie has a transverse maxillary deficiency.  Melanie had her urethra procedure done in January 2007 and her joint problems began in about March 2007, about 2 months later.  

Basic diagnoses for Melanie would be as follows:    

Left TMJ advanced severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction. 
Right TMJ mild arthritis and medial displacement of the articular disc.   
AP maxillary hypoplasia.  
Anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia.
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
AP microgenia. 
High occlusal plane angle 
Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior and right side complete open bite.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid root distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Bonded brackets can be used on all the teeth; no bands are necessary.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move anterior aspect superior and expand it as well as advance slightly.
AP augmentation genioplasty.
Partial reduction turbinectomies.
3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

