REBECCA TULBAH 									11-18-03

Becky is 33 years old. 

Patient History

Becky is in good health with no major medical problems. She takes no medications, and she has no allergies. Becky has had orthodontic appliances on her teeth since February of 2002. Dr. Jay Arnette in Austin, Texas, is doing her orthodontics. Rebecca started orthodontic treatment with Dr. Jay Arnette in February of 2002. In August of 2002, she had double-jaw surgery and a genioplasty performed by Dr. B.D. Tiner. 

Becky is aware of having clenching and bruxism at night, and also she clenches during the day. She has no problems with earaches, vertigo, or hearing loss but gets occasional tinnitus. Other joints that bother her include her back and her feet, and she does go to a chiropractic person for back treatments. She has no known allergies and no problems wearing jewelry. She has partial anesthesia to the left lower lip and chin with it being closer to it being numb. The right side of her tongue also has some significant loss of sensation to it. She doesn’t have any significant problems with headaches. She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 4, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 6, diet at 2, and disability at 4. 

Patient Concerns

Currently the concerns and problems that Becky has include the following in no specific order:
Lip incompetency
TMJ pain
Clicking in the jaw joints
Facial asymmetry
As she opens her jaw, it shifts toward the left side
Teeth don’t fit together
Some of the teeth on the right side don’t touch
Difficulty in eating and chewing
Very painful if attempting to chew tough foods
Limited jaw opening
Flared nasal nostrils
Nasal tip turned up significantly compared to what it was before
Fullness in the face in the cheek area and upper lip area
Excessive gingiva exposed now upon smiling with asymmetry in the amount of gum exposure with it being greater on the right side as compared to the left side
Bony notches in the mandible at two areas on each side that are quite noticeable
Loss of jaw line with her now having a straight line from her ear down to her chin
Appearance of elongation of the facial height
Prominent labiomental fold
Pain when singing

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Becky has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary midline is probably about 1 mm to the left as is the mandibular midline. Chin is probably at least 6 mm off to the left side. Mandible appears quite narrow transversely and quite tapered. Left mandibular angle is more prominent than the right angle by probably 2 to 3 mm. Inferior border of the mandible on the right side may be about 4 maybe 5 mm lower than the left side. Tip of the nasal dorsum appears a little bit wide with slight increased width between the alar domes. Nostrils appear a little bit flared. Transverse cant in the maxillary arch with the right side being probably 2.5 to 3 mm lower than the left side. 

In profile view, there could be just some slight fullness in the upper lip. There could be slightly increased fullness of 1 to 2 mm in the maxilla. Chin appears to be probably 10 mm AP deficient yet, although she does have a very prominent labiomental fold. Chin-neckline is extremely short measuring only about 35 mm, although the chin-neck angle is extremely well-defined. She does demonstrate lip incompetence of about 8 mm. Lower lip is at least 5 perhaps 6 mm below the level of the lower incisors. This is indicative of some lower lip ptosis.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Transversely, left cuspid may be 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Upper arch looks a little bit more symmetrical. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally being probably 3 to 4 mm Class II. Appears to have an open-bite tendency in the right lateral first bicuspid area. She has an overjet of probably about 2 to 3 mm. She has about a 1-mm overbite relationship. Oropharynx appears clear, and tissues appear healthy. 

Intranasally, the turbinates looks relatively normal in size. Septum looks straight. It looks like she has an adequate airway. Has some slight constricture of the luminal valves but doesn’t appear to cause any significant problem. 

She has no problems with headaches. Rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 6, diet at 2, and disability at 4. To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area. On opening and closing, she has some crepitus in the left joint and to a lesser degree on the right side. She says she does experience clicking and popping in her joints at times. Maximal opening is 37 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 8 mm but painful in the left joint, and excursive movement to the left 9 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four bone plates in the maxilla with four screws in each plate. Right sinus appears a little bit cloudy. Turbinates appear moderate in size, and septum appears fairly straight. In the mandible, there are three bone screws in the ramus area bilaterally, and there is a chin plate present in the chin with four screws in that area. Condyles appear arthritic, particularly the left one appears to have lost vertical bone height. 

Waters view shows what appears to be perhaps a fluid level in the right sinus, but in the left sinus it appears pretty cloudy and significantly different than the right side. The other sinuses including the frontal and the ethmoids appear fairly clear. Nasal airway appears clear. Facial asymmetry is noted with likely a 3 to 4-mm vertical discrepancy when using the orbits for reference at the cuspid area. Inferior border of the mandible also at the angle area shows a vertical difference of probably 6 to 7 mm. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is positioned superiorly and posteriorly in the fossa. There is some sclerosis on the head of the condyles, hockey stick shaped, associated with it. Some anterior beaking appears to be present. Significantly decreased vertical and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. This would be indicative of likely a dislocated articular disc. Right maxillary sinus appears to have a small area of lucency, but the rest of it appears to be more opacified. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with severe arthritic changes associated with it. There may be some bone changes in the fossa as well. There appears to be significant loss of vertical height of the condyle on this side. There is a high occlusal plane angle/ramus morphology bilaterally. 

On opening, there is good translation on the right side and restricted translation on the left side. Articular eminence on the left side appears to have arthritic changes associated with it as well. The significant difference in vertical height of the condyles is better appreciated in the open view. Probably loss of approximately 5 mm of vertical height on that left condyle.

Cephalometrically, Becky has a really high occlusal plane angle and high mandibular plane angle. Chin is quite prominent relative to the mandible but somewhat masked because of the high occlusal plane angulation. Significant vertical difference at the occlusal plane with about a 3 to 4-mm difference at the cuspid area and almost a 5-mm difference at the molar area. The inferior border of the mandible at the angle there is a difference of over 10 mm vertical height, and at the first molar area, it is closer to a difference of about 8 mm, and up by the first bicuspid about 4 mm. Oropharyngeal airway, however, looks very good.

Reviewing some of her old records including Panorex and lateral cephs show that before surgery it appears that she did have some bone changes present in her joints that aren’t compatible with someone her age. Compared to her records today, it appears that there may have been some further condylar resorption postsurgery on that left side that may have contributed some to the shift. The lateral cephalometric film presurgery shows that the jaw structures appear fairly symmetric vertically at the occlusal plane and also at the inferior border of the mandible. Immediate postsurgery x-ray taken by Dr. Leibold on 02/21/03 shows at least at that time there appears to be fairly good symmetry in the jaw structures at the occlusal plane and at the inferior border. Panorex was taken at the same time. Unfortunately it is impossible to evaluate the condyles as the left one is off the film. 

Becky recalls that at least a couple of weeks after surgery she was aware that there was some asymmetry present. 

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ severe condylar resorption and articular disc dislocation with perforations
Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction and with perforations
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Severe maxillary asymmetry with the left side being 3 mm shorter vertically than the right side
Slight AP maxillary excess
AP mandibular deficiency and severe asymmetry
Class II end-on occlusion
Open bite tendency on the right side
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 3 mm shorter vertically than the right side at the cuspid area and 5 to 6 mm at the second molar area
Left side of face vertically shorter than the right side by 3 to 4 mm in the cuspid area and close to 8 to 10 mm at the angle of the mandible
Bilateral mandibular inferior border exostosis
High occlusal plane angulation
Overangulation of the mandibular incisors
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of approximately 2 mm
Chin shifted at least 6 mm off to the left side
Facial asymmetry is progressive and worsening
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy and close the spacing

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to downgraft the posterior maxilla, move the anterior maxilla posteriorly, and correct the transverse and vertical asymmetries
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to posteriorly reposition the anterior bone and place a hydroxyapatite graft
Bilateral coronoidectomies 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)
External rhinoplasty
Recontour bilateral inferior border of the mandible

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
