NIKOLE TRENTACOSTA								10/20/2010

Nicole is 25 years old, birth date 06/22/1985, and is basically a self-referral.  She believes her TMJ problems began when she was about 20 years old in 2005 of unknown etiology, but says it could possibly be due to stress as her husband was deployed overseas at that time.  She is not aware of any clicking or popping in her joints.  She rates her headaches at 4 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 5, diet at 1, disability at 3.  She takes Motrin 800 mg once a day and usually takes two regular Advil in the morning.  She get occasional right-sided earaches, but no tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her knees and possibly her neck.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and during the day.

In frontal view, Nicole has fairly good facial symmetry of the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin are reasonably well aligned with each other.  In profile view, Nicole has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Nicole has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch and she has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Nicole has a Class I cuspid relationship on the left side and a slight Class III occlusion on the right side being about 2 mm Class III.  She has about a 1 mm vertical overbite relationship.  She has a slight open bite on the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  There is a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right cuspid being about 1 mm lower than the left side in the upper arch.  In the lower arch, the right cuspid is 2 mm lower than the left cuspid.  TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly in opening and excursion movements.  The incisal opening is about 54 mm, excursion movement to the left 9 mm and to the right 9 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship on the right side and Class I on the left side.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The turbinates appear enlarged.  It is difficult to evaluate the joint spaces. 

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is reasonably straight.  The right turbinate appears enlarged.  Axial view shows the sinuses are clear and the right turbinate is enlarged compared to the left one, although the septum is reasonably straight.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology, but perhaps a little bit small anteroposteriorly.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination and there appears to be good joint space.  
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  The condylar head appears a little bit larger than the opposite side.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is a little bit more of a curvature than the head of the condyle.  The joint space appears fairly well balanced and, in fact, slightly increased posteriorly.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width.  The vertical joint space looks pretty good in the mid part of the joint, but there is a decreased joint space at the lateral rim of the fossa.  Downward curvature of the rim of the fossa is probably about 2 to 3 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The condylar head appears a little bit taller than the opposite side.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she is basically a skeletal occlusal Class I relationship.  She does have a decreased oropharyngeal airway, but in part could be an over-exaggerated neck and jaw position.  She may not be in centric relationship as she has an end-on incisor relationship when the x-ray was taken, but she actually has about 1 mm overbite.  Teeth appear to be slightly apart.  There is some slight vertical difference in the inferior borders of the mandible with the right side being lower than the left side.

Nicole feels that she became aware of the teeth coming together first on the left side compared to the right side about 2 years ago when she was in the midst of having some dental work done.

Basic diagnoses for Nicole would be as follows:

Rule out osteochondroma/oseoma right mandibular condyle. 
Rule out articular disc dislocations.
Nocturnal clenching.
Right side Class III end-on occlusion. 
Right-sided open bite extending from the cuspid through second molar.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane being 1 mm lower in the upper cuspid and 2 mm lower in the mandibular cuspid on the right side.  
Myofascial pain.
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Medications:  Klonopin 0.5 mg tablets, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 to 2 tablets q.h.s.	
MRI of left and right TMJ.
Orthodontics to align and level the arches. 
Consider possible surgery that could include the following:
High or low condylectomy depending on pathology and articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchor. 
Right-sided sagittal split osteotomy.
Post surgical orthodontics to refine and retain

We will see how she does with the Klonopin medication.  She is to call me within the week and let me know how she is doing.  She is to return for further consultation once we acquire an MRI.