VALERI TSAREV									03-01-04

Val is 37 years old and referred by Dr. Stephen Fleming, 5320 W. Sahara Ave., #4, Las Vegas, NV  89146. 

Patient History

Val has had clicking in his jaw joints in the past and has grinding noises in his joints. He has had headaches for about the last 20 years. For about 20 years, he has had problems with his jaw alignment and being able to get his teeth to fit together. Val apparently had some kind of special device on the upper jaw that pulled the lower jaw forward about 20 years ago, and it resulted in flaring the lower anterior teeth, elevating them some, and creating posterior open bites. For the past two years, he has been in splint therapy and began orthodontics about a year-and-a-half ago. He is wearing some vertical elastics now in a slight Class II direction that go from upper first bicuspids to lower first molars. He does have some permanent retainers on his anterior teeth that open his bite vertically in the front and prevent him from developing a deep bite in his lower anteriors biting up into the roof of his mouth. Val’s jaw problems began about 20 years ago. He was placed in a splint apparently to try to move his lower jaw forward, and this made things worse for him. It flared his lower anterior teeth and caused some hypereruption of the lower anteriors. It has been about 20 years since he has had any reasonable jaw function. For the past years, he has been placed in some different splint therapy. He does have some periodontal stripping of the teeth. He has been in orthodontic treatment for about one-and-a-half years now. Val has been unable to eat or chew for about 15 years now since his teeth have not fit together. Val gets history, particularly when eating, at about a level of 6 that occur predominantly in the frontal and temporal area, but they can frequently elevate to a level of 8. Average daily pain is at a level of 6, TMJ pain at 6, jaw function at 1, diet at 10, and disability at 8. He has no facial numbness. He takes no medications currently. He gets earaches when chewing and gets occasional tinnitus and frequent vertigo although not everyday. No other joints bother him that he is aware of. He has some difficulties speaking as a result of his jaw malalignment and dysfunction. He is aware that he does tend to clench some during the day and possibly at night only in an attempt to try to find somewhere to place his jaw that would be comfortable.

Patient Concerns

His teeth and jaws are not properly aligned
Teeth don’t come together at all
Cannot eat or chew
Is on primarily a liquid diet

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Val has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face but has asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1. Maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to the left. Mandibular dental midline is 1 mm off to the left. Chin is probably 5 mm off to the left. 

In profile view, Val has some fullness in the upper lip. Has an acute nasolabial angle. Mandible appears AP deficient by probably about 10 mm. Upper lip looks a little bit full by maybe 3 to 4 mm. Chin-neckline appears a little bit short, although the chin-neck angle is reasonably well-defined. 

Val has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Has some significant buccal tipping of the lower right first and second bicuspids where they have a significant reverse curve of Wilson. Teeth are extremely flat on that side with evidence of either iatrogenic filing down of the teeth or severe bruxism. The first and second molars on that side also have very short cusp heights. Lower incisors look somewhat overangulated. Some gingival stripping particularly around the cuspid teeth. A little diasthema between the two centrals.

In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Second molars are tipped significantly out labially. Actually his second molars were extracted, and this third molars are pulled into the second molar position. Val has almost a full Class II malocclusion and an overjet of probably about 7 mm. Has a vertical overbite of about 3 to 4 mm. There is a significant cant in the occlusion with the left side being about 3 mm higher than the right side. AP position of the cuspids in the lower arch are fairly equal. AP position of the maxillary cuspids shows that the left one is about 1 mm posterior to the right. Lower arch is a little bit more level than the maxillary arch with the left side being up only 2 mm more vertically as compared to the right side. 

To palpation, he has some moderate discomfort over the temporalis muscles and some minimal tenderness of the SCMs but otherwise no pain or significant discomfort around the head and neck area. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly. Incisal opening is 74 mm, and excursive movement to the right 9 mm and to the left 10 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of the upper second molars with the third molars being pulled into the second molar position. Has impacted mandibular third molars with the right one in a vertical position that is in close approximation to the inferior alveolar nerve, and then he has a horizontal impaction on the left side where the tooth appears to be just above the inferior alveolar nerve. The left sinus appears a little bit cloudy compared to the right. Turbinates appear moderate in size, although the airway on the left side is not as clear as the airway on the right side. Condyles appear large but seem relatively normal.

Waters view shows the nasal airway actually looks fairly good. Sinuses appear about equal in lucency in the maxillary, ethmoid, and maxillary sinuses. Maxillary sinuses are not as clear because of overlying structures. Vertical asymmetry in the mandible and maxilla is observed.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit large anteroposteriorly and some anterior beaking present. There is good joint space, and, in fact, increased joint space vertically and posteriorly which means that he may not have been completely in centric relation when the x-rays were taken but postured forward some because of his splint that he currently has in place attached to his upper incisors. Articular eminence is moderate in steepness. Right third molar can be seen to be sitting right on top of the inferior alveolar nerve. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is more centrally positioned within the fossa. There appears to be good joint space. Condyle appears relatively healthy and looks better than the opposite side. Mandibular right third molar roots go adjacent to and slightly below the inferior alveolar nerve on that side. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. The anterior beaking is more evident on the left side than the right side. 

Cephalometrically, he has a good oropharyngeal airway space. Has a skeletal Class II occlusal relationship. Appears to have some maxillary protrusion and AP mandibular deficiency. 

Val does state he drinks a lot of fluids particularly because he mouth is always dry.

There is a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of almost 3 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary excess
Left vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency and asymmetry
Class II occlusion
Transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being approximately 3 mm higher than the right side
Impacted mandibular third molars
Missing maxillary second molars with the third molars in the second molar position
Buccal tipping of the maxillary third molars and progressive downward projection of the lingual cusps
Severe attrition on the mandibular right teeth including the bicuspids and molars
Overangulation of the maxillary incisors and mandibular incisors
Slightly accentuated curve of occlusion, mandibular arch
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.9 mm
Headaches 
Myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Consider repositioning the brackets on the third molars to rotate them palatally and align the mesial marginal ridges of the third molars with the first molars as well as correct some of the minor malrotation of the third molar teeth
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 to 2.5 mm of tooth structure and retract and close the spacing. This is to correct for the significant tooth-size discrepancy 

Surgery
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward approximately 7 to 8 mm
Surgical removal of impacted third molars with preservation of the inferior alveolar nerves

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Restorative dentistry to build up teeth particularly on the left side in the bicuspid and molar area

Special sagittal scans through the mandible show that on the right hand side that the lingual roots of the third molar are through the lingual cortex. The inferior alveolar nerve runs between the roots in one area. The neurovascular bundle is down the lingual cortex. On the left side, the tooth is horizontally impacted, and the inferior alveolar nerve sits below the tooth and against the lingual cortex.