MARSHA TSAHAKIS-PRYOR						09/06/2011

Marsha is 64 years old, birth date 12/02/1946.  She is referred by Dr. Christine Coke, DDS MD, 107 Suncreek Drive, S-200, Allen, TX 75013.  

Marsha’s primary concerns are as follows:

Constant pain and discomfort in the jaws.
Ear pain. 
Grinding and locking up of the jaws and occasional popping.
Headaches.
Pain in neck area.
Difficulties sleeping.

Marsha’s TMJ problems began when she was about 53 years old in 1999 of unknown etiology.  She first developed pain in her jaws and then some clicking and popping.  This subsequently subsided but now she has more grinding and crunchy noises in the joints.  She wore a splint from 2000 to about 2004, but noted no difference with the splint in nor any difference after she stopped wearing it relative to her pain and functional problems.  

She gets headaches 5 times a week at about a level of 8 that occur predominantly in the left temporal area and the posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 7, diet at 6, and disability at 7.  She gets earaches left side greater than the right side, frequent tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  She is not aware of any hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her left knee some where she has had previous surgery.  She also some slight scoliosis.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night and clenching in the daytime.  Additional diagnoses that she has include the following:

Diabetes.
Slight increased blood pressure.
ADD.
Depression.
Polycythemia vera.

She does have a previous history in 1998 of Bell’s palsy on the left side, but states that this does run in her family.  She could feel it coming on and took immediate action seeking medical help and was treated with anti-inflammatories and steroids and the problem did resolve.  

She takes the following medications:

Paxil 40 mg q.d.
Hydroxyurea.
Actos.
Lisinopril.
ASA 81 mg q.d.
Vitamins and calcium. 
Occasionally Metformin.
For pain, she will take ibuprofen and the equivalent to Aleve.  

Marsha does report moderate snoring when she sleeps and moderate daytime somnolence. She has had a previous sleep study that diagnosed her with mild sleep apnea.  She believes that she is predominantly a nose breather at night.  She has previously been placed on a CPAP machine, but she noted no improvement in her breathing or in the restfulness the following day.  She found equally good results using the Breathe-Rite nasal strips.  

In frontal view, Marsha has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline, but may be just about 1.5 mm to the left.  The mandibular dental midline may be about 1 mm to the right.  Chin is in fairly good alignment.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 5 mm.  The mandible is retruded 12 to 15 mm.  Intraorally, Marsha is missing mandibular second bicuspids and there is a little bit of spacing around the first bicuspid on both sides.  She has crowns on the first and second molars bilaterally.  There is a slight increased curve of Spee.  She has good attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has got crowns on the molar teeth.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side being about 3 mm Class III.  On the right side, she is probably 5 mm Class II.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  The soft palate might be a little bit elongated.  The turbinates appear as though they are relatively normal in size.  There does not appear to be any significant nasal airway obstruction at least radiographically.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters, styloid areas, SCMs and high moderate pain over the TMJs.  On opening and excursion movements, she has crepitation in the left joint, but the right joint is reasonably smooth.  The maximal incisal opening is 35 mm, excursion movement to the right 5 mm and to the left 7 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all third molars except there appear to be retained roots of the mandibular right third molar.  There are crowns on all four molars and even the maxillary right second bicuspid at least has a crown on it.  The maxillary left cuspid has just a partial root left with a dowel and pin and a crown present.  Both joints appear somewhat arthritic.  The sinuses appear relatively clear and turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is fairly straight.  The inferior turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  

Axial view shows that the septum appears straight and turbinates are relatively normal in size with the sinuses clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has severe arthritis with sclerosis on the head and significant narrowing anteroposteriorly but with some anterior beaking present.  There is significantly decreased vertical joint space and at the lateral aspect of the joint it appears that there could be bone-on-bone contact.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some sclerosis and anterior beaking present.  The arthritis is not as progressive on this side as the opposite side.  There is decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The articular eminence has a relatively low inclination.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic with areas of erosion on the condyle head and particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint it appears that there may be bone-on-bone contact.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has some sclerosis on top, but has not progressed as far arthritically as the opposite side.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  The superior joint space is significantly decreased.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows she has a relatively low angle.  The oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 mm at the soft palate level and about 3 mm at the base of the tongue.

She takes Naproxen and ibuprofen.

Basic diagnoses for Marsha would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 to 4 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Sleep apnea.
TMJ pain.
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Sleep study.
2.	Evaluation at the Environmental Center to test for hypersensitivities to the 	materials in the prostheses.
3.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
4.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies.
	c.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
	d.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	e.	Application of arch bars.