KACIE TRUELOCK								06/03/2011

Kacie is 10 years old, birth date 06/30/2000.  Referred by Dr. Holly Reeves, 4013 84th Street, Lubbock, TX 79423, and Dr. Clint Barrett, 2420 Quaker Avenue, Suite 102, Lubbock, TX 79410.  The orthodontist is Dr. Ed Wentz and he is at the same address as Dr. Reeves (actually they are brother and sister).

Kacie jaw problems may have begun as young as the age of 5 to 6 years of unknown etiology.  She began orthodontic treatment in 2008.  It was about that time that it was noted that her profile was showing that the chin was becoming more retruded.  Kacie has had no other treatment except for the orthodontics where she had some head gear and some appliance work done with the upper and lower jaw expansion performed.  Primary concerns that Kacie has at this time include the following:

Difficult time biting and chewing food.  
Tongue blocks the airway passage. 
Headaches.  
Periodic swelling of the parotid glands.  

Kacie reports headaches that occur in the frontal and temporal area at about a level of 7.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 0, diet at 5, disability at 3.  She has no trouble with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her wrists, knees, and ankles.  She does get this parotid gland swelling that can occur unilaterally or bilaterally and she gets these episodes about 2 times per year for the past 5 to 6 years.  When her joints flare up, she has been put on antibiotics, but her physician is not sure if that really helps.  They have take sour drops to help the swelling go down.  

In frontal view, Kacie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is probably almost 3 mm.  the maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental line may be to the left about 2 mm, but the chin is also about 2 to 3 mm to the left.  Transversely, the occlusal plane seems fairly level.  In profile, the upper lip retruded probably a good 5 mm.  The chin is retruded about 25 mm.  The chin neckline is very short.  She has an obvious head postured forward neck position.  She tends to breathe through her mouth at nighttime and some through her mouth even during the day.  She has mild to moderate snoring, mild daytime tiredness, and moderate sleep apnea.  She did have a sleep study done and her O2 sats dropped as low as 83%.  She is a mouth breather at nighttime and also partly during the day.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth erupted back through the first molars.  She has a retained primary E on the right side.  She has some moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has unerupted cuspids and a retained primary cuspid on the left side.  The first and second bicuspids and first molar are in.  She does have a tongue crib present in the upper arch.  The incisal opening is 43 mm and excursion movements are 4 mm in each direction.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the shoulders and moderate over the right styloid area.  Joints seem to function smoothly.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy, although it was very difficult to observe those.  I could not really see the tonsils well.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  The septum looks reasonably straight.  Columella is wide and the nostrils are narrow.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that the maxillary cuspids are unerupted.  The second molars and third molars are also unerupted.  In the lower arch, the second molars are unerupted and third molar is just beginning to develop.  She has a retained primary E in the right side and an unerupted mandibular right second bicuspid.  The tongue crib is seen attached to bands on the first molars.  Turbinates appear fairly large.  The condyles appear severely resorbed and appear to be functioning almost anteriorly on the articular eminence.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is fairly straight.  Sinuses are small but clear.  Turbinates are quite large. 

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates are quite large and appear to be obliterate a good part of the airway.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that there is significant loss of condylar height.  The articular eminence also has been eroded away.  The condyle is postured forward almost beneath the articular eminence. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has lost significant volume, and, in fact, the condylar head is essentially absent.  The articular eminence likewise has been resorbed.  The condyle is functioning essentially underneath the articular eminence postured forward in the fossa. 

Left TMJ coronal view shows that there has been significant loss of condylar volume.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa is flat with only about 1 mm of downward curvature. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows significant loss of condylar volume.  The joint space is a little bit narrower, but not quite as narrow as the opposite side.  The lateral rim is fairly flat with a downward curvature of only about 1 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Kacie has a severely retruded mandible and a retruded maxilla.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  She has a large adenoid mass present.  Her oropharyngeal airway measures about 2 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue about 5 to 6 mm.  



Basic diagnoses for Kacie would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ juvenile rheumatoid arthritis with severe condylar resorption.
Severe mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Unerupted maxillary cuspids and mandibular right second bicuspid with a retained primary E.  
Unerupted second molars and third molars.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Sleep apnea. 
Nasopharyngeal adenoid hyperplasia.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Removal of tongue crib.
2.	MRI of left and right TMJs.
3.	Surgery Stage 1:  Uncover maxillary cuspids, extract mandibular right primary 	second molar and expose the underlying second bicuspid.
4.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Bring the cuspids down into position.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Bring the second bicuspid into position.  
	c.	In the upper arch, tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally 		to make room for interdental osteotomies.
5.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
6.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a 				counterclockwise direction advancing the mandible approximately 20+ 			mm.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft it posteriorly and rotate it 			forward in a counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Removal of impacted maxillary third molars.
	d.	Medpore chin implant. 
	e.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	f.	Bilateral coronoidotomy.
	g.	Adenoidectomy.  
7.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 