ARIEL TULK										05/09/2007 

Ariel is 12 years old and is referred by Dr. Bill Hang.  She is in good health.  She takes Ritalin, Risperdal and "Gavnipince."  She has previous bio-block in 2003 and then has had retainers x2.  Apparently, the bio-block was not effective for her.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Teeth do not fit together well.
Cannot breathe through her nose.
Predominately mouth breather particularly when sleeping.

In frontal view, she has a little bit more fullness on the left side of the face as compared to the right side by maybe 3 to 4 mm.  Upper lip length is about 17 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 5 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin.  Maxillary midline is a little bit off to the right side probably 1 to 2 mm.  Nasal tip is also off to the right side about 2 to 3 mm.  In profile view, the maxilla is retruded about 6 mm and is retruded probably about 15+ mm.  Nasal tip is rotated upwards 3 to 4 mm.  Ariel has an obtuse nasolabial angle.  Chin neckline is somewhat short although the chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined.  She has lip incompetence of about 6 mm.  Intraorally, Ariel has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has attached gingiva although it is a little bit thin.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being worse on the left side than the right side.  She is probably 3 to 4 mm Class II on the left and probably 2 mm Class II on the right.  She has about 1 mm vertical overbite.  She has an overjet of probably 5 mm.  Uvula is moderately elongated.  Soft palate is pretty much normal and faucial pillars may be mildly constricted but not too significant.   To palpation, Ariel has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function very smoothly.  Incisal opening is about 40 mm.  Excursive movements are about 5 mm in each direction.  Joints function smoothly.  She has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  There may be some slight curvature to the septum anteriorly.  Cannot see the posterior aspect.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly the right side and it seems to have a fairly significant occlusion of the nasal airway.  Ariel does have moderate snoring and moderate daytime tiredness.  However, she has not been observed to have sleep apnea.  Dental model analysis shows that Ariel has a significant curve of Spee with the incisors being probably 4 to 5 mm off the flat plane with the posterior teeth.  She also has an accentuated curve of Spee of probably about 1 mm.  She has some spacing around the upper teeth extending from the first bicuspids forward.  Upper lateral incisors appear somewhat small.  She does have some crowding in the lower anterior arch.  There is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.  In a Class I position, there appears to be some transverse maxillary deficiency.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of mandibular third molars though all the other teeth are present including impacted maxillary third molars.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  Septum may be a little bit deviated.  It is very difficult the turbinates.  The condyles appear a little bit small in size.  


ARIEL TULK					05/09/2007				Page 2

Waters view shows that she has a deviated septum going off a little bit off to the left side in the bony area.  Turbinates appear quite large.  It obliterates most of the airway.  Sinuses look relatively healthy.  Maxillary sinuses are quite large and extend beyond the mid portion of the orbit bilaterally.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit small in size.  There appears to be good joint space.  Articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that again appears maybe slightly small in size but otherwise appears to have reasonable morphology.  Joint space looks adequate.  Articular eminence is a little bit towards the shallow side.  Joint space looks reasonably well balanced.  On opening, there is good translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a Class II skeletal occlusal relationship.  She has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  There is adenoid tissue present in the nasopharynx and the turbinate appears to extend beyond the hard palate with a decreased airway between the turbinate and the adenoid tissue of about 3 mm.  The airway distance from the soft palate to the posteropharyngeal wall measures about 9 mm and at the base of the tongue to the posteropharyngeal wall measures about 10 to 11 mm.  Lower incisors appear to be in lingual inclination.  Mandibular plane angle is also high.  He has an overjet of about 5 mm.  Nasal tip is short and rotated upwards creating an obtuse nasal labial angle.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
AP microgenia.
Class II end-on occlusion. 
High occlusal plane angle.
Spacing in upper arch.
Small upper lateral incisors creating a tooth size discrepancy of about 2.5 mm.
Mild crowding of lower anterior arch.
 Lip incompetence of 6 mm. 
 Upper tooth-to-lip relationship of 5 to 6 mm. 
 Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and to a lesser extent in the lower arch. 
 Posterior yaw with the maxilla and mandible shifted to the left 1 to 2 mm. 
 Hypertrophied nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue.
 Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Slightly deviated nasal septum.
 Impacted maxillary third molars x2.




ARIEL TULK					05/09/2007				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
MRI of left and right TMJs. 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Close the maxillary spacing except leave about 1 mm of space around the maxillary lateral incisors.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Continue to monitor facial growth and development and to monitor the TMJs.
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly in the front and advance about 5 mm as well as correct any transverse problems that may exist.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Augmentation genioplasty. 
Partial inferior turbinectomies.
Consider nasoseptoplasty if indicated.
Surgical removal of impacted maxillary third molars x2.
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
