BARBARA MARTINEZ-BROHEZ-TREVINO 					10/26/2007

Barbara is 22 years old.  To the best of her knowledge her TMJ problems began in about 2005 but they may have actually developed a little bit earlier.  She was hit in the jaw about 8 years ago with a basketball but she was not aware of any problems associated with that injury.  In 2005 she began developing some significant pain problems including a closed lock situation.  Etiology is essentially unknown.  She had previous orthodontics at the age of 10 and then from the age of 14 to 15.  During 2005, she underwent surgical repair of the left TMJ disc with a disc repositioning procedure by Dr. Albano Flores.  She was reinitiated into orthodontics in July of 2007.  She takes no medications.  She has no earaches.  She has some mild tenderness but no vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her knees minimally.  No known allergies.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime.

She rates her headaches at 0, TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 1, jaw function at 7, diet at 6 and disability at 2. 

In frontal view Barbara has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm on the left and 4 mm on the right.  Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline may be about 1 mm off to the left.  Chin also is off to the left about 1 to 2 mm.  In profile view she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably 2 to 3 mm.  Chin is retruded by approximately 10 mm.  Chin-neckline is short though the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some braces on the anterior six teeth and she has spacers around the mandibular first molars.  She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch she is missing first bicuspids.  They were probably extracted for orthodontic reasons.  Maxillary right central is extruded slightly compared to the left central.  She has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by about 2 mm and on the left side by probably 2 to 3 mm.  She tends to want to bite end-on on her incisors.  She has a 0 overbite relationship.  She has an anterior crossbite tendency.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy and normal.  Some slight constructure of the faucial pillars.  Tonsils are mildly enlarged but not too significant.  Barbara tends to breathe through her mouth when she is sleeping.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged, particularly the left side is larger than the right side.  The septum is relatively straight and there is probably mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction.  She may have some mild snoring and she has some mild daytime somnolence but she is not aware of any sleep apnea symptoms.  Barbara has no significant tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  She has crepitation in both TMJs.  Incisal opening is 50 mm.  Excursive movements are about 9 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Radiograph evaluation shows that she is missing all four third molars.  Both TMJs appear arthritic with loss of condylar volume.  Sinuses look relatively clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic and appears to have lost condylar volume.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  There appears to be decreased vertical joint space and anterior joint space.  A little sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  A little anterior beaking is present.  
BARBARA MARTINEZ-BROHEZ-TREVINO                  10/26/2007			Page 2


Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also appears sclerotic.  It appears as though there is a pseudocyst on the head of the condyle.  Articular eminence is moderate in inclination.  There may be decreased superior joint space.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles.  

Waters view shows that the septum is reasonably straight.  Turbinates are moderately hyperplastic but the sinuses appear clear.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology with a retruded maxilla and significantly retruded mandible and anterior vertical maxillary excess with posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm at the soft palate level and probably about 7 to 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  Not much of a tooth size discrepancy in numerical evaluation but very likely there is about a 2 mm or so difference because of the thickness of the maxillary incisal edges.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ arthritis with probable non-salvageable discs (need MRI to evaluate the joints.)
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Slight anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia. 
Anterior mandibular vertical excess.
Slight Class III cuspid relationship by 2 to 3 mm. 
Mandibular dental midline shifted 1 mm to the left.
 Missing maxillary first bicuspids. 
 TMJ pain.
 Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Partial nasal airway obstruction. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
MRI of left and right TMJs. 
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 to 3 mm of tooth structure and retract.
CT scans (TMJ Concepts protocol) but only if indicated from MRI evaluation.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary mastotomies to advance and down graft the posterior aspect. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
BARBARA MARTINEZ-BROHEZ-TREVINO		10/26/2007			Page 3


Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Genioplasty with a combination of vertical osseous reduction and alloplastic AP augmentation. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

Depending on MRI evaluation, if the MRI shows that the articular disc is salvageable then instead of doing the total joint prostheses the following would be done:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.  

I suspect a total joint prosthesis will be required.  