BARBARA TUCKER								07/09/2007

Barbara is 54 years old and is referred by David Reed, DDS, MS, 4109 N. 22nd St., McAllen, TX 78504.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Jaw pain.
Headaches.
Severe neck and shoulder pain.
Jaw sounds.
Earaches.
Stress created by the TMJ problems.
Lack of sleep associated with the jaw and pain problems.

Barbara also has been diagnosed with the following additional medical conditions:
Fibromyalgia.
Chronic fatigue syndrome.
Depression.
Irritable bowel syndrome.

Barbara has worn splints for 20+ years for her TMJ situation.  Barbara's TMJ problems began in the 1980s when she was in her 20s.  It has been addressed as being induced by hereditary factors, stress, and depression.  Relative to treatment for her TMJ problems, she has worn splints for about 20 years now.  During this time Barbara also has had additional nonsurgical treatments such as physical therapy, massage therapy, treatment for depression and pain management and many years of chiropractic treatment.  None of these have remedied the situation.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Cymbalta 60 mg daily. 
Wellbutrin 150 mg in a.m. and 150 mg in p.m.
Tri-Est (hormone replacement.)
Pravachol 20 mg at bedtime.  (Barbara recently has been taken off the Pravachol.)
Ambien 5 to 10 mg q.h.s.
Xanax 0.5 to 0.25 mg p.r.n.
Tylenol p.r.n. 
Ibuprofen p.r.n.
Relafen 500 mg tablets p.r.n.
 Darvocet-N 100 p.r.n. use as needed as a last resort.

Barbara gets daily headaches that average at about a level of 6 that occur in the left frontal, left temporal and posterior head area.  She can have escalation of her headaches to a level of 8 to 9.  This is not daily but does occur frequently.  She rates her average daily TMJ pain at 6.  She rates her average daily pain around the head and neck area at a level of 4.  She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 2, disability at 8.  She also has pain in her teeth daily likely due from the chronic clenching that she does at least at nighttime and also during the daytime.  Barbara states that she does have snoring and her family would rate it as severe.  Daytime somnolence is moderate.  
BARBARA TUCKER			07/09/2007				Page 2

She may have some moderate sleep apnea symptoms.  She has a moderate sleep disorder and requires sleep medications in order to sleep.  She gets earaches.  She has continuous severe tinnitus and moderate vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her left knee, elbows and hips at times.  She occasionally gets sciatica.  Her teeth hurt probably from chronic clenching which she does at nighttime and during the day.  In 2005 Barbara did have a cervical fusion performed apparently very successfully.  

In frontal view, Barbara has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular, dental midline and chin midline all appear to be on the facial midline.  In profile view, Barbara has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 to 5 mm at least.  Chin is retruded about 10 to 12 mm.  Chin-neckline is extremely short and chin-neck angle is very obtuse.  Intraorally, Barbara has all of her teeth back through the second molars in the lower arch and in the upper arch.  She has a Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by probably about 3 mm and on the left side she is close to being a Class I.  She has anterior deep bite of probably 4 to 5 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues appear healthy.  Uvula is moderate to severely elongated.  In fact, I could not even see the bottom end of it.  The soft palate is perhaps moderately elongated and it appears that there is a decreased dimension from the back of the soft palate to the posteropharyngeal wall area.  Faucial pillars appear moderately constricted.  Tonsils are absent.  Turbinates are mild to moderately enlarged.  The septum appears relatively normal.  There does not appear to be any significant nasal airway obstruction, perhaps mild.  The columella width and nostrils look normal although the luminal valves appear somewhat constricted.  To palpation she has some mild to moderate tenderness over the left TMJ but no other tenderness to the head and neck area to palpation.  On opening and closing she has audible crepitus in the left TMJ.  Right joint functions relatively smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 39 mm.  Opening without significant pain 26 mm.  Right excursive movements 7 mm, left 8 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars but the presence of all the rest of the teeth.  Sinuses appear clear.  Right joint appears a little bit flat on the anterior head.  Left joint appears a little flat on the anterosuperior aspect.  

Waters view shows the septum looks fairly straight in the bony area and turbinates appear moderate in size.  It appears that there is a passable airway.  Frontal sinus is huge but all the sinuses are clear.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a joint that appears a little bit flattened on the anterior aspect.  Joint space may be somewhat decreased particularly vertically.  Articular eminence is relatively normal in inclination.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows that there are some degenerative changes in the joint.  Articular eminence is moderately steep and somewhat elongated.  There may be decreased joint space posteriorly.  There appears to be a small pseudocyst in the head of the condyle.  

BARBARA TUCKER			07/09/2007				Page 3

On opening, there is some moderate translation with the condyles coming down towards the inferior aspect of the articular eminence but not down to it.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Barbara has some maxillary and mandibular AP deficiency.  Oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue appears to be about 7 mm and at the base of the soft palate and the base of the uvula may only be about 2 mm.  Occlusal plane appears relatively normal.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Left TMJ severe arthritis. 
Right TMJ articular disc dislocation with early reduction (pre-click.)
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion on the right side and Class II on the left side.
High occlusal plane angle. 
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied soft palate and uvula. 
Sleep apnea symptoms.
 TMJ pain.
 Headaches.
 Earaches.
 Tinnitus.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Sleep study to evaluate severity of sleep apnea.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. 
CT scans of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Left TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with a Mitek Anchor. 
Right mandibular sagittal split osteotomy to advance the mandible.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft the posterior aspect. 
Left coronoidectomy. 
Left TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen.)
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) procedure.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
 