KRISTEN TREST									07/03/2008

The patient is referred by Dr. Bob Hunsucker.  She is 46 years old and suffers from depression.  She had ovarian cysts removed last year.  

Her TMJ problems began in approximately 2002 when she was 40 years old of unknown etiology.  That is when it began to click and pop.  She has been under splint therapy for 6 years.  She had a gingivoplasty in 1993 and then she had orthodontics when she was a teenager with removal of all four second bicuspids and all four third molars.  Primary concerns she has are as follows:  

Clicking and popping noise constantly in her jaws with any kind of jaw function.
TMJ pain.
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints when she eats or talks. 
Snoring.
Daytime tiredness.
Restless leg syndrome. 

Kristen does not have any significant problems with headaches.  She rates her TMJ average daily pain at 5, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 1, diet at 0, and disability at 1.  

She takes the following medications:

Doxycycline 100 mg q.d.
Spironolactone 50 mg q.d.
Terbinafine 50 mg.
Lexapro 10 mg q.d.

She has no problems with headaches, but gets tinnitus and has mild vertigo difficulties.  The other joints that bother her include her lower back, but she is not aware of any other significant joint problems.  She does have restless leg syndrome.  She does clench and brux her teeth at night and she may do that some during the day as well.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Kristen has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  In profile view, she may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency, but not too much.  The mandible appears a little bit retruded.  Chin neckline and chin neck angle are not well defined. The mandible is retruded probably about 8 to 10 mm possibly.  As Kristen postures her lower jaw forward and the upper lip is filled out slightly, it improves her overall facial balance.  Intraorally, Kristen appears to be missing mandibular second bicuspids and also maxillary second bicuspids.  There is a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of almost 3 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues appear relatively normal except the soft palate may be a bit elongated.  The fascial pillars may be just mild to moderately constricted.  Tonsils look relatively normal.  Intranasally, she has fairly good size nasal turbinates.  Airway appears a little bit constricted.  The septum appears relatively normal.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, she has a very early click in the left joint at about 5 mm and a closing click at about the same.  On the right side, she has an opening click at about 10 mm and a closing click at about 5 mm.  Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm.  Excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.   
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four second bicuspids and all four third molars.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  The condyle looks to have reasonably good formation.  
Waters view shows that the septum is reasonably straight.  She has enlarged turbinates that seem to block most of the airway.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is actually postured forward.  Her teeth are not together and are apart so the tomogram is meaningless relative to disc and condyle position.  The condyle is actually postured a little bit forward in the fossa.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  
On the right side, the teeth are together.  This shows that the condyle may be a little bit posteriorly positioned.  The anterior head of the condyle is a little bit flat with some slight anterior beaking.  Joint space may be a little bit decreased superiorly and posteriorly.  On opening, there is moderately good translation of both joints.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship.  It appears the oropharyngeal airway may be decreased.  She has a skeletal and occlusal Class I cuspid position.  
Basic diagnoses for Kristen would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction.
AP maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway of 3 mm (normal 11 mm). 
Pain. 
Sleep apnea symptoms. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Partial nasal airway obstruction. 
Missing all four second bicuspids and all four third molars.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and down graft it slightly posteriorly.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a slight counterclockwise direction.  
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.