ELIZABETH URIBE									7/29//05

Libby is 20 years old and goes to TCU.  She is referred by Dr. Stan Ganderson from Houston.  She takes Zyrtec and Singulair.  She has some allergy problems and a few sinus problems, but nothing real significant.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
She feels her bite is off even though she has gone through extensive orthodontics.  She does not feel comfortable with her bite.  
She feels that her jaws are retruded.  
She has difficulty breathing through her nose.
Predominately a mouth breather.  

She has no earaches.  She gets tinnitus and vertigo.  She has heart palpitations at times and has been told it may be related to the vertigo.  She has seasonal allergies, but no known problems with jewelry.  She is aware of clenching and grinding her teeth particularly at night.  She does get some pains in her neck and her back that she relates to perhaps playing volleyball.  She has to crack her back a lot to make it feel better.  She has problems with her left shoulder although she has had previous trauma to that area.  Her knees bother her some and her ankles bother her when she exercises.  She gets headaches 1 to 2 times per week primarily in the temple area at about a level of 4.  She rates TMJ pain at about a level of 5, overall average daily pain at about a level of 4.  She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 3, disability at 2.  The onset of Libby's TMJ problems is unknown and the etiology is unknown.  She was in orthodontics for 8 years from the age of 9 through 17.

In frontal view, Libby has good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 4 mm.  Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline may be about a mm off to the left.  Mandibular dental midline and chin midline and fairly well aligned with each other.  In profile view, Libby has some AP maxillary deficiency probably about 3 to 4 mm.  She is retruded about 15 to 20 mm.  Chin-neckline is full and the chin-neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, Libby has all of her lower teeth through the second molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer on.  She has fairly good attached gingiva and teeth appear fairly well aligned.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a Class II end-on occlusion being a little bit greater on the left side probably by 4 mm on the left side and probably 3 mm on the right side.  She has an anterior open bite of about 1 mm.  Actually her open bite is about a 0 as far as vertical overlap.  In centric relation she occludes only on the very back teeth on the right side and all other teeth are essentially out of occlusion.  In centric relation she does hit on the second molars on the right side and also the first bicuspids on that side also touch.  The rest of the teeth are out of occlusion.  Oropharynx appears clear.  Uvula appears relatively normal length as does the soft palate and faucial pillars look relatively normal.  Apparently, sometime in the past Libby had one of her fainting spells and fell and hit the right side of her mouth knocking some of her teeth on the right side loose including the cuspid and maybe bicuspid.  She states she also lacerated her lower lip.  Intranasally, she has large septal spur coming off the right side of the septum.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged and appear a little bit inflamed.  Airway seems somewhat constricted.  She has moderate to severe nasal airway obstruction.  
ELIZABETH URIBE				7/29/05				Page 2


She is predominately a mouth breather.  She is not aware of any snoring problems.  She says she can sleep a lot if she had the time to do it.  She has moderate daytime somnolence.  She is not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  To palpation, she has moderate tenderness over the temporalis muscles and high moderate tenderness over the styloid areas, but no other tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, in the jaws she has lots of noises in her joints and popping, but there is no consistency as to the level of jaw opening that the noises occur.  Popping is actual audible at times when she opens.  Sometimes it occurs early on in opening and sometimes a very late stage of opening.  Maximal opening is about 50 mg, but she only opened about 20 mm where she was reasonably comfortable.  Excursive movement to the right about 8 mm and to the left 6 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows presence of all the teeth.  The third molars on the left side are bony impacted and on the right side probably soft tissue impacted and perhaps partial bony impaction on the mandibular right side.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer.  It is difficult to evaluate the sinuses and the nasal airway.  No other is significant pathology noted on this film.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The left turbinate appears quite large and obliterating.  The septum has some deviation in it.  The spur seen anteriorly clinically is in the cartilage and therefore it does not show up as well.  The offset does not show up as the bony deformity.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that seems to have a reasonable morphology, although there are some bony changes definitely present.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with decreased posterior and also superior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is a horizontally impacted mandibular left third molar. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology, but the condyle is posteriorly and superiorly positioned in the fossa with significantly decreased joint spaces in those areas.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The third molar on the right side appears as though it has a partial bony and soft tissue impaction.  However, its orientation is vertical.  On opening, there is good translation of the condyles.  

Cephalometric analysis shows that she has a Class II skeletal relationship, but the maxilla also appears to be AP deficient.  She has a high occlusal plane angle and an open bite tendency anteriorly.  She has an occlusal Class II relationship.  There may be a slight transverse vertical discrepancy.

BASIS DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
ELIZABETH URIBE				7/29/05				Page 3


High occlusal plane angulation.
Class II end-on occlusion being slightly worse on the side as compared to the right side.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 to 2 mm lower than the left.
Occluding only on the right first and second molar area.
Mandibular dental midline and chin shifted to the left side about 1 to 2 mm.
 Headaches.
 TMJ pain.
 Myofascial pain.
 Tinnitus.
 Vertigo.
 Nocturnal clenching and bruxism.
 Hypertrophied turbinates. 
 Nasal septal deviation with a large septal spur off towards the right side.
 Nasal airway obstruction. 
 Impacted third molars x4. 
 Tooth size discrepancy of approximately 2 mm. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
MRI of left and right TMJ.

Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are needed.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing. 

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and down graft the posterior aspect and level transversely.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Removal of 4 bony impacted third molars. 
Nasoseptoplasty. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
