SARAH UTSEY								12/27/2011

Sarah is 13 years old, birth date 06/25/1998.  She was referred by Dr. George Adams.  Sarah’s TMJ problems began when she was about 11 years of age of unknown etiology.  She had initiated orthodontic treatment with Dr. Cindy Woodson and about 2 months into the treatment she began developing pain and discomfort in her TMJ joints.  She had orthodontics from the age of 10 to 13 for 2-1/2 years.  She has had a Herbst appliance that did help her some.  She also has had turbos on her teeth, but with her clenching and grinding she would knock these off within a couple of days.  She has had iontophoresis.  She recently received a splint, but this has not provided any significant benefit as of yet.  

Primary concerns that Sarah has at this time include the following:

TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Jaw joints lock.
Severe tiredness secondary to difficulties sleeping because of pain.
Difficulties eating and chewing.  

Sarah gets headaches two times a week at about a level of 8 predominantly in the temple areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 9, jaw function at 7, diet at 7, disability at 7.  She gets bilateral severe earaches, frequent tinnitus, and frequent vertigo.  She has a 50 percent hearing loss bilaterally.  The only other joints that may bother her are her neck.  She is aware of clenching and perhaps bruxing at nighttime.  During the day, she may clench and, if she has significant jaw pain, she chews on things such as straws to help relieve some of the pressure.  She takes the following medications:

Vyvanse 40 mg q.d.
Allegra.
Advil.
Aleve.
Klonopin 0.5 mg occasionally at bedtime.

Sarah’s mother is a juvenile diabetic.  Sarah was born prematurely and initially had difficulties eating, sucking and swallowing.  Dr. Richard Riggs has been treating Sarah for about 1-1/2 years.  Sarah started developing ear infections at the age of 6 months.  By the age of 18 months, it was identified that she had a chronic sinus infection that was draining down into her stomach.  This was treated aggressively with antibiotics and apparently cleared. 

In frontal view, Sarah has good left-to-right symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 17 mm and upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  The nasal tip may be just slightly to the right side 1 to 2 mm.  In profile view, she has just some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe 2 to 3 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded about 10 to 12 mm.  Sarah and her parents are aware that her jaw has moved backwards over the last couple of years.  Sarah feels that she does not have room for her tongue.  Intraorally, Sarah has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars with the second molars partially erupted with soft tissue covering the distal parts of the crown, greater on the left side than the right side.  Teeth however anteriorly appear to be fairly well aligned and leveled and she appears to have adequate attached gingiva, although somewhat thin.  In the upper arch, she is congenitally missing the maxillary lateral incisors.  The first molars are erupted in, but the second molars are clinically hard to identify.  She is basically a Class I cuspid relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the right turbinate appears a little bit enlarged and the left one appears relatively normal in size.  The septum may be somewhat deviated to the left posteriorly in the nose.  She may have some mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction.  Columella and nostrils appear relatively normal in size.  The incisal opening is about 43 mm.  The maxillary incisal opening is 43 mm, opening without pain and discomfort 28 mm.  The excursion movements are about 7 mm in each direction.  To palpation, Sarah has high moderate to low severe pain to palpation over the TMJs, retromandibular areas, posterior neck areas, and moderate pain over the SCMs and shoulders, and milder tenderness to palpation over the temporalis muscles and masseters.  On opening, she has significant crepitation in both joints being louder on the left side than the right side.  

Sarah states that she cannot wear her lower retainer because she has no space for her tongue.  Her dad says that when she sleeps she sleeps so that she props her hands underneath her jaw and she sleeps on her side so that her jaw and face sort of hang downward and I suppose this is to help open up her oropharyngeal airway when she is sleeping.  Sarah says that when she lays on her back that she cannot breathe and has to sleep on her side.  She currently has significant difficulty sleeping because of her major pain issues.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that the absence of maxillary lateral incisors bilaterally.  She has impacted unerupted maxillary second molars bilaterally.  In the lower arch, she has developing unerupted third molars.  The second molars are partially soft tissue impacted.  She appears to have severe advanced arthritis in both temporomandibular joints.  The articular eminences appear somewhat shallow.  The right turbinate appears larger than the left turbinate, although the septum appears reasonably straight.  The left sinus appears to have thickened tissues or fluid within it.  

Coronal view shows that the right turbinates are quite large and appear to obliterate most of the functional airway.  The left turbinate appears relatively normal in size.  The left sinus is full of fluid being probably at least three-fourths full of thickened membrane and/or fluid.  The right sinus appears relatively clear.  The septum is deviated a little bit towards the left side.  

Axial view shows that the right turbinate is quite large and appears to essentially block off the right nasal airway.  The left turbinate appears relatively normal in size.  The left sinus is more opaque where the right side is clear.  There is obviously fluid or thickening of the sinus membrane in that left maxillary sinus.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is small in size and has lost vertical and anteroposterior volume.  There is some anterior beaking present.  There is a little bit of peaking of the condylar head.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination, although a fairly long slope.  The joint space looks relatively normal.  Cortical bone on top of the condyle appears thin.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has lost vertical and anteroposterior volume.  There is some anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow, but elongated.  The joint space looks relatively normal.  Towards the lateral aspect of the joint, the condylar head is quite flattened. 

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant loss of vertical volume.  The joint space in at least one view looks reasonably good vertically.  The lateral rim of the fossa is quite flat.  The condylar head appears arthritic.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat narrow and appears to have lost vertical volume.  The lateral rim is quite flat.  The joint space appears relatively normal at least in one of the views.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Sarah has somewhat of a high occlusal plane angle.  The maxilla and mandible appear somewhat retruded.  Oropharyngeal airway measures 4 mm at the soft palate level and about 3 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnoses for Sarah would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation without reduction and with significant deformation as well as condylar resorption, compatible with AICR.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and anterior mandibular vertical hypoplasia. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Congenitally missing maxillary lateral incisors but spaces present.
Moderately high occlusal plane angle of 16 degrees (normal angulation 8 degrees).
Hypertrophied right nasal turbinate.
Left maxillary sinusitis. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Management of left maxillary sinusitis (by Sarah’s pediatrician).
2.	Surgery Stage 1.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Consider right partial turbinectomy.
3.	Control occlusion with splint with exposure of the molar teeth to allow them to 	erupt vertically into position.  
4.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
5.	Surgery Stage 2 (December 2013).
	a.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise 			direction approximately 3 to 4 mm at the incisor tip and down grafting 			posteriorly about 4 mm.  
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction approximately 9 mm at pogonion. 
	c.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to vertically lengthen the 			mandible anterior.  
	d.	Surgical removal of mandibular impacted third molars.  
	e.	Right partial turbinectomy if turbinectomy not performed at stage 1.
6.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
7.	Restorative dentistry to include possible osteointegrated implants to the maxillary 	lateral incisor spaces.
8.	Dental reconstruction of the lateral incisors.  