CAROLINE TURNER								01/05/2011

Caroline is 14 years old, birth date 06/07/1996.  Referred by Dr. Petra Schubert, 6128 Sherry Lane, Dallas, Texas 75225-6301.  The onset of her TMJ problems and significant aberrant growth began when she was about 11 years old.  Genetically, her father had a similar kind of condition that apparently was corrected in about 1985.  Caroline began orthodontic treatment in 2006.  She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability all at 0.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  The only other joints that bother her are her knees.  She has been diagnosed with mild adrenal hypofunction.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  The only medication she takes is Cortef 5 mg 2 times per day.  

In frontal view, Caroline has fairly good symmetry in her middle and upper third face.  She may have some slight asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 4.5 mm.  The maxillary midline is about 3 mm off to the right side.  The mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline as is the chin.  She has a 4 to 5 mm anterior open bite.  In profile, the maxilla may be retruded about 2 mm.  the chin may be retruded about 3 to 4 mm.  Lower lip is everted and protrusive by probably 10 mm.  In the relaxed position, she has a lip incompetence of about 8 mm.  Intraorally, Caroline has all of her teeth back through the second molars erupted in.  Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.  She has thin attached gingiva around the central incisors.  In the upper arch, she is missing the right lateral incisor, but has the rest of her teeth in place.  The missing lateral incisor with closure of the spacing accounts for the asymmetry in the upper jaw.  The left cuspid is only about 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  She has almost a full Class III cuspid relationship on the left side and just slightly less on the right side where she is probably about 6 to 7 mm Class III.  She has an anterior and a left posterior cross bite.  Her occlusion is predominantly the maxillary first molars and mandibular second molars bilaterally with all other teeth essentially out of occlusion.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the septum appears reasonably straight and the turbinates are mild to moderate in size.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  The incisal opening is about 44 mm.  The excursion movements are about 5 mm in each direction.  Transversely, the maxilla and mandible are fairly level.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  She is also missing maxillary right lateral incisor.  All the rest of the teeth are present.  She has a decreased vertical height of the posterior mandibular body.  The anterior vertical height of the mandible may be somewhat excessive.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are enlarged and appear to obstruct a good portion of the nasal airway.  

Axial view shows that sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are fairly large and may be obstructing the airway.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  There is decreased vertical joint space and the articular eminences are relatively shallow.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  There is decreased vertical joint space and the articular eminences are relatively shallow.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly normal mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly at least 4 mm.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly normal mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly at 4 to 5 mm.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Caroline has a high occlusal plane angle mandibular prognathism related to bilateral condylar hyperplasia.  The maxilla may be slightly AP maxillary deficient.  There is some moderate anterior vertical maxillary excess and posterior maxillary vertical deficiency.  Turbinates extend posterior to the hard palate and there is some adenoid tissue present with a clearance between the adenoid tissue and the turbinate of about 5 mm.  From the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 8 mm and from the base of the tongue at the posterior pharyngeal wall 9 mm.  The lower incisors actually look as though they are in reasonable angulation to the mandible.  

Basic diagnoses for Caroline would be as follows:

Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Mandibular prognathism. 
Maxillary AP hypoplasia but anterior vertical and transverse hyperplasia. 
Class III occlusion. 
Maxillary midline shifted 3 mm to the right.
Missing maxillary right lateral incisor.
Impacted third molars x4. 
Anterior open bite of 4 to 5 mm.
Hypertrophied turbinates causing nasal airway obstruction.
Occluding only on maxillary first molars and mandibular second molars.   All other teeth are out of occlusion.  
High occlusal plane angle with 19 degrees for the mandible (normal 8 degrees).

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Extract maxillary left lateral incisor.  
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Shift anterior central incisors 3 mm to the left, 			realign them on the facial midline.  
	b.	Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing no more than 2 mm of tooth 				structure and retract. 
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament 			repair with Mitek anchors. 
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to counterclockwise rotate the mandible 			in posterior positioning. 
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, move the anterior aspect superiorly, 			and decrease the transverse width.
	d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	e.	Removal of impacted third molars x4.
	f.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin and shorten 			slightly vertically.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
	