SHELLY TYE										09/28/2010

Shelly is 24 years old, birth date 02/24/1986.  She is referred by Kyle Dalton, DDS, 2415 Prince Street, Conway, Arkansas 72034.  Her orthodontist is Richard Meyer, DDS MS, 10319 W. Markham, Suite 200, Little Rock, Arkansas 72205.

Primary concerns that Shelly has include the following

Extreme tooth sensitivity.
Widespread enamel loss along gum line.
Excessive wear on teeth.
Front teeth chipping.
Clenching and grinding of teeth at night.

Shelly has no significant TMJ issues.  She had orthodontics from 1999 to 2002 with Dr. Richard Meyer.  A year or two after her orthodontics were completed, she began developing sensitivity in her teeth and her teeth began to wear.  She began hitting more predominantly on her front teeth and began having enamel coming off of her teeth.  She developed some periodontal problems around some of her teeth.  She even had pain brushing her teeth.  She also began developing cavities.  She eventually had periodontal surgery on the lower anterior arch in 2009.  She had a mouth guard made to wear at night in January 2010.  More recently on September 8, 2010, she had sinus surgery and reduction turbinectomies.  Her sinus problem was predominantly in the right sinus with almost complete opacification of that sinus.  

Shelly has type 1 diabetes and also Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.  She takes the following medications:

Novolog insulin.
Synthroid.

Shelly has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, and no myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability all at 0.  She gets occasional earaches, but no other joints bother.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime, but does not believe that she does it during the day.  She feels that her chin may be a little bit more prominent now than it was a few years ago.

In frontal view, Shelly has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 16 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 1 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The nasal tip is just slightly to the right side about 1 or 2 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left side as is the chin.  In profile view, she has an obtuse nasolabial angle with the nasal tip turned up some.  She may have some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe 2 mm.  Chin is a little bit prominent by about 5 to 6 mm.  The chin neckline is somewhat elongated a little bit.  Chin neck angle is well defined.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch.  She has some gingival grafting performed in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She does have some chipping in the upper anterior teeth, particularly on the right side involving the central incisor and lateral incisor.  She is wearing on the lower anterior teeth on the labial surface.  She has about a 2 mm anterior over bite.  Upper incisors are quite thinned down.  She has a fairly tight Class I cuspid relationship bilaterally with just a slight 1 mm Class III on the right side.  She does have some crenations on the lateral border of her tongue bilaterally.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal.  It appears as though she has a deep oropharynx.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  The incisal opening is 49 mm, excursion movement to the right about 9 mm and to the left about 7 mm.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The right sinus is a little bit cloudy.  She has a brachiocephalic facial morphology.  She has decreased anterior and mandibular vertical height.  Gonial angles are quite angular.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.

Coronal view shows that she has relatively normal size turbinates.  There is currently an adhesion between the left turbinate and septum.  The left sinus is clear.  The right sinus is smaller in size and is full of fluid that could be related to the recent surgery.  

Axial view shows that the right sinus is small in size.  The septums are reasonably straight and turbinates are relatively normal in size.  The right sinus is full of fluid.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is flattened on top with some anterior beaking present.  The joint space looks reasonably good.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. 


Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with flattening on the posterior head and some anterior beaking present.  The joint space looks fairly good.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Left TMJ coronal view shows that the condyle has fairly good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  There appears to be decreased lateral joint space that may account for the slight noise that she heard in the left joint.  It does appear that the disc is medially displaced. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm and appears to be more decreased in the lateral joint space compared to the vertical joint space that could correlate to a medial displacement of the articular disc.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Shelly has a low occlusal plane low mandibular plane angle facial morphology.  The chin is somewhat prominent.  She has over angulation of the maxillary incisors, but the angulation of the crown from the root is fairly significant, placing the crown in a better aesthetic position relative to the long axis of the tooth.  

Basic diagnoses for Shelly would be as follows:

Bilateral condylar hyperplasia (arrested growth at this time).
Mandibular prognathism.
Mandibular AP macrogenia.
Slight maxillary AP and vertical hypoplasia.
Vertical mandibular hypoplasia.
Class I occlusion.
Over angulation of maxillary incisors. 
Abrasion and attrition of the teeth.
Multiple dental hypersensitivities.
Clenching and bruxism.
Enamel dysplasia.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Medications:  Klonopin 1 mg q.h.s. to eliminate nocturnal clenching and bruxism.  
Restorative dentistry with full mouth rehabilitation.
Surgery:  AP reduction genioplasty.