JAMES UNDERWOOD							11/28/2011

James is 18 years old, birth date is 10/05/1993.  He was referred by Dr. Michael Scott, an orthodontist in Longview, TX.  The only previous surgery James has had is for removal of his wisdom teeth in June 2008.  

James’ primary concerns are as follows:

Underbite.
Left TMJ clicking and pain and occasionally some clicking in the right joint.
TMJ pain.
Headaches that occur predominantly in the back of the head.

James rates his headaches that he gets about 3 or 4 times a week at a level of 5 and they occur predominantly in the posterior head area.  He rates his TMJ pain at 2, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 4, diet at 0, and disability at 0.  James has been aware of his bite being off for as long as he can remember.  As far as developing clicking and popping in his jaw joints, that began about a year ago.  James had previous orthodontics at about the age of 5 to 6 where he wore a face mask and wore it for a good time for a year at that age.  He has been followed by Dr. Scott through the years.  Appliances were placed on the teeth in February 2011.  James takes no medications.  He has no earaches, tinnitus but does get moderate vertigo.  No other joints bother him.  James has some problems with his right shoulder and his right elbow, but he is a right-handed baseball pitcher.  

In frontal view, James has good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  The maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm to the right.  The chin is about 3 to 4 mm to the right.  In profile view, James appears to have pretty good balance between his upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  The mandible is a little bit protrusive, although the chin neckline actually looks fairly good.  The lower lip is somewhat everted compared to the chin position.  He does have some fullness in the submental area.  Intraorally, James has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.  He has mamelons on his lower teeth yet.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars erupted in.  He has a slight accentuated curve of Wilson in the upper arch and he has a slightly reversed curve of Wilson in the lower arch.  He is about 6 mm Class III on the right side and probably at least 7 mm Class III on the left side.  He has about a 2 mm anterior open bite and a reverse over jet of probably 7 mm.  He has an anterior cross bite on the right side with a tendency towards a cross bite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Uvula may be just slightly enlarged.  Tonsils appear mild to moderate in size.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear mild to moderate in size, although the transverse width of the nose is fairly significant and it appears at least anteriorly he has a reasonably good airway.  He has no significant tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  The maximal incisal opening is 58 mm and excursion movement to the right 5 mm and to the left 7 mm.  Transversely, the maxillary and mandibular arches appear relatively level.  The mandibular dental midline and chin midline appear to be fairly well aligned with each other.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The maxillary centrals and lateral incisor roots are tipped significantly distally.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  All four third molars are absent.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is reasonably straight.  The turbinates appear fairly large and appear to block a good portion of the functional airway.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is reasonably straight.  The turbinates appear fairly significantly enlarged yielding a narrow airway.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The condylar head and neck are extremely long.  There is decreased vertical joint space indicative of either a displaced disc or a thin disc that is in position.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology, although the condylar head and neck are extremely long.  The condyle is a little bit more tapered on this side compared to the opposite side.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow.  There appears to be some decreased vertical joint space.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The vertical height of the condyle appears fairly long.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 5 to 6 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat enlarged vertically.  Transverse width appears fairly good.  There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 to 5 mm. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class III relationship.  The maxillary incisors are over angulated.  He has a Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship.  There is an anterior open bite of about 2 mm.  Oropharyngeal airway looks very good with an AP dimension of about 12 mm at the soft palate level and about 10 mm at the base of the tongue.  Condylar heads and necks appear excessively long.  

Dental model reveals a Bolton’s difference of 3.5 mm.  There is also at least 0.5 mm of tooth size discrepancy in the bicuspid area as well.



Basic diagnoses for James would be as follows:

Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia growing faster on the left side compared to the right side.
Mandibular deviated prognathism shifted towards the right. 
Maxillary AP hypoplasia but transverse hyperplasia.
Class III occlusion.
Anterior and right sided cross bites.
Over angulation of the maxillary incisors.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 4 mm with the anterior 6 teeth and 0.5 mm with each of the bicuspid teeth with the maxillary teeth being smaller in size.
Hyper-eruption of maxillary left second bicuspid, mandibular left second bicuspid.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Consider 			opening up 1 mm of space between the upper laterals and cuspids to help 			compensate for the significant tooth size discrepancy.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Intrude maxillary left second bicuspid 			and mandibular left second bicuspid so that they are vertically level with 			the other posterior teeth.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies to arrest the mandibular growth.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back 
                        towards the left and counterclockwise rotate it moving the incisor tips 
                        back about 6 to 7 mm.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to upright the incisors and correct the 			transverse arch discrepancies.  
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  