RYAN TWEED									01/04/2011

Ryan is 15 years old, birth date 09/27/1995.  He is referred by Dr. George Adams, 2845 Parkwood Blvd., #100, Plano, Texas.  Ryan was born with craniosynostosis of the metopic sutures.  In April 1996, he had cranial surgery performed.  In September 2010, he had maxillary third molars and mandibular right third molar removed.  Apparently, he had a large cyst associated with the mandibular left third molar and on November 2010 the left mandibular third molar and large cyst were removed.  Ryan gets headaches about 3 times a week in the temple and top of the head area.  It is not known exactly what is causing this, but the dad feels that could possibly be related to his diet or medications.  He has no TMJ pain.  Rates his average daily pain at 1, jaw function at 6, diet at 4, disability at 4.  He has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo and no other joint problems.  He has been diagnosed with ADHD.  He is aware of bruxing his teeth during the day, but not particularly at night.  He takes the following medications:

Daytrana 10 mg patch that he wears for school.
Strattera.

Both these medications are for ADHD.  

In frontal view, upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Nasal tip is deviated 3 to 4 mm off to the left side.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline and chin.  In profile, the maxilla may be retruded about 3 to 4 mm.  The chin is retruded about 12 to 15 mm.  Chin neckline is short.  He has significant flattening of the frontal bone from the craniosynostosis.  Intraorally, Ryan has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has some slight spacing between some of the teeth, but not too much.  He has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has multiple spaces around the upper teeth.  In centric relation, he has a Class II cuspid relationship.  He has an over jet of about close to 8 mm.  He has about a 2 to 3 mm vertical over bite.  He has a buccal cross bite on the left side in the bicuspid area.  Upper arch is wide compared to the lower arch.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy, although the soft palate may be somewhat elongated and the tonsils are moderately enlarged. 

Ryan’s headaches began about 2 years ago of an unknown etiology.  However, Ryan’s dad states they were on a trip last week and he did not take the Daytrana and he had only one headache during that time period.  It is possible the headaches could be related to the medications.  The headaches tend to occur after school or in the evening.  Ryan does not wake up with headaches in the morning.  To palpation, he has some moderate tenderness over the masseter muscles and milder tenderness over the temporalis muscles.  He does have a definite click in the left TMJ on excursion movements, but opening it functions rather smoothly.  The right side seemed to function reasonably smoothly.  The incisal opening is 45 mm and excursion movements are 5 mm in each direction.  Intranasal evaluation shows the turbinates are hyperplastic and there is deviation of the nasal septum.  Luminal valves may be somewhat constricted.  He does have about 5 mm of lip incompetence.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the area around the left third molar where the cyst was removed.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Right condyle appears smaller in size compared to the left side.  

Coronal view shows that the nasal septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  The turbinates are quite large and likely obliterate a good part of the nasal airway.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

In axial view, the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  There is significant deviation of the nasal septum.  

Left TMJ sagittal views show a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be fairly adequate joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some anterior beaking and appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination with perhaps some slight flattening.  The posterior and superior joint space appears decreased in some of the view.  The condyle on right side appears smaller than the left side.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has moderate mediolateral width.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit wider than the left side and there appears to be decreased vertical joint space and lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Ryan has over angulation of the maxillary incisors.  He probably has AP maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia.  Oropharyngeal airway however looks relatively normal.  There appears to be a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  Mandibular over jet is about 8 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Ryan would be as follows:

Craniosynostosis of the metopic suture with residual frontal deformity.  
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary transverse hyperplasia.
Class II occlusion.
Left TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction and probable right TMJ dislocation.
Bilateral buccal cross bite in the cuspid-bicuspid area.  
Multiple diastemas in the upper arch.  
Over angulation of the maxillary incisors.
Hypertrophied tonsils.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal septal deviation.
External nasal deformity.
Headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJs.
2.	Surgery stage 1:  Otolaryngology.
	a.	Removal of hypertrophied tonsils.
	b.	Partial resection of hypertrophied turbinates.
	c.	Nasal septoplasty.
3.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Maintain 1 mm of space between the upper 			laterals and cuspids.  Try to transversely narrow the arch in the cuspid-bicuspid 			area.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
4.	Surgery stage 2 (to be performed after his 17th birthday).
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular discs repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 		(dependent on MRI evaluation).
	b.	 Bilateral ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible approximately 15 mm.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction and transversely narrow if indicated.
	e.	External rhinoplasty.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  