SAGE TUNE										11/29/2005

Sage is 28 years old.  She was referred by Dr. William Hang, but she is seeing Drs. Scott and Damian Newhart, 301 Arizona Ave., Ste. 300, Santa Monica, CA 90401.  Sage has had previous orthodontics, stage 1 with the Newharts when she was in the third grade.  Sage is in good health with no major medical problems.  She does smoke about 10 cigarettes per week.  The only previous surgery she has had is that she had some otoplasties. 

MEDICATIONS
Acidophilus.
Calcium.
Vitamin C.
Chinese herbs.
Advil but no more than about twice a month.
 
PRIMARY CONCERNS
Jaw pain.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Lower jaw shifted off to the left side.
Teeth and jaws do not align or fit together.
Cannot breathe through nose.
Bump on the nose. 
Tumor that may be present in the right jaw joint.

Sage's problems began she believes around the age of 8 or so relative to her jaw joint.  At the age of 10, she had trauma to the right jaw joint area.  Later on at the age of 10, she was involved in a motor vehicle accident and was struck on the right side of the face and jaw area.  She had clicking in her joints from about the age of 10 through about 16 and then it stopped.  She predominately has crunching noises in the joints at this time although that has subsided some.  

Her orthodontics was started in July of 2003 so she has had her appliances on for approaching almost 2-1/2 years.  She did have orthodontics previously when she was in the 3rd and 4th grade for stage 1 orthodontics by the Newharts.  She was then placed into retainers and tooth positioners.  She did have physical therapy to her jaws when she was younger but she has not had this for a few years now.

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo but does have some hearing loss that she relates maybe to concerts that she used to go to.  Other joints that bother her include her neck where she may have a herniated disc at C4.  She gets back aches, occasional carpal tunnel.  Her right hip bothers her at times with significant pain and she has problems with her right knee.  She is aware of clenching of her teeth at night and also during the day.  She does not have any problems with headaches.  She gets TMJ pain on an average day at about a level of 4 but it can easily go to a level of 8.  Her average daily pain is at 4, jaw function is 4, diet is 4 and disability is 4.  

In frontal view, Sage has fairly good facial balance in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1.  Maxillary midline is very close to being on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is 5 mm off to the left side.  Chin is approximately 10 mm off to the left side.  As Sage shifts her chin towards the right side about 6 to 7 mm, it does improve her facial symmetry fairly significantly.  
SAGE TUNE					11/29/2005				Page 2


She has a little fullness in the right ramus area compared to the left.  In centric relation, the right side of the mandible is significantly longer than the left side.  The left side is a little bit flattened and there is an increased curvature on the right side.  In profile view, Sage has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  There is a little bit of AP deficiency of maybe 2 to 3 mm.   The lower lip is somewhat inverted.  She has a high mandibular plane facial morphology for the most part.  Chin appears a little bit AP deficient by perhaps 4 to 5 mm.  She has fairly good lip competence.  Chin-neckline is somewhat short and she has some fullness in the submental area.  The chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Sage has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  On the left side, the second bicuspid and first molar are tipped lingually, particularly the second bicuspid.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Right side molar is tipped out in significant buccal inclination.  She has an increased curve of Wilson being much greater on the left side as compared to the right side.  Sage has a full Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and Class I cuspid relationship on the left side.  She is in total buccal cross bite on the left side as well and anterior.  She has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm.  She has a slightly reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch.  Mandibular cuspid appears to be slightly elevated over the first bicuspid and lateral incisor.  Upper lateral incisors appear small indicative of probably a tooth size discrepancy.  There is a significant transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right maxilla being 2 mm lower than the left and in the mandible, the right side is 3 mm lower than the left side.  Intraorally, the oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  The uvula is moderately elongated.  The soft palate may be mildly elongated.  Faucial pillars may be mildly constricted but not too significant.  Sage is not aware of having any problems snoring although she is predominately a mouth breather particularly when she sleeps and she does make mouth breathing noises.  She says she does have problems with moderate to severe daytime somnolence.  She often finds it difficult to wake up in the morning.  She is not aware of sleep apnea problems per se.  She says that sometimes while she is awake she catches herself holding her breath.  Sage apparently drools a lot when she sleeps.  She finds it extremely difficult to breathe through her nose when she is trying to go to sleep.  Her turbinates are quite large and the left side appears to be almost totally blocked.  The septum is deviated off towards the left side some.  The left airway appears fairly well blocked.  The right side is decreased in functional width.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the right TMJ and mild pain and discomfort over the masseters, medial pterygoids, left TMJ, right-sided area, bilateral SCMs and posterior neck area.  On opening, she has some glitches in her jaw joints particularly on the right side.  Maximal incisal opening is about 48 mm and with opening she did get pain in her left masseter muscle area.  She can open about 34 mm at a reasonable comfort.  Right excursive movement is about 11 mm, left excursive movement is about 6 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars but the presence of all the rest of the teeth.  She has a root canal in the maxillary left first molar.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates appear fairly large with the left side showing significantly decreased airway.  The left condyle appears a little bit flattened and with a little bit of sclerotic top on the condyle.  Articular eminence looks moderately steep.  The right joint I cannot see on the Panorex.





SAGE TUNE					11/29/2005				Page 3


Waters view shows that the septum in the bony area is deviated off towards the right side, however, clinically the cartilaginous septum is deviated off towards the left side.  The turbinate on the left side is huge and blocks the airway even back at the posterior aspect of the nose.  On the right side, the turbinate is enlarged but not nearly to the significance to the left side.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit of sclerosis on the top.  The condylar head and neck appears elongated particularly compared to the opposite side.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow and not very long in length.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be a little bit sclerotic on top and there appears to be a little bit of anterior beaking present and perhaps a bit of a decreased joint space vertically.  The change is probably likely from overloading of the left joint from the right side.  On opening, there is good translation of the condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Sage has a high occlusal plane angle.  She has vertical asymmetry with the right mandible being probably 5 mm lower at the inferior border than the left side at the first molar area and back at the angle and it could be as high as 7 to 8 mm vertical difference.  Oropharyngeal airway is about 7 mm at the base of the soft palate and at the base of the tongue is less than 5 mm.  However, the tongue is being held downward and to the floor of the mouth.  Sage is a Class III occlusal relationship and a high occlusal plane angulation.  She has an anterior open bite tendency as well.  

DIAGNOSES 
Right TMJ possible osteochondroma/osteoma and articular disc dislocation.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
Deviated mandibular prognathism.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Accentuated curve of occlusion in upper arch.
Extruded maxillary right second molar.  
TMJ pain.
Myofacial pain.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Anterior open bite of 3 mm.
Anterior crossbite and possible left-sided crossbite.
Class III occlusion likely on the right side and possibly a Class I on the left side.
Deviated nasoseptum.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal airway obstruction.
External nasal deformity.  
Tooth size discrepancy.  
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left maxillary cuspid being 3 mm lower than the left and right mandibular cuspid being 3 mm lower than the left. 
Reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch.
High occlusal plane angulation. 
SAGE TUNE					11/29/2005				Page 4


Sage says she first became aware of her facial asymmetry about 2 to 3 years ago and it has gotten significantly worse since that time indicative of active growth in the right condyle.  

SURGICAL TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.  Try to elevate the incisors 1 mm as there is a reverse curve of Spee present in the arch at this time.
Surgery.
Right TMJ high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to transversely lower the occlusal plane, upright the incisors, level the AP occlusal plane and expand the maxilla.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back onto the facial midline and decrease the occlusal plane angle as well as correct the transverse asymmetry.  
Anterior mandibular horizontal ostectomy to reduce vertical height of the chin. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
External rhinoplasty.
      3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

I discussed with Sage in detail her existing problems, recommended surgical treatment and orthodontic treatment as well as potential risks and complications.  She recorded most of the conversation with a tape recorder for her mother.  In addition, her mother had numerous handwritten questions, probably at least 30 of them or more and we reviewed those questions and answered them to all Sage's satisfaction and hopefully to her mother's satisfaction. 