KELLI VANDIVER								08/08/2011

Birth date 01/27/1968, age 43 years.  Referred by Dr. Brent Bills, 799 S 2nd St # B, Lander, WY 82520-3703.  

Kelli has been aware of having TMJ problems since she was 12 years old in 1980 of unknown etiology.  She was involved in a vehicle accident in 1987 when they hit a deer and she got whiplash injury.  In 1989, she underwent bilateral TMJ surgery probably for attempted disc repositioning by Dr. John Delfino in St. Louis.  In 1990, she had arthroscopy of the left joint to release some scar tissue.  She had splints from the age of 12 until she was about 24 years old.  She gets headaches 2 or 3 times per week that she rates at a level of 6 and they occur predominantly in the back of her head and then come up over the top of her head.  She rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 3, jaw function and diet at 4, and disability at 2.  She gets occasional earaches, tinnitus, vertigo.  She feels as though she has some hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her knees and her neck.  She is aware of clenching some at nighttime and also during the day.  She has some mild snoring, some moderate daytime tiredness and reports rare occasions of sleep apnea episodes.  She has a mild sleep disorder.  She breathes predominantly through her nose.  

In frontal view, Kelli has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -1.  The maxillary midline is about 1.5 mm off to the left side as is the mandibular dental midline.  Chin is probably about 6 mm off to the left.  In profile view, the maxilla and upper lip are retruded about 4 to 5 mm and the chin is retruded about 10 to 12 mm.  The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angles are fairly well defined.  The commissure on the left side is about 2 to 3 mm higher than the right side.  The inferior border of the mandible on the left side is probably about 10 mm higher than the right side.  Intraorally, Kelli has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars and has all of her teeth in the upper arch as well.  She has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side with a tendency towards a cross bite on that side.  On the left side, she is fairly close to being Class I as well.  Actually her mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Kelli has a significant cant to her occlusal plane with the left cuspid being 4 mm higher than the right cuspid.  There is significant dental asymmetry in both the maxillary and mandibular arches with the left cuspids being about 3 mm posterior to the right cuspids.  There is a fairly significant yaw in the maxilla and mandible with both being shifted off towards the right side at least 3 mm.  In frontal view, the right cheek is about 3 to 4 mm more full than the left side.  Because of her asymmetries, Kelli finds it difficult to get glasses to fit.  She does have about 1 mm of vertical over bite.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness in her shoulders and in the right TMJ area.  On opening, she has a click in the left joint at 10 mm and closing click at 5 mm.  On excursion, she has clicks in both joints.  The maximal opening was 43 mm, opening without discomfort 21 mm.  The excursion movement to the right 5 mm, to the left 9 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Apparently, the upper third molars were developed and were extracted, but she never develop lower third molars.  Both condyles appear arthritic.  The left condyle demonstrates a greater amount of condylar resorption as compared to the right side.  

Coronal view shows that the septum deviates a little bit towards the right side, but then significantly off to the left side.  The turbinates are fairly large and appear to block a good part of the airway.  The sinuses appear relatively clear except a little fullness in one area of the ethmoid sinus on the left side.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  In this view, the septum is reasonably straight with just a small bone spur off to the right side.  Turbinates appear enlarged and appear to block most of the functional airway.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has lost significant volume.  There is anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow.  The joint space appears fairly good, although the condyle is somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa and out laterally there is extreme flattening of the condylar head.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has lost significant vertical volume, although not as much as the opposite side.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking present.  There is decreased posterior and superior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow, although fairly long in length.  The condylar head and volume is somewhat larger than the left side.  

Left TMJ coronal tomogram shows that there has been significant loss of volume from the condyle.  The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.  There is decreased vertical joint space. The condylar head appears somewhat like a mushroom in this view. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic and demonstrates loss of volume.  The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  There are areas of erosive lesions in the top of the condyle at the lateral aspect of the joint and also in the mid portion of the condyle.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a retruded maxilla and mandible with a high occlusal plane angle.  Head may have been tilted just slightly.  There is a difference at the occlusal plane level of probably 3 mm and at the inferior border the left side is shorter vertically by about 6 mm.  It is possible the head may have been tipped just slightly.  AP dimension of the airway measures about 6.5 mm at the soft palate level and almost 7 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnosis for Kelli would be:

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with condylar resorption greater on the left side than the right side. 
Facial asymmetry with the left side of the face being 4 mm shorter vertically at the occlusal plane and 8 to 10 mm vertically shorter at the inferior border of the mandible. 
High occlusal plane angle.
Cross bite tendency on the right side.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Hypertrophied inferior turbinates.
Deviated nasal septum.
Mild crowding in the dental arches.
Dental arch asymmetry with the left cuspids being 2 to 3 mm posterior to the right cuspids.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 4 mm higher than the right side.
Posterior yaw with the maxilla and mandible being rotated towards the right side 3 to 4 mm.
TMJ pain and headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they 		are necessary in order to correct any transverse or vertical occlusal 				discrepancies.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a 				counterclockwise direction as well as transversely leveling the occlusal 			plan utilizing TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
	b.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward in a counterclockwise 				direction and level it transversely.
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	e.	Consider nasal septoplasty.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  