COLLETTE VANDENBERG							02/26/2010

Collette is 57 years old and referred by Urszula Firlik, DDS, 6225 W. River Drive NE, Plainfield Township, Michigan.  Collette does not have any overt TMJ symptoms.  When she was about 12 years old, she had orthodontics done and wore head gear for one year to retard upper jaw growth.  Then at age 27 through 29, she had orthodontics a second time with extraction of the maxillary bicuspids and retraction of the upper anterior teeth.  At age 30 to 32, she had orthodontics done again.  She has developed depression since having the upper teeth extracted and the upper front teeth have retruded.

Collette has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 0, disability at 7.  Collette is  professional violinist and because of the severely retruded lower jaw has difficulties supporting her instrument.  She has no problems with earaches, but has tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her fingers, wrists, neck, knees, ankles, and back.  She does have mild depression.  She was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis 2 years ago.  She has dry mouth, dry eyes, and has symptoms similar to Sjogren’s disease.  She has had pneumonia.  The only medication she currently takes is pilocarpine 7.5 mg to help with her dry mouth and dry eyes.  

 Primary concerns that Collette has include the following:

Severe sleep apnea. 
Snoring.
Frequent awakenings at night that occur 2 to 7 times per night.
She is concerned that she could have a heart attack or stroke.
Difficulties breathing through the nose.  
 
CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Collette has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline and chin midline are pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular midline is about 1 mm off to the right side.  In profile view, the maxilla is retruded 10-12 mm and the mandible is retruded about 25-30 mm.  Intraorally, Collette has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some moderate crowding.  She has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she is missing first bicuspids but has spaces pretty much closed.  She has a Class I cuspid, Class II molar relationship bilaterally.  She had a slight end-on Class II perhaps on the right side by a couple of millimeters.  She has about 3 mm anterior deep bite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy and normal.  Evaluation of the nose shows that she has moderately enlarged turbinates.  The luminal valves are constricted.  The columella is moderately wide and the nostrils are narrow.  To palpation, she has moderate to high moderate pain to palpation over the TMJ muscles, TMJs, and milder tenderness over the masseter muscles.  The maximal incisal opening is 34 mm.  The excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction. 

RADIOGRAPH EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars but all the rest of the teeth are present except for the maxillary first bicuspids that are also absent.

Coronal view shows that the inferior turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Sinuses are relatively clear except for a little bit of fluid in the left sinus floor.  

Axial view shows the turbinates are moderately enlarged and the airway appears somewhat constricted.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a joint with advanced arthritis present with eburnation of the condylar head and the fossa. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a slightly more advanced degenerative change affecting both the fossa and the condyle.  There is significant anterior beaking in both joints.  There is decreased vertical and posterior joint space.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has severe arthritis with loss of vertical volume in some areas.  It looks as though there could be bone-on-bone contact.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  There is significantly decreased joint space. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows advanced arthritis in the joint.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  There are some pseudocysts in the condyles, being greater on the left side as compared to the right side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Collette has a severely retruded maxilla and mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 mm at the soft palate level and about 3 mm at the base of the tongue.  The tongue appears to fill the majority of the oral cavity.  

Basic diagnoses for Collette would be as follows:

Severe sleep apnea. 
Rheumatoid arthritis. 
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis. 
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal dimension 11 mm).
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia. 
Severe mandibular AP hypoplasia. 
Hypertrophied nasal turbinates creating nasal airway obstruction. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots 		distally in case interdental osteotomies are necessary.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts 		total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction.
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
	e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.