DANIELLE VENUS									11-18-04

Danielle is 31 years old.

Patient History

Her TMJ problems began about 5 years ago when she developed clicking and popping of unknown etiology. She developed a few situations where she would lock open, unable to close. She had a lot of clicking and popping in her jaw joints. She has had splint therapy now for two years. She has had a lot of physical therapy as well as chiropractic treatment performed. 

She has problems with earaches but no tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. The only other joint that really bothers her is her left knee. She does have some bulging cervical discs but no associated symptomatology. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. She gets headaches at a level of 5 in the temporalis and posterior head area. Her daily TMJ pain is at about a level of 7, and it is constant with it being worse on the right side than the left side, although the left side has increased significantly lately in its intensity. The average facial pain is at a level of 9, jaw function on an average day is at 7, but it at times gets to 9. Diet is 9 and disability is at 8. 

Patient Concerns

Constant fairly severe TMJ pain
Headaches
Severe myofascial pain
Facial muscle twitching
Throbbing pain through the head and neck area
Cannot talk and has actually had to change her job to help decrease the amount of talking that she does
She cannot sing, and she uses to love to sing
Extreme difficulties eating
Difficulties breathing through her nose
Snoring problems
Earaches 

Current Medications

Robaxin 750 mg q.i.d. 
Tylenol p.r.n. pain 
Ibuprofen p.r.n. pain 
Aleve p.r.n. pain 

Clinical Examination

Incisal opening is 29 mm, and she feels that she has no side-to-side movement. To her self palpation, she has rather high moderate to low severe pain over the masseter muscles and TMJs and moderate pain over the posterior neck muscles and temporalis muscles. Looking at her occlusion, she appears that she has bilateral posterior open bites. 

Basic Diagnoses 
Based on radiographic, dental model, and MRI (poor quality) evaluations, her diagnoses are as follows: 

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
Bilateral posterior open bite
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJ but high quality and including sagittal and coronal views

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch 

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to improve occlusion and make room within the joint spaces to accommodate the discs

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Danielle understands that if the discs are not salvageable based on the new MRI that she may need disc replacement or total joint prostheses. She very much wants to have the surgery done before the end of the year if possible. 