BOBBIE VAN BOGAERT							10/19/2011

She is now 68 years old, birth date 01/07/1943.  We did her surgery on her joints one at a time apparently, one in 1990 and the other side in 1991 or so, but she could not remember the exact dates.  She medically has lots of problems ongoing.  She uses a CPAP at night.  She has glaucoma and cataracts.  She has congestive heart failure.  She has multiple joint problems including her knees, hips, shoulders, left big toe, right elbow, ankles, and sacroiliac area.  She gets headaches about 3 to 4 times per month at a level of 5 in the temporal area.  She has no TMJ pain and no myofascial pain or headaches in her usual day.  She rates her jaw function at 7, diet at 5, disability at 3.  The incisal opening is 32 mm, but excursion movements are less than 1 mm in each direction.  Occlusion is very good with a good Class I with a 2 mm overbite.  To palpation, she has moderate tenderness over the SCMs, posterior neck, left shoulder, but very high moderate to low severe pain over the left TMJ and mild tenderness over the temporalis area.  She gets earaches sometimes and she has constant tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  She has some hearing loss.  She is allergic to cats, dust, cigarette smoke, Albuterol and Patanol.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and also in the daytime.  She wears a nasal CPAP at night, gets shooting pain in her eyes and she has narrow angle glaucoma.  She has been getting injections into her right knee.  She says she has osteoporosis and osteoarthritis and she particularly has osteoarthritis in her neck.  This may be the cause of some of her pain around the head and neck area.  She has fractured her shoulder and her toes in the past.  In late 2010, she fractured off the maxillary left crown.  She wanted to know if that was related to the surgery and I told her I did not feel it was related to the surgery, but could be related to her clenching.  She does wear a night guard, but she lost it and she is having a new one made now.  She was diagnosed with Chlamydia pneumoniae in 2000 and was told she had hypersensitivity pneumonitis.  She said she got the flu while she was in Dallas with one of her surgeries.  I would like to get an I-CAT of her TMJ joints.  I will try to locate someone in the San Diego area that could help us with that.  She is to keep in touch with me.  She does have a good sense of humor yet, but it is difficult for her to get around.  She uses a cane.  She had to quit nursing a number of years ago, in fact, shortly after our surgery as she had a nervous breakdown.  We need to try to find someone in the San Diego area to get an I-CAT on her.  