FRANCES VALENE									02-20-04

Frances is 50 years old.

Patient History

Her problems began in 1982, either following third molar removal or following an MVA where she was rear ended. She developed severe headaches and decreased jaw function. She has had numerous surgeries, and we feel we have most of them listed here, which include the follow:
06/13/86:  Bilateral TMJ Proplast Teflon implants
07/11/86:  Replacement of left Proplast Teflon implant
02/25/87:  Right TMJ removal of PT implant and dermal graft
12/01/87:  Left TMJ removal of PT implant and dermal graft
Early ‘90s:  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with rib grafts
10/10/94:  Recontouring of the rib grafts
’96 or ’97:  LeFort I osteotomy
2000:  Removal of screws and wires from the jaw area

Frances has continuous headaches at a level of 5, but they average around an 8, and they occur all throughout the head including the frontal, temporal, posterior head, and top of the head. The headaches can escalate to 10. When she is relaxed, she rates her TMJ pain at about a level of 6, but following jaw function, it can easily escalate to a 10. On an average day, her pain levels are about a level of 6. Jaw function is at 9, diet at 8, and disability at 7.

Patient Concerns

TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Cannot chew
Decreased incisal opening
Severe pressure behind the right eye
Teeth and jaws don’t fit together
Fairly severe crepitus in the joints with jaw function
Earaches 
Ringing in the ears
Lightheadedness and dizziness
Hearing loss
Daytime clenching and inability to get a comfortable jaw position
Severe snoring
Daytime tiredness
Difficulty sleeping

Medications

Ambien 5 mg occasional at night
Zoloft
Zyrtec
Zocar
Tylenol PM
Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Frances has fairly good facial balance in the middle and upper third face. She has some increased fullness on the right side of her face particularly over the parotid area. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Nasal tip is a little bit off to the left side maybe a millimeter. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other, but the lower dental midline is off to the left side about 2 mm. Actually, maxillary midline is off to the right side about a millimeter. Right eye might be elevated about a millimeter or so compared to the left side. 

In profile view, the maxilla is retruded probably I would say close to 8 mm. Mandible is retruded by about at least 15 mm or more. She has an obtuse nasolabial angle. Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale. There is no chin-neck angle or chin-neckline. She holds her breath when sleeping. Her husband, Larry, has observed the severe snoring problems and the apneic episodes. She wakes up periodically at night. She has difficulty sleeping. She states that she cannot sleep more than three or four hours at a time. 

Intraorally, Frances has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has an accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch. Some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. Crown on the mandibular left first molar. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Appears to have a little bit of perhaps an accentuated curve of occlusion. Appears that she probably has a tooth-size discrepancy secondary to small upper lateral incisors. In centric relation, she has a Class III cuspid relationship on the left side of probably 3 mm and a tendency toward a crossbite posteriorly. She has a crown on the maxillary left first molar. On the right side, she also tends into a crossbite tendency. She has almost a full Class III molar relationship on the right side and about a 4-mm Class III relationship in the cuspid area. When she bites together, she occludes on her right maxillary second bicuspid, first and second molar and mandibular first and second molar. On the left side, she occludes on the first and second molars, and she also occludes on her right maxillary central and mandibular central and lateral incisors. All other teeth are out of occlusion. She probably has about a 4-mm open bite in the cuspid areas. Oropharynx appears clear and tissues appear normal.

To palpation, she has severe pain over the masseter muscles, medial pterygoids, TMJs, styloid areas, moderate pain over the temporalis muscles, and mild to moderate pain over the SCMs. She gets muscle spasms in the left masseter muscle causing her face to quiver. Maximal incisal opening is 20 mm. She could open to about 14 mm without excruciating pain. Excursive movements are probably less than 1 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that she is missing all four third molars. She has root canals on the maxillary left first and second bicuspids, first molar, mandibular left first molar, and maxillary right second bicuspid. She has two screws in the mandible on each side. She has probably the remnants of rib grafts left in her joints with severe bone development and bony ankylosis around the joint area. She has a lot of heterotopic bone in the area as well. Difficult to make out any reference of the fossas. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows just massive bony formation around the joint area. It appears that any rib graft that may be in place was placed anterior to the articular eminence perhaps, and then she just has a massive amount of heteroptic bone formation posteriorly in the fossa area as well as coming down anterior and below the internal meatus of the ear. Styloid process appears quite calcified as well.
Left TMJ tomogram actually looks better than the right side. There appears to be a pseudoarthrosis between some heterotopic bone up in the fossa and the lower jaw component. However, there is probably bony ankylosis and maybe just a pseudoseparation. Bone screws can be seen in the mandibular ramus area. The styloid process is seen but not as evident on this side as the opposite side. 

Opening views show virtually no movement of the condyles. Could be just a slight increase in the pseudoankylosis area in the mandible on the left side in the open views compared to the closed view. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. Turbinates are of moderate size, and it looks like the right one has been reduced. Nasal airway looks satisfactory. Maxilla looks fairly symmetrical. Mandibular teeth are a little bit off toward the left side. 

Cephalometrically, Frances has pretty close to a Class I skeletal relationship but has a high mandibular plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 mm at the soft palate level and 5 mm at the base of the tongue. Transverse occlusal plane appears fairly level. She does have a little bit of a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2+ mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Multiple previous TMJ surgeries including the placement of Proplast Teflon implants, dermal grafts, and rib grafts (approximately 6 to 7 per side)
Bilateral TMJ severe ankylosis 
AP mandibular deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Class III end-on occlusion 
Posterior crossbite tendency and end-on incisor relationship
Bilateral buccal open bites of 4 mm
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2+ mm
Mild crowding, upper and lower anterior arches
Accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch
Severe TMJ pain
Severe headaches 
Severe myofascial pain
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Sleep disorder
Sleep apnea symptoms 
Snoring
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Severe masticatory dysfunction
Earaches 
Tinnitus
Vertigo

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up at least 0.5 mm of space around each upper lateral incisor to help compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing 1.5 to 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the tooth-size discrepancy and to help keep from flaring the incisors too far forward
Can use bonded brackets on all of the teeth but could possibly require a band on the mandibular left first molar and maxillary left first molar since those are crowns. Place appliances on the second molars but not necessary to incorporate them into the arch wire. This is to prevent untoward orthodontic movements

CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ extensive debridement 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

General dental treatment as necessary to preserve and maintain the teeth

