MIA VENO										10/09/2006

Mia is 14 years old, referred by Dr. Clay Pickering, Denton, TX.  Mia has had her tonsils out and she had some juvenile polyps that she had removed from the rectal area.  She has had some tubes in her ears as well.  She has a history of exercise-induced asthma but this past year has done very well and has not required any medications.  

Mia does have some snoring at night when she sleeps.  She also has some pain in the right jaw joint although not real severe.  Her joint problems as far as she is aware began this year.  She does get headaches at about a level of 7.  She gets headaches 3 to 4 days per week and they usually occur on top of her head.  The headaches can go through the temple area and also into the frontal area.  For the headaches she takes Tylenol or Aleve.  She does get earaches occasionally.  She rates her headaches about a level of 7 in the frontal, temporal and particularly on the top of the head where they most commonly occur.  She rates her TMJ pain at 1, average daily pain at 3, jaw function, diet and disability at 0.  

On frontal view, Mia has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 2 mm.  Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 1 mm off towards the right side.  Chin is about 2 to 3 mm off to the left side.  In profile view, she has fairly good facial balance.  There is a little bit of fullness in the submental area.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  A little bit of crowding in the lower arch on the right side that may account for some of the dental midline shift.  The lower incisors appear a little bit in lingual inclination.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  There is just a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and she has posterior crossbite on the left side involving the second bicuspid and the molars.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 2 mm lower than the left side.  On the right side, the mandibular cuspid may be about 3 mm compared to the left side.  Intraorally, she has huge hypertrophied tonsils with the right one being significantly larger than the left one almost going to the midline.  This could be the major contributing factor to her snoring.  She has had an adenoidectomy previously performed.  The soft palate appears relatively normal in length but the faucial pillars are severely constricted again as a result of the hypertrophied tonsils.  Intranasally, she has deviated nasal septum off towards the left side.  Turbinates appear relatively moderate in size.  There appears to be decreased functional airway on the left side as compared to the right side.  I can only evaluate the turbinates anteriorly and could not see them at the posterior aspects.  Anteriorly in her dentition she has a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm.  Excursive movements are 9 mm in each direction. 

Dental model analysis of models taken in February of 2005 shows that she has posterior crossbites on the left side in the first molar and on the right side in the second bicuspid area.  In addition, she has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.  She has some crowding in the lower anterior arch on the right side and has a mandibular midline shift to the right about 1 mm.  She has a slight Class III cupid molar relationship.


MIA VENO					10/09/2006				Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Mia has 4 impacted third molars.  She has an enlarged condyle on the right side.  The mandible on the right side may be just slightly elongated by a couple of mm.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Some significant asymmetry in the mandible with the right side being a little bit lower than the left side.  Nasal septum may be deviated just a little bit to the left.  It appears to have adequate airway on the right side of the nose but the left side may be a little bit blocked.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be good joint space between the condyle and the fossa.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is enlarged with anterior projection.  The condylar neck appears a little bit increased in width.  The joint space otherwise looks reasonably good.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is a little bit difference in vertical height at the inferior border of the mandible about 4 to 5 mm.  Otherwise, she is basically a Class I cuspid molar.  Oropharyngeal airway looks adequate.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Right mandibular condylar osteochondroma.
Right mandibular hyperplasia.
Right maxillary vertical hyperplasia.
Slight Class III occlusal relationship.
Crowding in the lower anterior arch.
Mandibular dental midline shifted 1 to 2 mm to the right with the chin shifted 2 to 3 mm to the left. 
Nasal septal deviation.
Severely hypertrophied tonsils. 
Oropharyngeal airway obstruction.
 Snoring.
 Headaches.  
 Impacted third molars x4. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open about 1 mm space around each of the upper lateral incisors.  Tip the lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomy. 
Align and level mandibular arch. 


MIA VENO					10/09/2006				Page 3

Surgery.
Right mandibular low condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to transversely level the maxilla, expand it and increase the occlusal plane angle slightly.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomy to shift the mandible onto the facial midline.
Surgical removal of 4 bony impacted third molars.
Consider nasal septoplasty.
Consider partial turbinectomies. 
Bilateral tonsillectomies (by Dr. Weprin.)
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
