B140
B140 is 28 years old. B140 is basically a self-referral. B140's TMJ problems began to the best of her knowledge about 5 years ago shortly after she had a tonsillectomy performed. She had a lot of pain in the joints at that time and clicking in the joints. It was not until 3 years ago that she began noticing a change in her occlusion and jaw alignment. She feels she is still in a progressive state of her lower jaw and occlusion continue to change. Most of the pain has subsided that she did have initially. She has no problems with headaches, rates her TMJ pain at 2, but on the average day has no significant pain around the head and neck area. She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 3, disability at 4. She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, nor hearing loss. The only other joint that bothers her is her right knee where she collects fluid and she has had it drained seven times. The only treatment she has had to date is Invisaline which ended 3 months ago. She has been to see seven doctors in reference to her current situation. She has had a number of different opinions and recommendations.

CLINICAL EVALUATION. In frontal view, B140 has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face, but has some asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is 25 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 5 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline and so is the mandibular dental midline and chin. She appears to have a little bit more fullness on the right side of her face than the left by probably about 3 or 4 mm. In profile, the maxilla appears to be retruded about 4 to 5 mm. The chin appears to be retruded about 20 mm. The chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not defined. Intraorally, B140 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars in place. She has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being about 4 to 5 mm Class II and she has an overjet of about 4 mm. She has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm. In centric relation, she occludes only her first and second molars bilaterally. B140 has a posterior yaw with the maxilla and mandible being rotated off towards the right side about 2 mm. Transversely, the occlusal plane is level. Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy except the soft palate is a little bit shorter on the left side than the right side and it appears to be a little scar there probably related to the tonsillectomy. B140 has a wide columella and narrow nostrils. Holding the nostrils open enabled her to breathe much easier through her nose. In profile, B140 tends to tip her head up significantly and posture her chin forward and has a slight head postured forward neck position. To palpation, she has some very mild tenderness over the masseters and TMJ area. Maximum opening is 43 mm, excursion movement to the right 7 mm, to the left 8 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all third molars. She has severe condylar resorption present bilaterally. Turbinates appear moderate in size. The sinuses appear reasonably clear. Coronal radiograph shows that the sinuses are relatively clear with just some slight increased thickness of the mucosal on the floor of the left sinus. Inferior turbinates are quite large.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear in this perspective, but the turbinates are quite large and appear to block off a good portion of the airway.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows severe destruction of the condyles with sclerosis on the head of the condyle. There is increased joint space. Articular eminences are fairly shallow.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a severe resorption of the condyle and condylar neck. The articular eminence is relatively flat. There is increased joint space.

Left TMJ coronal view shows severe destruction of the condyles. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. There is increased vertical joint space present.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone more loss of bone than it appears than the left side. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. There is increased joint space vertically.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that her mandible is postured forward and she was not in centric relation when the x-ray was taken. She has a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway is significantly constricted with an AP airway of only about 3 mm at the base of the tongue. At the soft palate level, she has about 4 mm of airway space. The lower incisors appear over angulated. The upper incisors appear somewhat vertical in orientation. She has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.

Dental model analysis shows there is not any significant tooth size discrepancy, but there is a transverse deficiency in the maxilla. The transverse deficiency is approximately 5 mm.

B140 has had a rheumatology workup. She has HLA-B27 antibodies that have been detected.
Basic diagnoses for B140 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption compatible with connective tissue autoimmune process.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia. Maxillary AP posterior vertical hypoplasia, but anterior maxillary vertical hyperplasia and transverse hypoplasia. Hypertrophied turbinates. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Wide columella and narrow nostrils.
Class II occlusion.
Anterior open bite.
Occluding only on the first and second molars bilaterally with all other teeth out of occlusion.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
3. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and expand. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Bilateral mandibular coronoidotomies. e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. f.	Columella reconstruction.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B140 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that lost significant volume vertically and mediolaterally. The head of the condyle is very sclerotic and this extends down into the neck. There is decreased vertical joint space towards the medial aspect of the joint. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. It is difficult to identify discal tissue.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost significant vertical and mediolateral volume. The head of the condyle is quite sclerotic and this continues down into the neck of the condyle. The joint space appears somewhat decreased. Difficult to identify discal tissue.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has lost significant volume vertically and anteroposteriorly. The head of the condyle and remaining neck are quite sclerotic. The articular eminence has a relatively shallow inclination. There appears to be some remnants of the disc anterior and sitting beneath the articular eminence. Otherwise, there is no discal tissue present. At the most lateral aspect of the joint, there appears to be some remnant of disc sitting beneath the articular eminence. On opening, there is restricted translation.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has lost significant vertical volume and some anteroposterior dimension. The articular eminence is moderately shallow. The condylar head is sclerotic. There may be some discal tissue anterior beneath the articular eminence, but severely degenerated. At the most lateral aspect of the joint, there is some remnant of discal tissue, but severely deformed and degenerated. On opening, there is restricted translation.

The imaging in both joints is suggestive of rheumatoid arthritis.
IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ severe condylar resorption and degeneration of the displaced articular discs. MRI changes are suggestive of rheumatoid arthritis or a similar connective tissue autoimmune disease.

B140 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view is very sclerotic with no evidence of medullary bone. The lateral rim of the fossa is very flat. There is an amorphous type of tissue within the joint space and no significant evidence of distal tissue present. The mediolateral width of the condyle is very narrow. There is evidence of vertical as well as mediolateral condylar resorption.

Right TMJ coronal view is very sclerotic with no evidence of medullary bone. The lateral rim of the fossa is very flat. There is an amorphous type of tissue within the joint space and no significant evidence of distal tissue present. The mediolateral width of the condyle is very narrow. There is evidence of vertical as well as mediolateral condylar resorption.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is very sclerotic with virtually no evidence of medullary bone. There is significant loss vertically and anteroposteriorly of condylar volume. The articular eminence is moderately flat. There is no evidence of discal tissue.

Right TMJ sagittal view likewise shows a condyle that appears to have lost the vertical aspect of the condyle and some narrowness anteroposteriorly. The articular eminence is moderately flat. There is amorphous tissue within the joint space with virtually no evidence of discal tissue present. There does not appear to be any significant inflammatory process present. On opening, there is restricted translation of the condyle in both joints.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ severe condylar resorption with sclerosis, absence of the articular disc, and amorphous tissue surrounding the condyles compatible with connective tissue autoimmune disease.

