MARIALAINA VANDERWERF							09-28-04

Marialaina is 48 years old and referred by Dr. Ronald Thoman, Honolulu, Hawaii.

Patient History

Marialaina’s problems began in about 1984 secondary to trauma from spousal abuse. She was given some steroid injections, but this did not improve the situation. In 1984, she had bilateral Proplast Teflon IPI implants placed. Within a week, she had developed a significant allergy to the materials, and they were removed one week after they were placed. About four weeks later, Silastic implants were placed bilaterally. She has had no other surgeries on the TMJs. In about 1998, she began losing her teeth. 

Marialaina currently has an infection in the right TMJ area probably involving the Silastic implant. She has had a number of other medical problems including the following:
Degenerative disc disease in her back, and she has already had four back surgeries
Ob/Gyn problems for which she has had numerous surgical procedures, the first one at the age of 14 for a hymenectomy 
Thyroid goiter removed in 1994
Right knee arthroscopy
One ovary removed in 1993 secondary to an ovarian cyst, although she has had several bouts of ovarian cysts


Other Systems

She has had joint problems involving the back and her right knee. She has had urinary tract infection x 1 and usually does get up one time at night to urinate. She has had significant reproductive system problems including when she had her periods that they were very regular with excessive pain. She has had significant fertility problems, and this required the numerous gynecological procedures. She has had five miscarriages. She has had six children through five pregnancies, and they are age 18, 17, 16, 14, and twins at age 12. She probably had severe peridontosis resulting in the loss of most of her teeth. She had conjunctivitis x 1. She gets dry eyes occasionally. No significant sinus problems. She does smoke a half pack of cigarettes per day and has done that for about 30 years. No significant ear symptoms except for the infection in the preauricular area for which she has been on antibiotics for almost a full year. She had bronchitis as a child x 2 and pneumonia at about the age of 3 years old. She was diagnosed with asthma as a child. No GI problems. No STDs. She does have fatigue. She has had a previous thyroid goiter that was removed. She has three brain aneurysms that will require surgery apparently, but they cannot do that treatment now because of the infection in the right TMJ. She has been exposed to a fair number of birds particularly in her early teens. For about three or four years she had at least three parakeets, a canary, and a parrot. She had a cockatiel for about six months when she was 24 years old. On the farm they live on, they have had some chickens as well. Some of these chickens were pets. She has always had cats, and some of these ate birds. She has had dogs, at least 12 of them, and some of those may have eaten birds as well. Relative to implants, she had bilateral TMJ Proplast Teflon IPIs and Silastic implants. She has titanium cages in her back at L4-L5. She does also have hepatitis C. She had partial treatment and couldn’t complete the treatment because it was intolerable. She gets headaches about two times a week predominantly in the temporal area at a level of 5. She has constant TMJ pain at about a level of 4, and the worst it gets is 6. Her average daily pain is at 3. She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 4, and disability at 3. Her pain levels were registered while on the significant pain medications including MS Contin 200 mg t.i.d. and MSIR 30 mg 1 to 2 tablets t.i.d. 




Current Medications

MS Contin 200 mg t.i.d.
MSIR 30 mg 1 to 2 tablets t.i.d. p.r.n. pain
Soma 350 mg q.i.d. 
Paxil ER 25 mg q.d. 
Dicloxacillin 800 mg q.i.d. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, upper lip length is about 24 mm. She has no maxillary incisors present. She has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. 

In profile, she has fairly good facial balance. Somewhat overclosed vertically. Acute nasolabial angle is present. 

Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular left molars and on the right side missing bicuspids and molars. In the upper arch, she has a right lateral incisor, bicuspid, and a retained cuspid root. On the left side, she has the same teeth with the crowns still there, although the left lateral incisor has a large carious lesion. Marialaina was probably pretty close to a Class I cuspid-molar relationship when she had all of her teeth. She has maybe just a slight tendency toward Class III from some slight overclosure but otherwise fairly close to Class I. Oropharynx appears relatively normal with just some enlargement of the uvula and soft palate, and faucial pillars may be slightly constricted but not too significantly. She does feel that her chin is a little bit more retruded than it used to be, and this is probably due to loss of vertical height of the condyles. Maximal incisal opening is about 30 mm. She can open to about 25 mm without severe pain, but when she hits 30, it is very painful for her. Excursive movements to the right are about 5 mm and to the left 3 mm, but this is also painful for her. 

To palpation, she has high moderate pain to palpation around the masseters, TMJs, and moderate pain over the styloid areas and medial pterygoid areas. With jaw function, she has some crepitus in both joints being a little bit greater on the left side as compared to the right side. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular left molars, mandibular right bicuspids and molars, maxillary left molars, and maxillary right second bicuspid and molars. She has remaining in the upper arch her lateral incisors, cuspids, and first bicuspids. The crown on the right cuspid is gone. There is a large carious lesion in the left lateral incisor. Sinuses appear relatively clear as does the nasal airway. She has metal wires x 2 in each joint. Condyles look extremely eroded. Appears to be significant loss of vertical height of the condyles bilaterally. Articular eminences are extremely flat particularly on the right side. 

Waters view shows that the septum is reasonably straight, and the turbinates appear moderate in size. Sinuses appear clear. Frontal sinuses are fairly large particularly in a vertical direction. Jaw structures appear fairly symmetric. 

Left TMJ tomograms show virtually no joint space vertically. Condyles appear postured forward in the fossa. Condyle does appear broader in this radiograph than on the MRI. However, joint space is extremely narrow. Bone is more difficult to identify on this side relative to the boundaries of the condyle, but appears there is extreme loss of joint space. Appears to be significant loss of vertical height of the condyle. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the tongue appears to fill the whole oral cavity. Appears that there is significant overangulation of the lower incisors. Has some bimax protrusive qualities. Oropharyngeal airway space may be slightly decreased at the soft palate/posterior pharyngeal wall area. From the base of the tongue, the posterior pharyngeal wall looks well within normal limits. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with the presence of Silastic and foreign body giant cell reaction
Recurrent infection by history of right TMJ probably associated with the Silastic implant
Severe TMJ pain
Severe headaches
Severe myofascial pain
Severe masticatory dysfunction
Missing mandibular left molars, mandibular right bicuspids and molars, maxillary right second bicuspid, molars, and central incisor, and missing left central incisor, second bicuspid, and molars
Fractured off crown of maxillary right cuspid
Recommended Treatment

Surgery, Stage I
Removal of Silastic implant and conservative debridement of the fossa

CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery, Stage II 
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)
Construction of surgical stabilizing appliances

Dental reconstruction that could include implants, bone grafts, and dentures with or without implants

