SARA VANCOTT									11/13/2007

Sara is 22 years old and is referred by Dr. Thomas Pascoe, 21 Public Ave., Montrose, PA 18801.  She has had a previous tonsillectomy, wisdom teeth removed and Lasik eye surgery.  She takes Soma 350 mg 4 per day for 6 days and then goes off it and then starts it again.  She currently is not taking it.  She has an allergic reaction to penicillin and Biaxin.  Sara included a detailed history of the onset of her problems and treatment today.  Sara had orthodontics in about 1995 to 1996 for probably two to three years.  The onset of her current problems began when she was 20 years old in August of 2005 on a return trip from New Guinea.  She was tested for malaria, migraines, sinus congestion, neurological problems etc. with no positive diagnoses made.  She has had a brain MRI and they did find about a 1 cm lesion in her frontal lobe but apparently assumed that it was benign and not causing headache problem.  She apparently had a benign parotid tumor on the left side and she has had MRIs and a biopsy taken of that area.  It apparently is getting smaller in size.  She bought a SleepRight mouthguard that seemed to help her for a while but then the pain came back again.  When she sings the headaches seem to develop but sometimes not always right away and there may be a 24-hour delay.  She now has disarticulating splint that does not seem to help much but she does wear it at night.  The splint does disarticulate the teeth by providing an interference with the incisors.  It fits on the lower anterior teeth.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Headache pain in the forehead and back of her head.
Pain on the left side of the TMJ shooting down her jawline.
Nothing has been able to give her more than temporary relief since August of 2005. 
Inability to sing without creating pain.

CLINICAL EVALUATION:
In frontal view, Sara does have some facial asymmetry.  Left mandibular angle area is probably 4 to 5 mm more prominent laterally than the right side.  Upper lip length is 19 mm and upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted 2 mm off to the right side.  She has a Class I occlusion and centric occlusion on the left side and Class II end-on occlusion on the right side.  In centric relation, she has a slight Class II occlusion on the left side of maybe 2 to 3 mm.  On the right side it is closer to probably 5 to 6 mm.  In centric relation she occludes only on her right molar teeth.  All other teeth are out of occlusion and she actually has an open bite posteriorly on the right side of 1 to 2 mm.  

Sara rates her headaches when they get pretty bad at a level of 8 in the frontal, temple and posterior head area.  It is like a band of pressure around her head.  It can create nausea when it gets bad.  She rates her TMJ pain at 4 and is greater on the left side than the right side and it comes and goes.  Average daily pain is 2, jaw function 0, diet at 2 and disability at 6.  Incisal opening is 57 mm.  Excursive movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  On opening, the left joint functions smoothly but on the right side she gets a click at about 40 to 45 mm of opening but I do not detect any click on closing.  Based on the MRI it could be the click may be occurring if she comes over the articular eminence with the condyle as the disc appears to be in position on the MRIs.  To palpation, she has mild tenderness over the masseter muscles and shoulders.  

SARA VANCOTT 				11/13/2007				Page 2

When she was in New Guinea she was around birds for about two months.  She lived in the village with the natives for one month and the other month she moved around from small village to small village and this occurred before onset of her problems.  She also has a history of herpes simplex in the corneas and forehead area.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus nor vertigo and no other joints bother her.  She is allergic to some tree nuts except cashews and peanuts.  She used to clench her teeth at night but she does not think she does not with the splint.  She does wake up with headaches and when she has them they are fairly constant through the day.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The left condyle appears a little bit larger than the right but not by much.  There is a little protuberance on the left condyle coming forward moreso than on the right side.  The condylar head and neck are a little bit longer on the left side compared to the right side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are fairly clear.  Bony septum is fairly straight and turbinates are of moderate size.  It appears there may be a slight yaw in the occlusion with the maxilla slightly towards the left side. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  There appears to be good joint space.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be postured slightly forward in the fossa with increased vertical joint space.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  The left condyle may be about 2 mm wider than the right side.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows basically a skeletal Class I position.  However, she is in centric occlusion on this x-ray not centric relation.  Oropharyngeal airway looks adequate.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Possible osteoma/osteochondroma in the left condyle.
Facial asymmetry with the mandible shifted off to the right side and the left mandibular angle more prominent than the right side. 
Class II end-on occlusion being significantly worse on the right side than the left side.
Occluding only on the left molars in centric relation. 
Rule out bilateral TMJ inflammation 
Rule out clenching.
Headaches. 
TMJ pain worse on the left side.




SARA VANCOTT				11/13/2007				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Medications.
Klonopin 1 mg tablet dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x3. 
Prescription for doxycycline 100 mg, dispensing 60 tablets, 1 tablet b.i.d.. refill x2.  
She is to start the Klonopin this week and then if there is no improvement, next week begin the doxycycline.  It is possible she may have picked up a viral or bacterial factor in New Guinea that has not been diagnosed or identified yet.  
Further evaluation as necessary.

It is quite possible that her headaches may be unrelated to TMJ and jaw factors though she does have the discomfort in the left TMJ area.  Also, when she sings this seems to stimulate her headache problems as well. 