LETICIA VENTURA								04/01/2011

Leticia was referred by Dr. David Adame, 210 W. Mahl Street, Edinburg, TX 78539, telephone #956-381-8262.  Leticia is 52 years old, birth date 01/04/1959.  Her TMJ problems began when she was about 8 years old when she developed clicking and popping in her jaw joints of unknown etiology.  She has had pain since at least her early teen years.  The pain has escalated in the more recent years.  She has had a night guard for 1 year and this seems to help some, but does not eliminate the entire problem.  She has had no other treatment.  

Leticia rates her headaches at a level of 7 in frontal, temporal and posterior head area bilaterally.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 5, diet at 4, disability at 4.  She has no earaches, but has loud constant tinnitus and frequent vertigo.  She has no earaches.  Other joints that bother her include her knees, lower back, elbows.  She does have some discomfort in her fingers and her ankles bother her some as well.  She states that all of her joints are stiff in the mornings.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also during the day.  Leticia states that her TMJ pain is worse on the left side than the right side.  Leticia does have some mild snoring problems, mild daytime somnolence, but she is unaware of sleep apnea problems.  She breathes through her nose when she sleeps. 

In frontal view, Leticia has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 minutes.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The nose is off to the right side about 3 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is off to the left 2 mm.  The chin is pretty much on the facial midline.  The right eye is about 3 mm lower than the left eye at pupillary plane.  There is some increased fullness in the right ramus angle area with about 2 to 3 mm increased transverse fullness compared to the left side.  There may be a slight yaw in the maxilla and mandible being shifted off towards to the right side about 10 mm.  In profile view, she has pretty good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  The chin appears somewhat deficient and chin neckline is short in AP dimension and the chin neckline is not well defined.  The chin may be retruded 10 mm.  In the lower arch, she is missing the right first and third molars and on the left side she is missing all three molars.  She has fairly significant attrition on her incisors.  The mandibular left cuspid is about 6 to 7 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  In actuality, the mandibular right first bicuspid is in better alignment transversely with the left cuspid.  In the upper arch, she is missing the right maxillary second and third molar and the left third molar.  Anteroposteriorly, the maxillary arch is fairly symmetric.  She has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and a full Class II on the left in part due to the significant lower arch asymmetry.  She has an anterior deep bite of at least 6 mm.  The lower incisors occlude at the gingival margin on the lingual aspect of the maxillary central incisors.  She has no vertical occlusal stability on the left side.  She has decreased vertical dimension between the remaining alveolar ridge on the mandible on the left side relative to the position of the maxillary second bicuspid and molars.  The lingual cusp of the maxillary left first bicuspid has been removed either intentionally or by attrition.  The lower teeth from the incisors around to the second bicuspid on the mandibular left arch are hypererupted about 2 mm compared to the mandibular teeth on the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, turbinates appear normal in size.  To palpation, Leticia has moderate pain in her shoulders, left TMJ, left styloid area, left SCM and mild tenderness over the left masseter, left medial pterygoid, right TMJ, and the posterior neck areas.  On opening, she has a click in the left joint at about 15 mm and on closing at 10 mm.  On the right side, the open click is close to 35 mm and closing click of about 25 mm.  The maximal incisal opening is about 58 mm.  The excursion movements are about 5 mm in each direction and the excursion movements did create pain in the left TMJ.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of mandibular left first, second, and third molars and the right first molar and third molar.  In the upper arch on the right side, she is missing second and third molars and on the left side the third molar.  She has a root canal in the maxillary right first bicuspid.  Bony septum appears reasonably straight and the sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Coronal radiograph shows the sinuses are clear and that the turbinates are normal in size with the septum relatively straight.  

Axial views also show that the septum is straight, turbinates are moderate in size with good passage of airway and the sinuses are clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some arthritic changes with some sclerosis in the head of the condyle.  The condyle is postured posteriorly in the fossa.  The joint space appears somewhat narrowed superiorly.  There is some development of anterior beaking. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit more arthritic particularly towards the outside of the joint and somewhat posteriorly positioned.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  There is sclerosis on the head of the condyle as well as in the articular eminence.  There is some anterior beaking. 

Left coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The vertical joint space appears somewhat narrow.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit more arthritic with some sclerosis in it and some pitting in the head of the condyle.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla is in fairly good AP position.  The mandible appears somewhat retruded.  The oropharyngeal airway looks somewhat constricted.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with inflammation with early reduction on the left side, but lateral reduction on the right side with duration of disc displacements of over 40 years.  
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship.
Mandibular asymmetry with the left cuspid being 6 to 7 mm posterior to the right cuspid. 
Missing mandibular left first, second and third molars, mandibular right second and third molars, maxillary right second and third molar, maxillary left third molar.
Anterior deep bite of 6 mm.
Transverse asymmetry in the lower arch with the left teeth being 2 mm higher than the right side.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3.5 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
Generalized arthropathy.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider using turbos to open the bite as 		well as consideration for a TAD on the left side to intrude the lower left 			central through bicuspid approximately 2 mm to level the left arch 
                        vertically with the right side.  
	c.	Consider placement of dental implants in the mandibular left first and 
                        second molar area with subsequent placement of temporary crowns prior 
                        to surgery to provide left side posterior vertical stability.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses.
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	c.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
	d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it 			posteriorly to level the occlusal plane.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
5.	Restorative dentistry to reconstruct the occlusion and missing teeth including 	consideration for placement of implants in the mandibular right first molar area 	and the maxillary right second molar area and subsequent crown construction.  
