MARIAH VICK									03/13/2006

Mariah is 13 years old, referred by Dr. Maryam Mojdehi-Barnes, 1223 McDermott Dr., Ste. #15, Allen, TX 75013.  Mariah has a history of having pneumonia last year.  She has some mild asthma problems primarily when she gets a severe cold.  She really does not take any medications currently but does have an Albuterol inhaler 2 puffs as needed but has not used it in a year.  She is allergic to Omnicef and she developed hives with that.   She does get headaches about 1 time per week.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Only the back teeth touch when chewing.
Difficulty biting into foods.
Has to bite from the side of her mouth. 

Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary midline and chin midline are pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the left.  In profile view there is about 6 mm of lip incompetence present.  There is fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks and nose.  The chin has pretty good AP balance but posterior open bite might be slightly strong.  Chin-neck line is relatively normal in length and chin-neck angle is relatively well defined.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has good attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch.  The lower incisors are slightly in lingual inclination.  Right cuspid is probably 1 mm or 2 posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch, Mariah has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a slight Class III cuspid tendency, maybe about 2 to 3 mm Class III.  She has an anterior open bite of about 4 or 5 mm.  There are no crossbites present.  There is a slight reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch and accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.  When she bites together on the right side she appears to occlude from the first bicuspid to the second molars and on the left side from the first and second molars only.  Anteroposteriorly, the upper arch is fairly symmetric.  Transversely the maxilla is fairly level.  The mandible on the left side, the cuspids are 2 to 3 mm lower than the right side and the first bicuspid is about 1 mm lower than the right side.  Oropharyngeal airway looks healthy.  The uvula is moderately enlarged.  Soft palate is relatively normal and faucial pillars are perhaps mildly constricted.  Intranasally, the turbinates are fairly large.  The septum, however, is fairly straight.  Probably moderate nasal airway obstruction due predominately to the large turbinates.  The columella and nostrils are normal and the luminal valves appear relatively normal.  Mariah's anterior open bite has always been there and the situation is not getting worse.  Joints seem to function smoothly and there is no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars that are impacted.  All of the rest of the teeth are present.  The film is a little bit dark but sinuses look reasonably good.  I cannot see any major pathology in the joints.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good anatomy.  Joint space looks fairly good around the condyle.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
MARIAH VICK				03/13/2006				Page 2


Right TMJ tomogram shows fairly good joint space around the condyle though superiorly it may be slightly decreased though the disc may be somewhat thin.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle has reasonably good shape.  On opening, there is some slight restriction in translation.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses are reasonably clear.  She has huge frontal sinuses.  The turbinates are significantly enlarged particularly on the left side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a moderate high occlusal plane.  She has reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch and accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.  Anterior open bite is probably about 4 to 5 mm.  She appears to be basically Class I skeletal.  Oropharyngeal airway space from soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 5 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 11 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Vertical maxillary excess.
Mandibular prognathism. 
Apertognathia (4 to 5 mm)
Slight Class III occlusion. 
Accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.
Slightly reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm. 
Over angulation of maxillary incisors. 
Headaches.
Impacted third molars x4.
Hypertrophied turbinates.  
Partial nasal airway obstruction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Consider extracting maxillary first or second bicuspids. 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  If the patient is treated non-extraction, extrude maxillary cuspids about 2 mm and place a step in the archwire so that the incisors remain aligned at an elevated occlusal plane level compared to the cuspids and the posterior teeth.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure.
MARIAH VICK				03/13/2006				Page 3


Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly, about 8 mm posteriorly and 3 mm anteriorly and level the occlusal plane.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to tip the mandible posteriorly and move it superiorly into occlusion.  
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Partial turbinectomies.
Anterior mandibular horizontal ostectomy. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
