DIANA VINCENT									02/07/2008

Diana is 44 years old. By history, she has been aware of having TMJ problems since her teenage years.  It may have began as early as the age of 8 years.  She currently gets headaches about three per week at an average level of 3.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 8, diet at 7, disability at 7.  The onset of her current problems began three weeks ago when she was chewing and developed severe pain in her jaw joint.  She got a jaw manipulation in January 2008, but this did not relieve her pain problems.  She currently takes Aleve.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  Incisal opening is 29 mm, but only 19 mm without pain.  Excursion movements are 7 mm in each direction.  Joints function relatively smoothly except for some crepitation in the left joint.  Other joints that bother her include her left knee, midback, and left shoulder.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time and also clenching in the day time.  Pain is worse on the left side. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of impacted third molars x4.  Condyles appear arthritic particularly on the left side.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic and posteriorly positioned in the fossa with decreased superior and posterior joint space.  

Left TMJ tomograms show a condyle that is quite arthritic and appears to have lost volume.  

Waters view shows that the septum in the bony area appears relatively straight, but turbinates appear enlarged.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class I occlusion and jaw relationship and good oropharyngeal airway.  

The basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis (left severe). 
Left TMJ close lock.
Severe left TMJ pain.  
Left-sided headaches.
Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.
a.   Align and level maxillary arch.  
b.   Align and level mandibular arch.  
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Maxillary and mandibular arch bars if patient decides not to have orthodontics (orthodontics is the method of choice).
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.