DEBORAH VERDIN									03/06/2008

Date of Birth:  02/29/76.  Referred by Dr. William Hang, 101 N. Westlake Blvd., Suite 202, Westlake Village, California 91362.  Deborah has been under orthodontic treatment for a few years with Dr. Florman in Santa Monica, California.  Her bite is still off.  She has seen a surgeon who is going to advance her mandible and then put a big chin implant in.  I told her we had a basic plan worked up to treat her.  The biggest concern, however, is the status of her TMJ joints.  She has no particular issues with her joints symptom-wise, but some of the tomograms from Dr. Hang’s office shows that there is decreased joint space.  I strongly recommended that we get an MRI of her TMJs to help finalize the treatment plan for her.  Suggest that she come here so I could evaluate her and also get the MRI done, but she would prefer to get the MRI done in California and will do a workup long distance.  She will contact me if she has any questions.  Will then prepare a letter of preauthorization for her once I get the MRI.  

Basic diagnoses for Deborah would be as follows:

AP maxillary deficiency. 
Posterior vertical deficiency.  
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia.   	
Mild occlusal plane angle.
Class II end-on occlusion.  
Impacted maxillary third molars x2.  
Rule out TMJ problems.
Overangulation of lower incisors.   

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

MRI of left and right TMJ. 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open slight space between the upper right lateral incisor and cuspid of about 1 mm.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.  
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ surgery if indicated based on MRI analysis. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction moving the incisor tooth about 4 to 5 mm and down grafting the posterior aspect 6 mm.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction approximately 16 to 18 mm.
Augmentation genioplasty of approximately 6 mm.
Surgical removal impacted maxillary third molars x2.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.