BENNETT VIG									05/22/2006

Ben is 35 years old, referred by Dr. Larry Herwig, 8226 Douglas Ave., Douglas Plaza, Ste. 750, Dallas, TX 75225.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Bite and jaws are not lined up.
Difficulties breathing through the nose.
Severe snoring.
Predominate mouth breather.
Difficulty eating and chewing.

He has had previous jaw treatment including orthodontics from the age of 13 to 17 by Dr. Gene Lambert.  Then he had orthognathic surgery to reposition the upper jaw about 20 years ago and about 1985 at the age of 15.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Zyrtec.
Lexapro 10 mg daily.
Prevacid.

He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo and hearing loss.  The only joint that bothers him is his right shoulder.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  He has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain or myofascial pain.  Joints function smoothly.  He has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  Incisal opening is 45 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 6 mm, to the left 9 mm.  He has anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.  He has a Class III occlusion.  He has an anterior open bite of 2 mm.  Upper lip length is 25 mm, upper tooth to lip relationship is 1 mm.  The left side of the mandible is 3 to 4 mm lower than the right side.  Maxillary dental midline is shifted 2 mm off to the left side and chin is shifted 2 to 3 mm off to the right side.  He has transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side.  He has retained primary E in the mandibular right quadrant.  Profile of the maxilla appears to be retruded by about 8 mm and the mandible retruded by about 10 mm.  He has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.  In occlusion he hits on only the first and second molars bilaterally.  He has missing mandibular third molars but he has his maxillary third molars.  The uvula is mild to moderately enlarged but the soft palate and faucial pillars are relatively normal.  Right turbinate is moderately enlarged and posteriorly he has a deviated septum off to the left side and anteriorly off the right side.  He has moderate nasal airway obstruction.  He does report severe snoring but no daytime somnolence nor any sleep apnea symptoms.  He does have an anterior open bite of about 2 mm.   

He does appear to have some lack of attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch. 





BENNETT VIG				05/22/2006				Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC ASSESSMENT:
Panorex shows the presence of L-shaped bone plates in the anterior maxilla.  He has an impacted maxillary right third molar but the other three third molars are absent.  He is missing the permanent right second bicuspid and he has a retained E in position.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Difficult to evaluate the joints.  

Waters view shows that he has bilateral L-shaped plates at the base of the nose area.  The bony septum is deviated off to the left side.  Turbinates are mildly enlarged.  The left side of the mandible appears longer vertically as compared to the right side and the occlusal plane appears to be tipped slightly.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  It appears a little bit small for the size of the fossa.  The condyle appears posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit better centered in the fossa with a little bit better joint space although slightly posteriorly positioned.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle appears to be in good position.  On opening, there is moderately good translation of both joints. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a Class III occlusal relationship probably closer to a Class I skeletal relationship.  He has a high occlusal plane angle.  He has an anterior open bite.  He has decreased oropharyngeal airway of about 4 mm at the base of the tongue about 8 mm at the soft palate level.  He appears to be AP deficient in the maxilla and occlusal Class III open bite mandibular morphology.  Ben does report a history of sinusitis problems.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
AP and vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class III occlusion. 
High occlusal plane angle. 
Occludes only on the first and second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.
Anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
High occlusal plane angle.
Impacted maxillary right third molar.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Partial nasal airway obstruction. 
Severe snoring. 
Deviated nasal septum.
Periodontal concerns in the lower anterior arch. 


BENNETT VIG				05/22/2006				Page 3


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Periodontal evaluation and possibly grafting particularly in the lower anterior arch.
CT scan of sinuses to evaluate the extent of sinusitis (can use i-CAT imaging.)
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 
2 mm of tooth structure.
Extract mandibular right primary second molar and adjust spacing to equal the size of a bicuspid. 
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward about 8 to 9 mm and down graft it posteriorly approximately 5 mm to decrease the occlusal plane angle. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Nasoseptoplasty. 
Removal of impacted maxillary right third molar. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Replace missing mandibular right second bicuspid. 