PETA VERHAEGHE									02-13-04

Peta is 29 years old and referred by Dr. William Loughridge, Tulsa, OK.

Patient History

She had a C-section on 03/10/03 but no other surgeries. She has some seasonal allergy problems but otherwise no other really significant problems. She tends to run hypoglycemic, and if she doesn’t watch herself, she can have some fainting spells. 

Peta’s TMJ problems began when she was about 20 or 21 years of age when she was a sophomore in college. The etiology is unknown. She has had a splint for seven to eight years, and this is her second splint. The splint has been made by Dr. Keith Thorton. Currently she takes birth control fills. Serofem, and Advil 1 q.d. She gets earaches on the right side worse than the left but gets worse tinnitus on the left side as compared to the right side. No vertigo. She has hearing loss on the right side but attributes that to childhood ear infections. No other joints bother her. She has seasonal allergies and does have a reaction apparently to PENICILLIN. Cheap earrings cause her problems. She is very much aware of clenching during the day and at night feels that she clenches and bruxes. There is no specific time for the onset of her pain and headache problems. At times, she will wake up with headaches. At other times, they develop during the day. She gets daily headaches predominantly in the right temporal area at about a level of 8. The pain also can progress down through her right neck and into her right shoulder. Relative to TMJ pain, she rates that at a level of 5 on the right side only, average daily pain is at 7, jaw function at 0, diet at 1, and disability at 2. 

Her clenching and bruxism are so significant that she has had to have her maxillary incisors built up again because of the attrition on the teeth.

Patient Concerns

Headaches 
Neck and right shoulder pain
TMJ pain
Tinnitus

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Peta has good facial symmetry and balance. She has a good profile with good facial balance. 

Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has a crown on the mandibular left second molar. Has good attached gingiva. Teeth appear fairly well aligned and leveled. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. Teeth also appear to be nicely aligned and leveled. Facial and dental midlines appear to be aligned with each other. She appears to have a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has about a 2-mm anterior overbite relationship.

On opening, there seem to be some glitches in both TMJs as though the discs may be slightly anteriorly or possibly medially displaced. Maximal incisal opening is about 45 mm, and she can open to about 33 with good comfort or reasonable comfort. Excursive movements are about 8 mm in each direction.
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Sinuses appear a little bit cloudy but not too bad. Turbinates appear relatively small, and nasal airway looks good. Difficult to evaluate the condyles on this view because of overlapping structures. Appears to have a low angle facial morphology. 
Appears that she has crowns on the mandibular left second molar and maxillary right first and second molar. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good morphology. Fossa outline is not quite as clear and could be due to the angulation. Joint space looks good superiorly and posteriorly. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a little bit of flattening on the head of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep and similar to the slope of the opposite side. Appears to be good joint space vertically and posteriorly as well as anteriorly. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles, and they both come forward out of the fossa.

Waters view shows that the maxillary, ethmoid, and frontal sinuses all appear to be clear. Turbinates are of moderate size. Septum looks relatively straight.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she may have just a slight skeletal Class II kind of relationship. Some slight AP macrogenia. Occlusal plane may be just slightly increased in inclination. Oropharyngeal airway looks good. 

Re-evaluation of the MRI shows that there possibly could be some medial displacement of the articular disc on the right side. Similarly, on the left side there possibly could be some medial disc displacement, but it is difficult to be absolutely sure of that. That would go along with some of the clinical findings of the clitches in her TMJs bilaterally. The discs actually appear to be in pretty good position anteroposteriorly, however.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and possible medial displacements of the articular discs with inflammation
Bilateral TMJ pain (right greater than left)
Severe right-sided headaches
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
History of chronic clenching and bruxism
Earaches, right side greater than left
Tinnitus, left side greater than right 

Recommended Treatment
Medications
Klonopin 1 mg tablet, disp. 30, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x 3
Consider anti-inflammatory medication such as Celebrex, Vioxx, Bextra, etc. 
Consider possible other nerve or muscle relaxer medication to take during the day if clenching continues to be a problem

Peta is to keep me informed of her progress