B141
B141 is 33 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. B141 had orthodontics when she was younger at about the age of 12 to 13, and she wore head gear to pull the upper teeth back to meet the lower teeth. She then had a lower retainer that was fixed in place for about 3 years. Her jaw joint problems began at about the age of 29. Her problems began initially in the masseter muscle area particularly on the left side. She was placed in a splint and has been in splint treatment from ages 30 to 33; She has had 3 splints so far. She had her wisdom teeth removed when she was about 21 years old. Her bite has been getting progressively worse with it opening anteriorly.

She rates her headaches at about level 2 in the frontal and temporal areas that occur about once per week. She rates her TMJ pain at 2, average daily pain at 3, jaw function, diet, and disability at 0. She has no earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss Other joints that affect her include her shoulders and right ankle. She does have anxiety and some depression. She is very much aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also during the day. She takes Wellbutrin 300 mg q.d. and has been off this for about 3 months. Primary concerns that B141 have include the following:

Anterior open bite. Lower jaw moving posteriorly. Changes in facial asymmetry. Pain and discomfort. In frontal view, she has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 16 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 5 mm. The maxillary midline may be just slightly to the right side and the mandibular dental midline is just slightly to the right side about 1 mm. The chin is probably about 3 to 4 mm toward the right side. In profile view, his upper lip is retruded about 3 to 4 mm. She has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip. The chin is retruded about 10 to 12 mm. The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined. She has a high mandibular occlusal plane angle facial morphology. Intraorally, B141 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Transversely, the lower arch is somewhat narrow. She has some lingual tori. She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth and some mild crowding. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. In centric relation, she has a Class II occlusion being probably 5 mm Class II on the right side and maybe 4 on the left side. She has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm. She has an over jet of probably 4 mm. She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right maxillary cuspid being about 2 mm higher than the left one. The oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. Intranasally, the turbinates relatively normal. The septum I believe is reasonably straight. Columella is wide and nostrils are narrow. Holding the nostrils open, she could breathe a little bit easier. To palpation, B141 has no tenderness around the head and neck area. On opening and closing, she occasionally will have a click in her joint at little bit quieter than on the right side. She says that when she chews that she is more aware of the clicking and this is something that has just occurred in the last few weeks. The incisal opening is 41 mm and excursion movements are about 5 mm in each direction. Most of her complaints are with pain and discomfort in the left side of her face over the masseter muscle, however, she has a little nodule there that sometimes gets more swollen. Today it is not swollen too much, but it is mainly the left side that keeps her uncomfortable. Recently, Dr. XXXX injected that area with Lidocaine and it took the pain away for a day and B141 felt pretty good.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but the rest of the teeth are all present. She appears to be occluding predominantly on the second molars with all of the other teeth out of occlusion. She has arthritis in both TMJ areas with evidence of condylar resorption. The sinuses look relatively clear.

Coronal radiograph shows that she has a significantly deviated nasal septum off towards the right side. The turbinates are relatively normal in size, but practically block the nasal airway, especially blocked on the right side because of the deviation of the septum that it is almost touching against the inferior turbinate. The sinuses look clear.

Axial view shows that the septum is deviated significantly off to the right side. The sinus appear clear. Turbinates appear relatively normal in size but the right side appears blocked because of the deviated septum.

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has undergone some definite condylar resorption and flattening of the condylar head. There is some anterior beaking present. The articular eminence has a very diminished slope. The joint space may be slightly decreased.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant resorption. There is a little bit of anterior beaking. The articular eminence is flattened. There may be some decreased vertical space. In a couple of views, the condyle appear to be mushrooming slightly.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes and there are also arthritic changes in the fossa. There is some osteophytic kind of growths off the condylar head extending off the lateral poles on both sides and also on the midline. There is decreased vertical joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ coronal view shows that there has been significant loss of vertical condylar height. There is decreased joint space. Vertically, there is an osteophyte coming off the lateral aspect of the condyle. Lateral cephalometric radiograph appears no to be all the way back in centric relation, but at least partially in the most retruded position. She appears to occlude only on the second molars. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 5 to 6 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 6 mm. The maxilla and mandible appear somewhat retruded.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ rheumatoid arthritis or other connective tissue autoimmune disease.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia, but vertical hyperplasia.
Class II occlusal and skeletal relationship.
Occluding only on the second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion. Anterior open bite of 2 mm.
Wide columella.
Deviated nasal septum.
Nasal airway obstruction. TMJ pain.
Headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Evaluation by rheumatologist.
2. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Open up 1 mm of space between the upper laterals and cuspids. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Consider some expansion in the first molar and bicuspid areas.
3. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
4. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly, expand it, and advance. d.	Nasal septoplasty.
5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
6. Restorative dentistry to build up maxillary lateral incisors.

B141 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit narrow mediolaterally. There could be some discal tissue displaced medially and anteriorly. The joint space appears reasonably good. The lateral rim of the fossa curves about 3 to 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow mediolaterally. It appears that there is some loss of vertical condylar volume. It appears that there may be some discal tissue in place, but there could be a pannus surrounding it. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is significantly degenerated particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint and at the medial aspect of the joint. In the middle, it seems to have a little bit better morphology, although there is some anterior beaking present. On the left side, there may be some discal tissue in place, but it is degenerated. The articular eminence is moderately shallow, but there is a little divot in the articular eminence in about the mid part of the vertical length. There is a little bit of fluid in the posterior superior joint space. On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle and the disc translates with the condyle, but the disc is significantly degenerated.

Right TMJ shows a condyle that appears flattened on top with some anterior beaking. The disc appears to be in position, but there appears to be a reactive pannus surrounding the disc. The articular eminence appears flatter on this side, as though it has undergone some type of resorptive process. There is fluid in the superior joint space and there appears to be a pannus surrounding the articular disc. Right TMJ opening shows that there is fairly good translation of the condyle and the disc, but the disc is severely degenerated with a reactive pannus surrounding it.

MRI findings are compatible with a connective tissue autoimmune type of disease process.
IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs degenerated with connective tissue autoimmune disease.

