COOPER VERHEYDEN 							     	12/05/2006

Cooper is 15 years old.  On approximately January 30, 2000, he fell off a pogo stick landing on his chin sustaining a symphysis fracture and a right subcondylar fracture.  Dr. Lance Read treated Cooper with a closed reduction of the symphysis fracture and the open reduction on the right subcondylar fracture.  He was wired in fixation for about 2 weeks.  In March of 2000, he then got hit in the face with a baseball.  Further follow-up evaluation showed that the plate in the left subcondylar area had been fractured. 

Cooper has had orthodontic treatment on and off for the last 3 to 4 years.  Currently he has had his appliances on for about the last 6 months.  Dr. Andy Barron is the orthodontist.  Cooper is taking no medications.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother him include his fingers and he has had vertebral fractures from playing tennis from a rotational type of injury.  He does get some pain and discomfort in his neck.  No known allergies.  He does not clench or brux.  He does snore, however, when he sleeps.  He has no problems with headaches.  In the morning when he gets up, he will have some pain or discomfort in his TMJs at about a level of 4 but then upon opening his jaws some, that discomfort dissipates.  He rates his average daily pain at 0.  Jaw function at 6, diet and disability at 0.

In frontal view, Cooper has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3-1/2 to 4 mm.  Maxillary midline is about 1 mm to the left of the midline.  Mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline but the chin is off to the right side probably about 2 to 3 mm.  Maxilla and upper lip are retruded about 3 mm.  Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably 1 to 2 mm.  Chin is retruded about 24 mm.  Cooper has a head postured forward neck position.  He has a prominence of a chin tubercle on the right side of the mandible that is fairly prominent.  In addition, he has bilateral masseteric hyperplasia.  Intraorally, his lower teeth back through the second molars are erupted in.  A little bit of crowding in the lower anterior arch.  He appears to have good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch he has all of his teeth back through the second molars Cooper has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being probably at least 5 to 6 mm Class II.  He has an anterior deep bite about 4 to 5 mm.  He has an overjet of about 5 mm.  Transverse cant is present with the left side of the maxilla and mandible being about 2 mm lower than the right.  The uvula may be just slightly enlarged but not too significant.  The soft palate appears slightly elongated or at least there appears to be some decreased soft palate to pharyngeal dimension.  Faucial pillars appear relatively normal.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off a little bit to the left side and there is some spurring at the base of the nose.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  It takes a good portion of the airway.  On the left side there is fairly close approximation to the septal spur which is at the base of the septum.  Columella is quite wide and nostrils are narrow.  He has moderate snoring and some daytime tiredness that could be related to staying up late and being a teenager.  He reports no sleep apnea problems.  To palpation, Cooper has mild tenderness over the masseter muscles and posterior neck area.  



COOPER VERHEYDEN 			12/05/2006				Page 2


He has high moderate pain to palpation over the right TMJ.  In the right TMJ area, there is what appears to be an exophytic mass of bone over the joint area.  Maximal incisal opening including the overbite is about 29 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is about 4 mm, left is probably less than 1 mm.   Jaw opening where he is comfortable is about 24 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth including the 4 impacted third molars.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Septum appears deviated off to the left side.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  Left condylar head and neck appear a little bit short in length.  Right joint shows the presence of significant heterotopic bone formation around the joint and the presence of a bone plate that does appear to be fractured. 

Waters view shows that he has significant deviation of the nasal septum in the bony area.  Turbinates appear enlarged and nasal airway appears constricted.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  The right side of the mandible is vertically shorter than the left side.  Midlines are off by 1 mm.  There appears to be some flaring of the angles of the mandible probably related to the masseteric hyperplasia. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic.  There is some anterior beaking present.  Decreased joint space vertically.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The length of the condylar head and neck appears foreshortened.  AP dimension of the ramus appears somewhat wider than normal.

Right TMJ tomogram shows the presence of what appears to be a mass of heterotopic bone around the joint with difficulties identifying a level of clear separation between the bony areas.  On opening, there is no translation of the right joint and in the left joint there is some moderate translation of the condyle coming forward maybe about 3 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Cooper has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  There are 2 different occlusal plane levels with the left side being lower than the right side by probably 2 to 3 mm.  Maxillary incisors actually appear to be in fairly good angulation.  The mandible is AP retruded and the posterior maxilla is vertically deficient.  He does have a large adenoid mass still present in the nasopharynx.  It appears to come in very close approximation to the turbinates.  Oropharyngeal airway is decreased at the left palate level where it measures about 5 mm.   At the base of the tongue it does measure about 8 mm.  Soft palate appears somewhat elongated and relatively thin.  Cooper does exhibit a head postured forward neck position.  Tooth size analysis reveals no tooth size discrepancy.  Lower teeth are over angulated and they are mildly crowded.  Hand manipulating the models shows that there may be just a slight tooth size discrepancy and there is also transverse deficiency in the maxilla.  Transverse discrepancy appears to be about 5 mm. 



COOPER VERHEYDEN 			12/05/2006				Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Left TMJ bony ankylosis. 
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe degeneration. 
Severe AP mandibular deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
High occlusal plane angle.
Class II end-on occlusion.
TMJ pain.
Severe limited jaw function and decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 Hypertrophied adenoid tissue.
 Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Septal spurring on the left side of the nares. 
 Decreased nasal airway.
 Heterotopic bone in right parasymphysis area.
 Impacted third molars x4.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Surgical removal of mandibular impacted third molars.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing no more than 1 mm or 2 of tooth structure to help correct the crowding and keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward.
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand, down graft posteriorly and slightly advance the maxilla.
Bilateral mandibular coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen or buttock.)
Removal of maxillary impacted third molars x2.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy. 
Septoplasty. 
Implant to anterior mandible. 
Removal of heterotopic bone, right parasymphysis.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
