TONYA VIG										3/25/05

Tonya is 29 years old and is referred by Dr. Richard Myer. 

Tonya is in good health.  The only previous surgery she had was removal of her tonsils.  She has been diagnosed with sleep apnea and recently has received a CPAP machine.  Tonya believes that her jaw joint problems have been present ever since her teenage years.  They developed from unknown etiology.  She had orthodontics from the age of 12 to 16 where 4 first bicuspids were extracted.  Second round of orthodontics was at age 21 for about 8 months to try to align some of the anterior teeth.  Third ortho treatment began in August of 2003 by Dr. Richard Myer.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Birth control pills.
Ibuprofen.
Tylenol.
Excedrin Migraine.
Tylenol PM.

PRIMARY CONCERNS: 
Headaches.
Pain in the jaw joints.
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints.
Sleep apnea.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Difficulty breathing through the nose.
Prominent mouth breather.

She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo, but has a mild hereditary hearing loss.  The only other joints that bother her are her hips and she has to have them manipulated and pulled occasionally to help get some relief.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  She is predominately a mouth breather.  She gets nightly headaches and frequently wakes up with them as well.  Her headaches occur in the frontal and temple areas at about a level of 6 on the average.  TMJ pain used to run about at a level of 8 to 9 until November of last year when Dr. Myer began advancing some of her teeth forward a little bit and this took some pressure off her joints apparently and so her pain now average is about a level 4.  Her average daily pain is at 6.  Jaw function, diet and disability at 3.  

In frontal view, Tonya has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  A little bit more fullness in the right masseter muscle areas compared to the left side.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 8 mm.  Dental and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, the maxilla is 4 to 6 mm in AP deficient.  Chin is approximately 25 mm in AP deficient.  Chin-neckline and chin-neck angle are essentially nonexistent.  Tonya has a lip incompetency of about 12 mm.  Intraorally, Tonya is missing maxillary mandibular first bicuspids.  There is good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth, although she has a slightly high labial frenulum.  She has slightly Class II on the cuspid area, but not too significant.  

TONYA VIG					3/25/05				Page 2


A little bit more so on the left side than the right side by probably about 2 to 3 mm.  She has about a 1/2 mm overbite relationship.  Oropharynx appears clear with the uvula appearing normal.  Soft palate is positioned low and has some moderate increased length.  Fascial pillars are nearly mildly constricted.  Intranasally, she has a little bit of redundant tissue on the floor of the nose bilaterally.  Turbinates are significantly enlarged and appear inflamed.  She has a decreased functional nasal airway.  However, the columella and nostrils appear relatively normal as well as do the luminal valves.  Maximal incisal opening is 45 mm, but only 18 without significant discomfort.  Excursion movements are about 7 mm in each direction.  On opening, she has an audible click at 25 mm on the left side and 35 mm on the right side and closing click of 15 mm on the left side and 20 mm on the right side.  To palpation, she has severe pain over the styloid areas.  TMJs and masseter muscles with moderate discomfort over the SCMs and mild tenderness over the temporalis area.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids.  I cannot adequately evaluate the sinuses nor the nasal airway.  Condyles, particularly the right, show some arthritic changes with some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good formation.  Decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is some decreased superior joint space, but not quite as significant as the opposite side.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints with somewhat better translation of the right side as compared to the left side. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the left side.  Significant deviation of the nasal septum and it appears there is a large septal spur projecting off into the left side of the nose. 

Lateral cephalometric view shows a very high-occlusal plane anterior.  There is anterior maxillary vertical excess, anterior vertical mandibular excess and significant Class II skeletal relationship, but just a slight Class II occlusal relationship.  Lower incisors appear over-angulated.  Oropharyngeal airway is extremely constricted with a dimension of 2 mm at the soft palate level and less than 2 mm at the base of the tongue (normal dimension is 11 mm)

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with late reductions.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Severe AP mandibular deficiency.
TONYA VIG				3/25/05					Page 3


Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Severe sleep apnea.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Slight Class II nonocclusion.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 to 3 mm.
Masticatory dysfunction.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Possible nasal septal deviation and spurring.
Nasal airway obstruction.
High-occlusal plan angulation.
Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars.
Significant lip incompetence of 12 mm. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level the maxillary arch.  Open a little bit of space between the upper lateral incisors and cuspids to equal about 1/2 to 1 mm on each side.
Continue to align and level the mandibular arch.  Slenderize the anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract closing all the spacing.

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect of the maxilla superiorly and posterior aspect inferiorly as well as level the occlusal plane angle. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a  counterclockwise direction.
Anterior mandibular horizontal ostectomy to shorten the vertical height of the chin.
HTR implant to the anterior mandible of 6 mm to augment the chin.
Bilateral partial turbinectomies. 
Possible nasoseptoplasty. 

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
 