JUDY VICK									10/03/2007

Judy is 59 years old, referred by Dr. Lee Steglich, Dallas, Texas.  Judy's problems began in 1978 when she was involved in an automobile accident.  She subsequently has had four surgeries.  In October 1986, she had Proplast Teflon placed in the right TMJ joint and a repair of the left joint by Dr. Kevin McBride.  In December 1988, the Proplast Teflon implant was removed as it had fragmented and this also was done by Dr. McBride.  In June of 1993, she had foreign body giant cell mass removed from the right TMJ and apparently had a temporal fascial placed by Dr. Jim Bates.  In April of 2000, Dr. Bates did an arthroplasty and placed a TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis with a fat graft.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: 
Lortab 10/500, maximum 150 per month.
Paxil 40 mg 1 per day.
Lyrica 100 mg 3 per day.
Zantac 150 mg 2 per day.
Senokot-S daily.
Fosamax 70 mg 1 time per week.   She has not taken the Fosamax in several months.

Judy has also included a list of previous treatments that she has had in an attempt to try and control her pain but without success.

Judy gets headaches at about a level of 6 throughout the head area and these are on a daily basis and fairly constant.  The headaches can escalate to 10 where the worst severity on the right side towards the top of the temporalis muscle area.  She rates her average daily TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 5 and this is with medications.  Her daily pain can escalate to 10.  She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 4, disability at 6.  She has pain all day long and sometimes she wakes up with severe pain and at other times it develops a little later on. 

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her wrists, hands, fingers and her left knee is noisy but not particularly painful.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at night.  She has a splint that she feels makes her bite more.  She may clench some during the day but not like at nighttime.  At times her pain is so severe that she cannot sleep as a result of the pain factor.  Because of Judy's pain she sometimes becomes significantly more tense which tends to exacerbate her pain levels somewhat.  Judy does not give a significant history of snoring nor daytime somnolence except if she does not get adequate sleep as a result of her pain problems.

The patient currently has a splint that she tends to clench into.  The splint is quite thick and she says that even to swallow she has to clench into the splint just for that activity because it is so thick. 

In frontal view, Judy has good left to right facial symmetry.  In profile view, she has fairly goo facial symmetry and balance.  Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids probably as a result of previous orthodontics.  Transverse width of the lower arch is extremely constricted.  

JUDY VICK					10/03/2007				Page 2

In the upper arch she likewise is missing first bicuspids, again likely taken out for orthodontic reasons.  She has Class I cuspid molar relationship which is 2 mm anterior overbite.  Judy had orthodontics when she was a teenager and probably at that time is when the teeth were taken out.  She subsequently has had orthodontics two additional times because of the surgeries and the fact that her teeth did not fit together and the orthodontics were used to try and get them to mesh better.  Oropharyngeal tissues look fairly good.  The uvula is a little bit elongated.  The soft palate looks relatively normal.  Faucial pillars may be mildly constricted.  There appears to be some small tonsillar remnants along the posterior faucial pillar bilaterally being a little bit more obvious on the right side as compared to the left side.  The tonsils themselves are difficult to identify.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  On the right side, the airway is blocked off a little bit more because of the septum being deviated.  On the left side, the airway appears fairly good even though the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  There does not appear to be any significant nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the styloid areas and mild to moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters, posterior neck and shoulder areas.  She has mild to moderate pain over the TMJs to palpation.  Incisal opening maximally is 35 mm and she can go to about 30 mm without significant pain.  Excursive movement to the right is 10 mm, to the left is 2 mm.  Both TMJ joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Significant deviation of the mandible off towards the right side on opening by about 4 mm.  

The only other surgery Judy has had is a ganglion cyst removed from her left wrist. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspid.  On the right side she has a TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis.  She has crowns on all the molar teeth.  The right sinus looks clear, the left sinus appears a little bit cloudy.  The right turbinate appears a little bit large compared to the left side.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses all appear clear and healthy.  She does have the prosthesis on the right side that appears to be well centered and well aligned.  There appears to be good adaptation of the fossa component in the fossa.  The nasal septum is a little deviated off towards the right side and the right turbinate appears a little bit enlarged. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows the condyle with some slight anterior beaking.  The condylar head actually looks fairly good.  However, there is a decreased posterosuperior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  It is possible that this may be in an anterior vertical orientation.

Right TMJ tomogram shows the presence of the TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis.  It is difficult to tell but there possibly could be some additional bone in the area but difficult to tell on that radiograph.  On opening, there is restricted translation in the left joint and significant decreased translation in the right joint.  It appears that the right styloid process may be elongated.  It appears that there may be an extension of bone posterior to the prosthesis that may be impinging on some other bone posteriorly around the mastoid area.  

JUDY VICK					10/03/2007				Page 3

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the vertical height of the ramus on the right side is significantly shorter than the left side.  The occlusal plane, however, looks fairly level.  Oropharyngeal airway is difficult to assess because I do not believe she was relaxed when it was taken.  There appears to be some decreased airway space.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Post right TMJ Proplast Teflon implant and currently with a TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis (the patient has had a total of 4 surgeries on the right joint.)
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation (the patient has had one previous surgery on this joint.)
Probable foreign body giant cell reaction and reactive heterotopic bone formation associated with the right TMJ.
Bilateral TMJ pain.
Bilateral severe headaches.
Myofascial pain.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Medications.
Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s. to try and decrease nocturnal clenching and bruxism and hopefully decrease her headaches and overall pain levels.
MRI of left TMJ.
CT scans of the jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Debridement of right TMJ with removal of heterotopic bone and foreign body giant cell reaction.
Fat graft to right TMJ.
Possible left TMJ total joint prosthesis with fat graft.