KELSEY VINCENT									03/17/2008

Kelsey is 13 years 6 months of age, referred by Dr. Peter Crump, 24 S. Gore Avenue, Webster Groves, MO 63119.  Kelsey’s problems began perhaps when she was 11 years old or could have even developed earlier than that.  The primary concerns that she has are:  
She has pain on opening her mouth. 
Bottom jaw is too small.
Headaches.
Fitful sleeping.

The etiology of Kelsey’s joint issues are unknown. She has some moderate earaches, occasional tinnitus, and occasional vertigo.  The knees and hips bother her some particularly with dance.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at night time.  She does predominantly breathe through her nose when she is sleeping and sometimes during the day.  She snores mildly and she has some mild daytime tiredness.  She is not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  She does toss and turn a lot.   
CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Kelsey has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  Maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin are pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Kelsey has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  Chin is retruded and chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well-defined. The upper lip may be retruded by 2 mm, but her chin is retruded by probably 10 to 15 mm.  Intraorally, she has got all of her lower teeth back to the first molars.  The second molars have not erupted in yet.  She has good attached gingiva around the anterior arch and some very mild crowding.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the first molars.  The second molars are not erupted in.  She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship bilaterally and probably about 2 mm Class II.  She has an overjet of about 1 to 2 mm.  She has about a 2 mm anterior vertical deep bite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy.  Uvula is normal.  Soft palate may be mildly elongated and fascial pillars are moderately constricted.  Tonsils are moderately enlarged.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Septum appears fairly straight.  To palpation, she has some moderate tenderness over her shoulders, mild tenderness over the styloid areas and posterior neck area.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly, although she felt she could hear a little pop.  Maximum incisal opening is 44 mm.  Excursion movements are 7 mm in each direction.   
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of impacted second molars and third molars.  Condyles appear a little bit resorbed particularly on the left side.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Left turbinate appears larger than the right one.  The tips of the unerupted mandibular second molars are at the inferior border of the mandible.    
Waters view shows that the bony septum is fairly straight and turbinates appear moderate in size.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit flattened on top, and there may be a little bit of anterior beaking.  Decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.    
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit more resorbed than the opposite side. Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is restricted translation of both condyles, but clinically she seems to have fairly good translation. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Kelsey has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway actually looks fairly good.  Occlusal plan is moderately steep.  She does have some AP microgenia.  Kelsey gets frequent strep throat probably related to the hyperplastic tonsils.  I plan on getting the tonsils removed during the first stage of surgery.  
Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and severe degeneration.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Unerupted and impacted second molars x4 and third molars x4.
Hypertrophied tonsils with recurrent tonsillitis.
Slight Class II occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle. 
TMJ pain.
Headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Surgery Stage 1.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Uncover maxillary and mandibular second molars x4.
Bilateral tonsillectomy (by Dr. Larry Weprin).
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery Stage 2.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft it posteriorly and advance it slightly.
Bilateral ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
Removal of impacted third molars x4. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion and retain. 