HAILEY VINCENT									    01-19-05

Hailey is 14 years old. Birth date is 07/26/90. She is referred by Dr. Tom Pitts, 4786 Caughlin Parkway, Reno, NV.

Patient History

She has a history of ankylosing spondylitis and jaw joint problems. Hailey’s jaw joint problems began when she was probably about 5 or 6 years of age. Her other joints started to kick in probably about 3 or 4 years ago beginning with the knees. She was diagnosed with ankylosing spondylitic in the summer of 2004 following fairly severe painful episode of problems with the sacral area in her back. She was having severe pain, and for a while they thought that she was having kidney problems. Hailey had a Herbst appliance in from 1998 to 1999 when she was 8 to 9 years of age. She has had physical therapy. She has had a splint for one year for her jaws to help keep them from locking up. She began orthodontic treatment with full braces in 12/2004. Prior to initiation of the splint therapy and her current medication regimen, Hailey’s TMJ pain level was around 9. Her headaches were also probably up around the 8 or 9 level as well. Since she has been diagnosed with ankylosing spondylitis, she has been placed on the following medications:  
Embrel 25 mg injections 2 times per week
Sulindac 150 mg b.i.d. 
Folic acid 1 mg per day

This has significantly reduced her pain levels at this time to where her headaches are about a level of 6 in the frontal and temporal area and occur much less frequently now than they used to. Her TMJ pain currently with the splint is about a level of 1. Her overall pain around the head and neck area with the splint is about a level of 4. Prior to the splint, her daily pain levels were at 7. She currently rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 6, and disability at 5. She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her sacral joints, hips, knees, elbows, wrists, hands, fingers, ankles, and toes. She also has involvement of her shins. SHE HAS NO KNOWN ALLERGIES and does not wear jewelry. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night.

Hailey was born premature by six weeks and had respiratory distress syndrome as a newborn infant.

Of interest, about three years ago in one of her choking episodes, she became cyanotic and had to have the Heimlich procedure performed. 

Hailey and her family are not aware of her having problems with snoring. She does breathe some through her mouth when she sleeps. 

The family did bring some photographs of Hailey in her younger years. It does appear that her mandible has become more retruded than it was before, although most of the pictures are from the front view. Her chin always was retruded some but now is more markedly retruded. 

Patient Concerns

TMJ pain
Headaches
Difficulties chewing
Choking problems since a young child when eating
Swallowing difficulties
TMJ pain
Headaches
Progressively retruding lower jaw

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Hailey has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm. Maxillary dental midline is probably about 3 mm off toward the right side. Mandibular dental midline is a little bit closer to being on the facial midline. Nasal tip is a little bit off to the right side about 1 to 2 mm. Chin appears to be pretty much on the facial midline. 

In profile view, she may have just some slight fullness in the upper lip area by maybe a couple of millimeters but not too bad. She has lip incompetence of probably about 8 mm. Chin is retruded AP wise by probably 15 mm. Chin-neckline is short, and chin-neck angle is moderately well-defined. Lower lip is everted and protrusive compared to the AP position of the chin. 

Intraorally, Hailey has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some moderate crowding of the lower anterior teeth. Has thin but appears to be adequate attached gingiva. Has sort of a rainbow pattern for the alignment of the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Maxillary right cuspid is blocked out of the arch currently. This is probably what accounts for the shift of the midline. She has a full Class II cuspid relationship on the left side and a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side. She has about a 2-mm vertical overbite. Oropharynx appears relatively clear. Uvula is a little bit elongated as is the soft palate. Faucial pillars are just mildly constricted. Tonsils appear relatively normal in size and shape. 

Septum is deviated a little bit off toward the right side. Turbinates are slightly enlarged but at least as best I can see appears to be an adequate airway. To palpation, Hailey has moderate to high moderate discomfort around the temporalis, masseters, medial pterygoids, TMJs, styloid areas, SCMs, and milder tenderness over the posterior neck and shoulder areas. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly at this time. Incisal opening is 38 mm maximum, but that is with pain and discomfort. She could open 24 mm with reasonable comfort. Excursive movements to the right are 5 mm and to the left 7 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size but appears to be a passable airway. She has developing unerupted third molars x 4. Maxillary right cuspid is blocked superiorly out of the arch. Maxillary midline is shifted significantly to the right of the mandibular dental midline. Condyles appear as though they have undergone some bony changes. Lower incisors appear overangulated. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be postured downward out of the fossa somewhat. Condyle appears small and appears as though it may have undergone some resorptive changes. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Posterior wall of the fossa is a little bit difficult to identify.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be somewhat arthritic. Decreased superior and posterior joint space is present. Articular eminence is moderately steep and appears longer in length on this side as compared to the opposite side.

On opening, there is restricted translation of both condyles with the left side being a little bit more restricted than the right side. It appears that there is significantly limited translation of the joints. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear throughout. She has moderately enlarged frontal sinuses. Bony septum appears relatively straight. Turbinates appear moderate in size with the right one being a little bit larger than the left one. Shift of the maxillary dental midline is noted. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Hailey has a high occlusal plane angle and a significant skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship. Oropharyngeal airway is decreased with the airway at the level of the soft palate being about 3 mm (normal 11 mm). At the base of the tongue, the AP dimension of the airway appears to be about 4 mm (normal 11 mm). Appears to have increased anterior mandibular vertical height. Upper and lower incisors both appear overangulated. 

I do have some radiographs on Hailey taken 06/29/04. These radiographs show that the turbinates are quite large posteriorly and might actually cause some airway obstruction posteriorly. On a Panorex film taken on the same day, it shows that the condyles are posteriorly positioned in the fossa. There appear to be more osteoarthritic changes in the left joint than the right joint. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space more so on the right side than the left side. It shows that there is confluence of the apices of the four mandibular incisors giving that rainbow curvature to the lower anterior arch. Turbinates actually appear quite large in one of the sagittal images through the nasal airway. Turbinates extend beyond the posterior aspect of the hard palate and within about 5 mm of the posterior nasopharyngeal wall. Some tomographic radiographs on the right side show that the condyle is somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa. There is anterior beaking present and degenerative changes in the head of the condyle. Likewise, on the left side, the condyle appears a little bit smaller in size than the right side. There also appear to be significant degenerative changes present. Coronal views also of both joints support the presence of degenerative changes within the joint structures. There is also a set of diagnostic imaging dated 10/10/03. The findings are fairly similar in both sets of the images with perhaps some additional progression of degenerative changes in the 06/29/04 radiographs as compared to the 10/10/03 photographs. There is a slight tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

Generalized ankylosing spondylitis with multiple joint involvement
Bilateral TMJ ankylosing spondylitis with degenerative resorptive arthritis versus a separate process of Idiopathic Condylar Resorption (ICR) affecting the TMJs
AP mandibular deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP microgenia
Hypertrophied turbinates 
Nasal airway obstruction 
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of 3 mm (normal dimension 11 mm)
High occlusal plane angle 
Crowding, lower anterior arch
Crowding, maxillary arch
Maxillary dental midline shifted 3 mm to the left of the facial midline
Maxillary right cuspid blocked out of occlusion
Developing unerupted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4
Overangulation of maxillary and mandibular incisors
TMJ pain
Headaches
Myofascial pain
Masticatory dysfunction
Dysphagia
Lip incompetence

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJ

Extractions
Extract four first bicuspids

Presurgical orthodontics  
Align and level maxillary arch. Try to get maxillary midline back onto the facial midline by shifting it 3 mm to the left
Align and level mandibular arch closing extraction spaces

CT scan of bilateral TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchors
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a counter-clockwise direction
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a counter-clockwise direction
Augmentation genioplasty (HTR implant to anterior mandible)
Removal of impacted maxillary third molars
Partial turbinectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 



