NEVA GAIL WALKER								12-09-03

Gail is 56 years old and referred by Fread Head, 106 S. Prairieville Street, Athens, TX  75751.

Patient History

Gail has had previous gallbladder surgery and also has had a hysterectomy. She smokes one pack of cigarettes per day and has done this for 25 years. She takes Diovan HCT 160/12.5 (for hypertension) and Premarin 1.25 mg per day. 

Neurological testing of the right lower lip showed the following:
Two-point discrimination:  In the left lip, the two-point discrimination was at 4 mm and on the right side it was at 8 mm. In the chin, on both sides it was 20 mm.
Von Frey hairs test:  On the left side, it was 1.56, and on the right side it was 1.56. This is the smallest fibril, although she had sensation on both sides, it was slightly less on the right side, but she definitely could sense the smallest fibril on the right side.
Brush stroke:  She was correct in directional determination with brush stroke on both sides, although the right side did feel a little bit different than the left side.
Cold sensation:  She had normal sensation on the left side and on the right side, the intensity was less on the left side, and there was a slight delay in detecting the cold on the right side, but she could feel the cold sensation.
Sharp stimulation:  She had normal sensation on the left side, and on the right side she could feel the pushing but could not feel the sharp sensation. This is probably due to the fact that the pain fibers are the larger fibers and in a regenerating nerve are slower to recover.

Clinical Examination

On the left side, the mental nerve fibers coming out to the lip could be seen underneath the mucosa and came forward. The nerve is directly underneath the mucosa. Based on the location of the lesion on the right side, the nerve was most likely obscured. The excision probably involved some of the terminal branches of the mental nerve. 

Gail states that she has been on Effexor and also Neurontin but couldn’t function well on these medications. She took them for about three weeks and then stopped. Currently she takes Tylenol PM at night and says she has to do this in order to sleep. If she doesn’t take the Tylenol PM, she is awake all night, and her sister said that she just cleans her house and does stuff and just can’t sleep. She has no pain and so that is not a factor in keeping her awake. It appears it is more of a psychological factor. She says that she “feels like a freak.” She feels that her lower lip is swollen and that she is deformed. I reassured her that others cannot tell that she has the sensory deficit in the lower lip. 

I suggested that since she has to talk to groups of people that she perhaps practice in front of a mirror to get used to how the lower lip should feel with it postured in a more relaxed position. Because of the numbness, I feel that she is probably providing over function of the lower lip on the right side that may cause it to distort somewhat. This is a normal phenomenon for most people when there is loss of sensation in that area. I did discuss with her the possibility that psychological or psychiatric help may be of benefit to her if she continues to be significantly affected in that area. This might help her learn to deal with the situation better and focus on the other positive factors in her life compared to focusing so strongly on this particular factor.

I did discuss performing surgery, but at the location of the injury surgical intervention could actually cause a worsening problem and be of no benefit whatsoever. The area of injury is where the nerve has branched off, and repair would be virtually impossible. Gail was emotionally upset about the fact that we could not do a surgical repair of her problem but I believe at the end of our conversation understood why the surgery could be more detrimental to her. From an optimistic standpoint, she does have some of her sensations that are not too far off from the normal, but others still have quite a way to go such as the sharp sensation and cold. With time, she may continue to improve, although I have no guarantee that she will ever regain total sensation comparative to what it was pre-injury.

Basic Diagnoses

Previous excision of pathological lesion, right lower lip
Injury to right mental nerve branches to the lower lip
Partial paresthesia to the right lower lip
Difficulty sleeping
Psychological effects from the injury

Recommended Treatment

Continue to allow the healing process to progress. Surgery would be of no benefit

Continue with the Tylenol PM for another month if necessary to help with her sleep disorder, but she should consult with her private physician in reference to continuing with that medication or whether she should be put on any other medications to help with this situation

Psychological or psychiatric evaluation and counseling if necessary to learn to deal with her current situation
