TAMERA VORMELKER								06/21/2010

Tammy is 51 years old and refered by Dr. Thomas Walsh, 99696 Overseas Highway, #6, Key Largo, FL 33037.  Primary concerns that Tammy has includes the following:

Snoring.
Difficulties breathing.
Choking.
Fatigue.
Teeth do not fit together.

Tammy is not sure when her TMJ problems began nor the etiology.  She did have orthodontics at the age of 24 and then the orthodontics were repeated in her mid 40s.  Tammy has no headaches, rates her TMJ pain at 1 and average daily pain at 1, jaw function at 1, diet at 0, disability at 1.  The incisal opening is 55 mm, excursion movement to the right 8 mm, to the left 10 mm.  She is basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side.  She has a vertical overbite of 5 mm.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo nor hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her neck and her back.  She does have diabetes and also has neuropathy in her legs.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime, but not during the day.  She has clicking in the right joint on closing at about 15 mm, but the left joint seems to function relatively smoothly.  She has severe snoring, severe daytime somnolence, and moderate sleep apnea.  She has a moderate to severe sleep disorder and is a mouth breather at nighttime.  

She takes the following medications:

Nova 10 g Pen (insulin).
Lantus 48 cc q.h.s.
Altace 5 mg (blood pressure medication),
Tricor 145 mg q.h.s.
Labetolol 50/50.
Calcium 1200 mg.
Ambien 10 mg q.h.s.
Xanax 5 mg q.h.s.
Tammy is aware that her bite appears to be shifting and changing.  Tammy started to notice in December 2009 that her upper teeth were beginning to separate in the center. 

In frontal view,  Tammy has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 2 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, the maxilla may be retruded about 5 mm and the chin may be retruded about 8 to 10 mm.  She has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has crowns on the second molars.  She has adequate attached gingiva of the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class I cuspid on the right side but Class II end-on on the left side of about 2 to 3 mm.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 5 mm.  The occlusal plan is fairly level.  She has some crenations around the borders of her tongue.  The soft palate, uvula, fascial pillars, and tonsils all look relatively normal.  Intranasally, at least anteriorly, the turbinates look relatively normal in size and the septum looks reasonably straight.  The maximal incisal opening is 55 mm, excursion movement to the right 8 mm, to the left 10 mm.  On opening and closing, she has a closing click at about 15 mm of opening the right joint.  The left joint functions smoothly.  I could not detect an opening click.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has crowns and root canals on the mandibular second molars.  Turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  Sinuses appear clear.  Right condyle appears posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  The left condyle appears somewhat arthritic. 

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are normal in size and the septum is deviated a little bit towards the left, but not too significantly.  Sinuses appear clear. 

Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderate in size and the septum is reasonably straight.  The sinuses are clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle and some flattening there.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  There is decreased superior joint space to the lateral aspect of the joint, but medially the disc space appears much better.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit better morphology.  It may be posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking and flattening of the condylar head at the lateral aspect of the joint.  More medially, the joint space is a little bit better balance.  

Axial view of the TMJs shows that the left TMJ is decreased in vertical dimension at the lateral aspect of the joint, but medially it looks quite good.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a significantly decreased lateral joint space, but more medially the vertical joint space appears a little bit more normal.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has an anterior deep bite.  She has some disproportion in the vertical height of the inferior border of the mandible with one side being about 8 mm shorter than the other side.  Oropharyngeal airway dimension measures about 5 mm at the soft palate level and 6 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Tammy does have some lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  The maxillary arch is more symmetric.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

AP maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4.5 mm (normal AP dimension is 11 mm).
Moderate macroglossia.
History of clenching and bruxism. 
Moderate soft palate hyperplasia. 
Class I cuspid relationship on the right side, Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side. 
Anterior deep bite of 4 to 5 mm. 
Lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid approximately 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1. 	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a. 	Align and level maxillary arch. 
	b. 	Consider placement of a TAD posterior to the dentition on the right side for 
		anchorage and shift the right mandibular cuspid posteriorly approximately 
		2 mm to establish good lower arch symmetry. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 
		removing 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure and retract. 
2. 	Surgery. 
	a. 	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. 
	b. 	Maxillary advancement of approximately 5 mm and stabilize with bone plates. 
	c. 	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible 9 mm. 
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

 