NATALIE VLADIMIROVS								08/04/2008

Natalie is 26 years old.  Referred by Farhad Moshiri, DDS, 501 S. Preston Street, Suite 334, Louisville, KY 40292.  Natalie problems began when orthodontics was initiated in approximately 1998.  She apparently had an impacted and probably ankylosed maxillary right cuspid tooth.  Orthodontic plan was to try to get that tooth to erupt into position.  Apparently, with the tooth being ankylosed, it actually caused a malocclusion to develop.  She subsequently has had splint therapy, physical therapy, chiropractic treatment, massage therapy, and pain management as well as further orthodontics to try control and correct her problems.  On April 14, 2005, she had arthrocentesis of the bilateral TMJs without improvement.  The situation continues to cause her significant pain and dysfunctional problems. 

Her primary concerns are as follows:

Chronic pain. 
Malocclusion.  
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Headaches.

The maxillary right permanent cuspid was eventually removed.  She ended up with a root canal on the  maxillary right lateral incisor.  She has a pontic tooth replacing the maxillary right cuspid tooth.  
CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Natalie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  Chin appears retruded by probably 12 to 15 mm.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  The lower arch appears fairly well aligned and leveled.  She has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars except she is missing the maxillary right cuspid replaced by a pontic tooth.  In centric occlusion, she has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side by probably about 3 mm, and on the right side she may be just 1 or 2 mm Class II.  She has an anterior open bite of about 2.5 mm.  She does hit prematurely on the left side primarily with the second bicuspids and first and second molars.  On the right, it appears that the maxillary first bicuspid is about 1 mm lower than the left first bicuspid.  The right cuspid is maybe 0.5 mm compared to the left cuspid.  Oropharyngeal tissues and structures look normal.  Intranasally, the structures look reasonably normal.  Natalie is not aware of having snoring problems.  She is sometimes tired during the day, but is not aware of sleep apnea problems.  She cannot sleep on her back and sleeps predominantly on her side and on her stomach.  She is not aware of being a mouth breather.  To palpation, she has some very minimal tenderness over the retromandibular area, but no pain around the head and neck otherwise.  Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm and 35 mm without discomfort.  Excursion movements are 10 mm in each direction.  The joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the maxillary right cuspid.  A root canal is present on the right lateral incisors.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  
Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The left turbinate appears somewhat enlarged.  The septum appears reasonably straight in the bony area.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good architecture and morphology.  Joint space appears relatively normal.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good space around it and fairly good architecture, although a little bit more difficult to read on this side.  Articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Natalie has a high occlusal plane angle and a skeletal Class II jaw relationship.  However, the oropharyngeal airway appears restricted only down by the hyaloid area and the rest of the area looks reasonable.  

Basic diagnoses for Natalie would be as follows:    

Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
AP macrogenia.  
Class II end-on occlusion. 
High occlusal plane angle.  
Reversed curve of Spee in the lower arch. 
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.
Anterior open bite of 2.5 mm. 
Missing maxillary right cuspid (replaced with a pontic).
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 6.5 mm (normal 11 mm).
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Decreased nasal airway.
Myofascial pain.
Headaches. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Place a step in the archwire and align in the 4 incisors in an elevated plane level compared to the cuspids and posterior teeth.  Extrude the left cuspid about 1 mm also.  Try to level the marginal ridges particularly between the second bicuspids and first molars.  
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Consider slenderizing the lower anterior teeth removing about 1 mm of tooth structure to help decrease the slight overangulation.  Also elevate the four incisors, particularly the centrals, 1 mm if possible to decrease the reversed curve of Spee.  
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the posterior aspect inferiorly, level the occlusal plane, and maximize the occlusal fit.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction approximately 8 mm.  
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to move the chin approximately 3 to 4 mm.  
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.