RONDA VOORHIS									06/28/2007

Ronda is 42 years old and is referred by Dr. Roger Baker, 818 N. Emporia Ste. 101, Wichita, KS  67214.  Her orthodontist is Dr. Robert Smith, 1230 N. Broadmoore Wichita, KS 67206.  Ronda's TMJ problems began when she was about 14 or 15 years old which would have been in about 1979 or so.  She was in orthodontics from about 1977 through 1979.  During the orthodontics the maxillary first bicuspids were extracted and the spaces closed.  After her orthodontic treatment she was placed into a splint beginning in 1979.  She has worn splints almost continuously except for her wedding until the present time.  She has had 15 to 16 different splints.  She has been put on exercises and she has been on some medications to try to control her headache problems.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Topamax 100 mg daily.
Effexor 75 mg daily.
ACTOplus metformin 50/850 mg t.i.d.

Ronda gets headaches that she rates about a level of 7 that occur in the temple area and up on the top of the head as well as in the left frontal area.  She rates her average TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 6, jaw function 8, diet at 9, disability at 8.  She gets earaches, tinnitus and vertigo but has no hearing loss.  She has really no significant problems with other joints.

In frontal view, Ronda has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0.  Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is off to the right side 1 mm and chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, Ronda has about 3 to 4 mm of AP maxillary deficiency.  Chin actually appears to be in fairly good AP position.  Submental area is somewhat full.  Chin-neck angle is well defined.  She has an anterior open bite of about 2 to 3 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is off to the right side by about 1.5 mm.  Ronda has a Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by probably 3 mm and on the left side by probably 4 to 5 mm.  She has a crossbite tendency on the right side.  She has an anterior crossbite.  She has a little bit of spacing between some of her lower anterior teeth.  She has a power chain on right now trying to close that space up.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal.  Intranasally, the right turbinate is moderate size with the left one quite small.  The left airway looks open.  To palpation, she has significant pain over the TMJs, styloid areas, and moderate pain over the medial pterygoids and the masseter muscles.  On opening, she has bilateral clicks at 10 mm of opening and closing click of about 5 mm.  The pop in the right joint is more evident than the one on the left side.  Maximal incisal opening is 54 mm and excursive movements are about 6 mm in each direction.  Tooth size analysis reveals that there is really not a tooth size discrepancy.  Hand articulating the model tends to present that there is a problem that could be due to labial lingual widths of the upper teeth.  It is probably 1 to 2 mm of tooth size discrepancy.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars and both maxillary first bicuspids.  The sinuses look clear.  Difficult to evaluate the joints.

RONDA VOORHIS				06/28/2007				Page 2

Waters view shows that the septum is relatively straight.  There may be a little constricture of the turbinates on the right side.  There may be a septal spur off the septum.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  She has a large frontal sinus. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Articular eminence looks relatively normal.  Articular disc has a moderate inclination and is a little bit elongated.  There is a slight decreased posterior joint space and increased anterior joint space.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is postured downward and forward in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle is not centered in the fossa.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is a Class III skeletal relationship and occlusal relationship.  Moderate increase in the occlusal plane angle.  There is an anterior open bite.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 8 mm at the tongue level and 10 to 11 mm at the soft palate level.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocated anterior and medially.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Mandibular prognathism.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Occludes only on left second molars.
Anterior open bite. 
Anterior crossbite.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
Continue to align and level lower arch closing the spacing in the anterior arch.
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible posterior.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
