KELLY VIVIAN 									08/20/2007

Kelly is 13 years old and referred by Dr. George Adams.  Kelly is in good health with no major medical problems.  Kelly has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain or myofascial pain.  He has no facial numbness.  He rates his TMJ pain at 0, average daily pain at 0, jaw function, diet and disability all at 0.  No headache problems.  He takes no medications.  No earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.

Kelly and his mother have been aware that he has had a jaw problem for about four years now.  He did see Dr. Mark Galler when Kelly was 9 and had orthodontics for 1 to 1-1/2 years.  At that time Dr. Galler did inform them that he might likely need some surgery.  Approximately a year ago Kelly changed orthodontists and began seeing Dr. George Adams.  Currently, Kelly has no braces on his teeth.

In frontal view, Kelly has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about –1.   Maxillary midline is off to the left side just a 1.5 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is off to the left about 3 to 4 mm and the chin is off to the left side approximately 5 mm.  In profile view, Kelly has some deficiency in maxillary projection of the upper lip about 3 to 4 m.  The upper lip looks slightly elongated compared to the lower two-thirds of the face.  The lower lip is somewhat everted.  Chin appears to be in fairly good AP position.  However, the chin looks deficient compared to the projection of the lower lip.  Intraorally, Kelly has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  The second molar is just not all the way erupted in.  The lower incisors are in lingual inclination.  He appears to have adequate attached gingiva although fairly thin.  In the upper arch he has significant crowding present.  The second molars are just beginning to come in.  Kelly has a full Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and a Class III end-on cuspid relationship on the left side.  He has a little bit of an open bite tendency on the left cuspid lateral incisor area.  The mandibular right cuspid is distal to the left cuspid by 1 to 2 mm in the lower arch.  In the upper arch, the right cuspid may be 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  Transverse occlusal plane is fairly level.  The left side may be just slightly elevated compared to the right side.  The cuspids are both elevated somewhat with the left one being a little bit more than the right.  Kelly has an overbite of 1 mm and an overjet of about 1 mm.  The oropharyngeal areas look normal and the tonsils appear normal in size.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  The septum appears relatively normal and may have some mild nasal obstruction.  He has an anterior crossbite and a left posterior crossbite.  To palpation, he has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Right joint seems to function very smoothly.  The left joint has an opening click of 10 mm and closing click at about 5 mm.  Maximal incisal opening is 59 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 6 mm, left 5 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth including the 4 impacted third molars.  The sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size and the septum appears reasonably straight.

Waters view shows the septum is fairly straight.  The turbinates are moderate in size.  The sinuses look very clear.  

KELLY VIVIAN				08/20/2007				Page 2

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good shape.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  Joint space looks adequate.  

Right TMJ tomogram is more difficult to interpret.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  Difficult to evaluate the condyle and joint space.  On opening, there appears to be good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class III relationship and occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway appears a little bit constricted particularly at the base of the tongue where the airway is only about 3 mm.  He has a slightly elevated occlusal plane angle.  

Bolton's analysis shows that there is no significant tooth size discrepancy.  When positioning a new Class I cuspid relationship there is no posterior crossbite or anterior crossbite.  There is some mild crowing in both arches. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ condylar hyperplasia.
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
Left TMJ articular disc dislocation with early reduction. 
Impacted third molars x4.
Moderate crowding of maxillary and mandibular arches.
Full Class III occlusion on the right side, Class III end-on on the left side.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Continue to monitor facial growth and development as well as progression of the left TMJ disc displacement until the patient is approximately 16 years old.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery. (When the patient is approximately 17 years old).
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly and align along the facial midline.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance and maximize the occlusal fit.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
