MARLENE WALKER							10/25/2005

Marlene is 74 years old and referred by Dr. Tom Walsh from Coeur d' Alene, Idaho.  Marlene has had previous problems with TMJ, sinus, neck, shoulder and back.  She had an ovarian cyst removed in 1960 and a hysterectomy in 1962.  She had her gallbladder taken out in 1985.  She had an angiogram in 1991.  For the most part she is in reasonable health.  She has hypothyroidism.  She has had some reactions to medications including Biaxin, Cipro and Ketek.  Her TMJ problems began probably in the 1970s.  She states she was in an MVA in the 1960s, but I am not sure whether that contributed to her joint problems or not.  She was treated by Dr. Slack in Ft. Worth.  She had migraine headaches frequently from the age of 30 to about 39.  She has had a history of closed locked on different occasions.  She has had splint therapy on and off since about the 1970s and has had several splints.  About 2 months ago she fell and this has aggravated her problems.  

MEDICATIONS
Cardizem 240 mg.
Prevacid 30 mg q.d.
Synthroid 0.1 mg q.d.
Advil for headaches. 
Emla cream.
Nexium, but she has stopped taking it.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Headaches.
Head pain.
Jaw pain.
When she touches her face she gets the feeling of needles sticking into her skin.
Neck and shoulder problems.
Eyes get dark circles around them.
Difficulty breathing.
Frequent vertigo.

She reports no problems with headaches, gets tinnitus occasionally but frequent vertigo.  She has decreased hearing on the right side.  The other joints that bother her include her neck, right shoulder back and questionably the hips.  The right foot tingles also at times.  She does have acid reflux and she gets leg swelling.  She has sleep disorder.

In frontal view, she has good facial balance.  In the profile view, she appears to have fairly good AP facial balance as well.  Intraorally, she is missing the right first molar.  She has the second molar in place.  First molar is in place by a bicuspid size pontic bridge.  On the left side, she is likewise missing the first molar and has it replaced with a bicuspid size pontic.  She has 3 in a bridge posterior in both quadrants.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she appears to have all of her teeth back through the second molars but has a crown and there may be some bridgework up there as well.  In centric relation she is Class I cuspid on the right side, Class II end-on on the left side.  

MARLENE WALKER			10/25/2005				Page 2


She has an anterior deep bite of about 5 mm.  She has about a 2 to 3 mm overjet.  Intraorally, the oral mucosa looks healthy.  Uvula is a little bit elongated but not too significant.  The soft palate looks relatively normal as does the transverse width of the faucial pillars.  Intranasally, she has fairly good sized turbinates particularly on the left side where it appears to almost touch the nasal septum.  The nasal septum has some deviations in it.  The turbinates appears quite large and the left one particularly being large almost touching the septum.  On the right side the turbinate is large but not quite as significant.  The septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side it appears.  Probable moderate nasal airway obstruction.  Columella is normal as well as luminal valves.  Her husband says at times have severe snoring.  She has problems with significant daytime somnolence.  She is aware of some sleep apnea problems where she wakes herself up trying to catch her breath.  To palpation she has high-moderate low-severe pain over the right TMJ,  moderate pain over the right pterygoid, bilateral styloid areas and right SCM, posterior neck and shoulder.  She has milder tenderness over the right temporalis, right medial pterygoid and left TMJ.  Maximal opening is 40 mm, excursive movement to the right 3 mm and the left 5 mm.  She has an opening pop at about 10 mm on the right side and closing pop about 5 mm.  Difficult to tell if there is a coincidental pop on the left side as well.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the absence of the first molars replaced by bridges in the mandibular arches and in the maxillary left arch.  On the right side, she is possibly missing a first molar as well with the second and third molars adjusted forward.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  Some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle on the right side.  The left side appear a little bit more aggressive which may be arthritis but difficult to judge from this x-ray.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly superiorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle does look somewhat arthritic.  

Left TMJ shows the condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Decreased superior joint space.  On opening, there is moderately good translation of condyles.  

Waters view shows the bony septum has some deviation and the sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates appears moderately enlarged specifically on the right side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of only about 4 mm.  She has a skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship.  The soft palate looks relatively long.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES 
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with reductions. (Discs have been displaced but with reduction for approximately 30 years.)
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.

MARLENE WALKER			10/25/2005				Page 3


Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of only with an APA-P dimension of 2 to 3 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm.)
Class I occlusion on the right side, Class II end-on occlusion on the left side.
Anterior deep bite.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Severe snoring.
Sleep apnea syndrome.
Nocturnal clenching.
Missing first molars in 3 quadrants with 3 in bridges replacing bilateral mandibular first molars and maxillary left first molar.
Hyperplastic soft palate.

SURGICAL TREATMENT OPTION 1: 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advance with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
UPPP.
TREATMENT OPTION 2:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla.
UPPP.
TREATMENT OPTION 3
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
UPPP.
TREATMENT OPTION 4
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion.
UPPP.

It is quite conceivable that her current splint which she says she ends up biting through could be initiating nocturnal clenching.  She says she wakes up with headaches predominately in the morning.  I feel that she could be treated with some Klonopin to see if this would stop her nocturnal clenching and help reduce her headaches.  The concern I have is with her sleep apnea symptoms that we do not want to sedate her too much.  I did give her a prescription for Klonopin 0.5 mg dispensing 10 tablets 1 to 2 tablets q.h.s.  She is to take it 1 hour before bedtime and try 1 tablet at first.  If she does good on this but still wakes up with some headaches, she could try 2 tablets at a time.  
MARLENE WALKER			10/25/2005				Page 4


On further discussion with her and her husband Thomas, she seems reluctant to proceed on with any type of surgery.  She would rather try the medication and perhaps even consider just doing the UPPP procedure that perhaps it may just give her some improvement with her airway.  She is on Medicare which would make it more difficult particularly in reference to total joint prosthesis approach.  She is to call me next week to let me know how she is doing with the medication.  For pain medication, we could consider trying Ultram, however, she says she has to have a coated pill or it upsets her stomach.  We will see how things go with the Klonopin first. 
