JAMES WADE									05/20/2008

James is 7 years old.  Birth date is 10/06/2000.  Referred by Dr. Thomas Czarnecki, 754 N. Carroll Avenue, Southlake, TX 76092.  Her dentist is Dr. Sandra Armstrong, 2915 E. Southlake Blvd., #200, Southlake, TX 76092.  James with born with unilateral cleft lip and dental alveolus.  Palate is intact.  He has a fairly nice loop repair performed by Dr. Ken Salyer.  James has had just one surgery to date and this was for the lip repair.  He may have had a little gum surgery done at the same time.  
CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, James has a little bit of deficiency in the mid part of the upper lip.  The scar line actually looks very nice.  Alar base on the left side is slightly wide compared to the right side and the alar cartilage is at a lower level in the tip of nose on the left side as compared to the right side.  Left nostril is more flared laterally, although the luminal valve appears constricted more so on the left side of the nose as compared to the right side.  In the midline, he is absent a tubercle and there is less vertical height of the vermilion in the midline as compared to laterally.  The vertical length of the upper lip is fairly level on both sides.  There is a slight mid-alignment at the mucocutaneous junction.  Upper lip length is about 17 mm.  Upper lip tooth relationship is about 5 mm.  In profile, he may have just some slight increased fullness in the maxilla.  The chin may be just slightly AP deficient.  Intraorally, his dental midlines are pretty much on the facial midline, but the maxillary left central incisor is rotated distally and at about 90 degrees to its proper orientation.  He has primary B’s, C’s, D’s, and E’s still remaining.  In the lower arch, he has C’s, D’s, and E’s still in position.  The lower lateral incisor on the right side is not completely erupted in yet.  He has all of his permanent teeth developing back through the second molars.  The third molars are not real evident at this time.  He has an anterior deep bite of about 4-5 mm.  He has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and a slight Class II on the left side by about 2-3 mm.  It is difficult to tell if he has a fistula through the alveolar cleft area, but radiographically, he has a fairly large bony defect in alveolar cleft area.  High beneath the upper lip it appears that there is an oronasal communication.  Intranasally, the very anterior aspect of the septum is displaced off to the right side, but then there is a significant deviation of the septum off to the left side that seems to block off a good part of that airway.  It towards the anterior aspect of the nose.  Intraorally, the uvula, soft palate, and fascial pillars are all look relatively normal.  Tonsils are moderate in size.  I cannot see the adenoid tissue from an intraoral view.  He likely has moderate nasal airway obstruction.  
His relatives state that he breathes through his mouth when he sleeps.  He is predominantly a mouth breather at nighttime and also during the day.  This could account for some of his anterior vertical maxillary excess.  He has no TMJ issues and no pain or headaches around the head and neck area.  He is taking an antibiotic, Cefdinir, for strep and began that last Friday night.  He currently weighs 68 pounds.  Katy Wade, James’ mother, apparently was developing lupus when she was pregnant with James.  She had blood clots in her placenta and had unexplained fevers.  She subsequently had developed some cardiac problems and has had heart surgery.  She had pericardial effusion and they put in a window apparently to allow the fluid to drain out.  On the questionnaire, they do have marked down that he has some mild snoring.  He does have significant difficulties breathing through his nose.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of numerous primary teeth including the maxillary B’s, C’s, D’s, and E’s and mandibular C’s, D’s, and E’s.  The first molars are in.  The second molars are unerupted yet.  He has a primary lateral incisor that is tipped over in toward the cleft area.  He has a 90 degree rotated maxillary left central incisor.  He has a fairly good-sized alveolar cleft measuring about 10 mm across.  He has a diastema between his upper central incisors.  In the lower arch, the mandibular right lateral incisor is not erupted in yet.  The condyles look relatively normal.  
Waters view shows that he has mild deviation of the bony nasal septum, but the cartilage septum is much worse.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Right frontal sinus is not developed.  The bony septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side.  
Tomograms look relatively normal.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that James may have some slight maxillary protrusion, but vertical maxillary excess.  The mandible may be slightly AP deficient.  Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good except he has got a large adenoid mass in the nasopharynx with significant constricture between the nasal and oropharyngeal cavities.  He has a relatively low occlusal plane and mandibular plane angle facial morphology.  
Dental model analyses shows that he has got a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and Class II end-on on the left side by about 3 mm. The primary left lateral incisor is still in position, but drifted over into the cleft area.  The maxillary incisors are both rotated, but the left one is significantly greater than the right side, being at almost 90 degrees to the frontal plane.  He has some space between the three lower incisors that are either erupted or partially erupted, but the right lateral incisor is not evident clinically.  The midlines are coincidental.  The right maxillary cuspid may be about 2 mm anterior to the left cuspid in the lower arch and that could be contributory to the asymmetry.  This may explain the Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side.  Upper incisors do appear to be oriented somewhat vertical.  The chin appears just slightly AP deficient.
Basic diagnoses for James would be as follows:
Repaired maxillary left cleft lip.
Left maxillary alveolar cleft.
Missing maxillary left permanent lateral incisor.
Class I occlusion on the right side, slight Class II end-on occlusion (2-3 mm) on the left side.
Slight anterior vertical maxillary excess of 2-3 mm.
Malrotation of the maxillary incisors, particularly the left one. 
Anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.
Residual cleft lip deformity with decreased vermilion and tubercle in the midline.
External nasal deformity secondary to the cleft lip.
Nasoseptal deviation with significant blockage of the left side of the nose.
Significant hypertrophy of the nasopharyngeal adenoid tissues.
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Retained primary teeth including bilateral maxillary B’s, C’s, D’s and E’s and mandibular C’s, D’s, and E’s. 
Unerupted mandibular lateral incisor.




Recommended treatment would be as follows:	
 
Continue to monitor growth and development.  (He has excellent growth of the maxilla considering having an unilateral cleft lip and maxillary alveolus.) 
Consider some aesthetic orthodontics to correct malrotations of the maxillary central incisors.
Consider bonding on the maxillary left primary lateral incisor to make the crown larger and help make it look like a normal lateral incisor.
Monitor the development of the permanent cuspid on the left side and monitor its eruption pattern.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.  
When cuspid is approaching or threatening to erupt into the alveolar cleft area, place a bone graft in the left maxillary alveolar cleft area. 
b.  Closure of oronasal fistula (if present).
c.  Consider nasal septoplasty.
Consider cleft lip revision.
Consider nasal reconstruction. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry.
Placement of implant to maxillary left lateral incisor alveolus.
Placement of crown on the dental implant. 
