JAKE VINES									05/17/2011

Jake is 20 years old, birth date 07/30/1990.  Referred by some former patients.  Jake is in good health with no major medical problems.  He takes no medications.  Jake’s primary concerns are as follows:

Clicking in the jaws.
Sore muscles.
Occasional locking of the jaw.
Sore mouth.
Occasional headaches. 
Tiredness of the jaws.

Jake’s jaw problems began when he was about 19.  At the age of 19, he did get hit in the jaw on the right side and since then has had some clicking in his jaw joints.  To date, Jake has had no treatment for his jaw situation.  Jake gets headaches once or twice a week at about a level of 4 in the temple and back of the head.  Jake has had 3 major headaches in the past month where he wakes up with the headaches in the morning.  Jake is aware of clenching his teeth at nighttime.  He rates his TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain is at about level of 7 and predominantly in the masseter muscle areas.  He rates his jaw function at 4, diet at 0, disability at 2.  He has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo nor hearing loss.  Other joints that bother him include his knees.  He takes no medications.

In frontal view, Jake has fairly good facial balance in the middle and upper third face.  There is some slight asymmetry in the mandible.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left side.  The chin is probably about 3 mm off to the left.  In profile view, Jake has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably 3 to 4 mm.  He may be just slightly AP prominent by a couple of millimeters.  Jake does have about 5 mm of lip incompetence.  The chin neckline and chin neck angle are well defined.  He has a high mandibular occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  Intraorally, Jake has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars erupted in.  He has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch and some lingual inclination of the lower incisors.  He has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he has got all of his teeth back through the second molars.  Jake has a full Class III occlusal relationship bilaterally, being just slightly greater on the right side than the left side.  He has got an anterior cross bite a full posterior cross bite on the left side and an end-on relationship on the right side.  The maxilla has a little bit of a transverse collapse on the left side with it being a little bit more narrow on that side compared to the right side.  The mandibular posterior teeth may be rotated just a little bit to the left side a couple of millimeters.  He has a zero vertical over bite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy, but he does have moderately enlarged tonsils and a mildly enlarge uvula.  Intranasally, turbinates appear mild to moderate in size.  He has had some sinusitis problems, and, in fact, his x-rays which were taken on May 10 show that the left sinus was totally obliterated with fluid.  To palpation, Jake has no significant tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, he has a very soft pop in the right joint at probably about 20 mm and a closing pop at about 10.  The left side seems to function relatively smoothly.  The maximal incisal opening is 61 mm and excursion movements are 7 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Turbinates appear moderate in size, but the bony septum appears reasonably straight.  He has a Class III cuspid-molar relationship.  He has a root canal in the maxillary right first molar.  The condylar head and necks appear somewhat elongated.  

Coronal radiograph shows that he has complete obliteration of his left maxillary sinus and it is completely full of fluids and/or mucous.  The right turbinate is quite large, although the left one is relatively normal in size.  The right turbinate appears to  be causing some obstruction in that side of the nasal airway.  The septum is reasonably straight.  The maxillary right sinus looks normal and healthy.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has reasonably morphology.  There is decreased joint space superior and posteriorly.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology and actually healthier looking than the opposite side.  The joint space is decreased superior and posterior.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The lateral pole is lower than the medial pole.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The condyle appears a little bit long vertically.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle where the lateral pole is lower than the medial pole.  Vertical joint space is less than normal.  The condyle appears to have good mediolateral width.  There is significant decreased joint space vertically.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class III and occlusal Class III relationship.  Cephalometric analysis shows that cephalometrically he has a Class III skeletal occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway looks good.   

Basic diagnoses for Jake would be as follows:

Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia with displaced articular discs.
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia.
Class III occlusion.
Anterior and bilateral posterior cross bite with the cross bite being worse on the left side.
Hypertrophied turbinates creating nasal airway obstruction.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
TMJ pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and 			ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back on the 		facial midline and reposition it posteriorly.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and expand.
	d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  