MIKE WALLIS									06-28-04

Mike is 29 years old and referred by Dr. Al Bishop. 

Patient History

Previous surgery includes he had a double hernia repair in 1977. Mike is in good health with no major medical problems. He takes no medications and is not aware of any allergies. Mike has been aware of having jaw malalignment problems for a long time. He was taken to a number of orthodontists and dentists when he was younger, and he was told that he would have to have his jaw broken and his jaws wired together, and he elected not to pursue that at that time. Mike is not aware of his bite getting any worse and feels that it is stable in its current position. Mike’s teeth touch only in one area on the left side, and the rest of his teeth are all out of occlusion. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Mike has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Lower third face appears to be shifted off toward the right side. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary midline is shifted off to the right side probably about 1 to 2 mm. Mandibular dental midline is shifted off to the right side probably 2 mm. Chin is shifted off to the right side about 5 to 6 mm. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much aligned with each other. As Mike shifts his mandible toward the left side probably about 4 mm or so in the mandibular dental midline, it significantly improves his facial symmetry. May be some slight oral dystopia with the right eye being maybe a couple of millimeters higher than the left eye. 

In profile view, Mike has some slight AP maxillary deficiency but not too significant, maybe 2 to 3 mm at the most. Chin actually has fairly good AP projection. Chin-neckline looks relatively normal.

Intraorally, Mike has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth are fairly well aligned. He has been wearing orthodontic appliances for about one year. Has really thin attached gingival around the lower anterior teeth, and roots are quite prominent anteriorly. In the upper arch, Mike has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Mike appears to occlude on the left maxillary lateral incisor, cuspid, and mandibular cuspid/first bicuspid with the rest of the teeth being out of occlusion. He has a crossbite anteriorly and on the right side and posteriorly a tendency on the left side. Has an open bite of probably a good 3 perhaps 4 mm on the right side. He has about a 5-mm Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and probably a good 5 to 6 mm Class III on the left side. Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level in the mandible. In the maxilla, the right cuspid is about a millimeter higher than the left side. Right maxillary cuspid is about a millimeter posterior to the left one. Oropharynx appears clear. Maximal incisal opening is about 66 mm, left excursive movements about 9 to 10 mm, right excursive movements 5 mm. 

Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged. The septum appears relatively straight. Columella is somewhat wide. Nostrils are narrow. Luminal valves appear relatively normal. Uvula appears relatively normal in size. Soft palate may be mildly hyperplastic but not significantly. Faucial pillars look relatively normal. He has no problems with snoring and no sleep apnea problems. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses look relatively clear as best they can be seen. Turbinates appear moderate in size. All four wisdom teeth are gone as they were removed about 11 years ago. Left condylar head and neck appear somewhat enlarged compared to the right side. On both sides, the head and neck of the condyles appear elongated. The rest of the teeth are all present. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that on one view appears to have a little bit of an unusual shape to it. Appears to be some anterior beaking and some irregularities on the head of the condyle. On another view it shows the condyle looks fairly normal in architecture. Joint space looks fairly good. Articular eminence is somewhat shallow. Joint space appears fairly well-balance in the two views shown.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Appears to be good joint space superiorly, posteriorly, and anteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. 

On opening, there is good translation of the condyles, and they both come anterior to the articular eminence.

Waters view shows that the left side appears a little bit cloudy compared to the right maxillary sinus. Right turbinate appears enlarged compared to the left side and seems to block a significant amount of the airway on the right side. The facial asymmetry is noted with the maxilla and mandible both being shifted off toward the right side. Appears to be a cant in the occlusion with the posterior right maxilla being a couple of millimeters lower than the left side. Mandible sort of follows suit. Aligning with the midline of the face, the maxillary dental midline appears to be a couple of millimeters off to the right, mandibular dental midline appears to be about 3 to 4 mm off to the right, and chin midline is probably 6 to 7 mm off to the right side. 

Cephalometric analysis shows that Mike has a Class III skeletal relationship, Class III occlusion, and posterior open bites. Oropharyngeal airway appears very good. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Appears to have occlusion only on some anterior teeth and all the posterior teeth from at least the first bicuspids posteriorly are completely out of occlusion with a significant open bite. 

Basic Diagnoses

Deviate mandibular prognathism
AP maxillary deficiency and asymmetry
Class III occlusion
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side a millimeter higher than the left side
Anterior and right posterior crossbites
Left posterior open bite from cuspid through second molar and right-sided open bite from right central incisor through second molar (approximately 3 to 4 mm)
Occluding only on the left maxillary lateral incisor/cuspid, and mandibular cuspid/first bicuspid
Rule out osteoma/osteochondroma of left condyle
Rule out bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations

Recommended Treatment

Evaluate previous photographs and any available x-rays to determine if the facial asymmetry is stable or getting worse

MRI of left and right TMJ to rule out or confirm articular disc dislocation 

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Remove occlusal buildups on the maxillary first molars prior to surgery

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, transversely level it, and rotate it back onto the facial midline
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate it in a counterclockwise direction, level it, and maximize the interocclusal relationship of the maxillary teeth
Consider bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair if displacement of the discs is confirmed
Consider left TMJ high condylectomy if osteoma or osteochondroma versus condylar hyperplasia is confirmed to be active

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
