MARY COLLEEN WARD								01-31-05

Mary is 21 years old and referred by Terry Carpenter, DDS, 3300 Haynes, Midland, TX  79707. Her orthodontist in Midland would be Dr. James Compton, 4610 N. Garfield, Suite A-9, Midland, TX  79705. Also, Mary was referred by Kevin E. Porter, DDS, MD, 4610 N. Garfield, Suite A-6, The Colonnade, Midland, TX  79705.

Patient Concerns

Jaw pain
Right jaw catches and locks
Teeth don’t fit together
Painful to bite the teeth together
Difficulties sleeping
Headaches 
Jaw joint pain
Snoring
Tiredness during the day

Patient History

She has no problems with earaches, vertigo, or hearing loss. Gets occasional tinnitus. Is allergic to LODINE and over Christmas had a severe allergic reaction for which she had to be taken to the hospital, and it was felt it was either due to a muffin she ate or to her new Christmas pajamas. About two years ago, Mary did develop an autoimmune deficiency problem and took gamma globulin injection treatments for about six months. She apparently has no further problems with that. She is not aware of clenching or bruxing her teeth at night or during the day. She has had some orthodontics to straighten up her upper front teeth when she was about 8 or 9 years of age. 

She takes Zyrtec but no other medications.

Mary’s jaw problems began about 1-1/2 to 2 years ago when she began developing some tenderness and soreness on the right, and about a year-and-a-half ago she was aware of it clicking. The clicking is still there, although now it has a tendency to get locked. She feels that the lower jaw now catches on that right side, and so she has to manipulate and move her jaw in order to get her jaw to open up. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Mary has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 6.5 mm. Maxillary dental midline is just slightly to the left about 0.5 mm. Mandibular dental midline is about 2 to 3 mm off toward the right side. Chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is probably about a millimeter to the right of the chin midline.

In profile view, Mary has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 to 5 mm. Chin appears retruded about 15 to 18 mm. Chin-neckline is a little bit short, and the chin-neck angle is moderately well-defined. 

Intraorally, Mary has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some mild crowding lower anterior arch. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Upper lateral incisors appear small in size, and she has a tendency toward a division II occlusion. Has a narrow transverse width of the maxilla and almost slight reverse curve of Wilson in the upper arch. There is a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being about 1 to 2 mm Class II on the left side and probably about 4 to 5 mm Class II on the right side. She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 to 5 mm. She has maybe a millimeter overjet. Right cuspid is about 1.5 mm posterior to the left cuspid in the lower arch. In the upper arch, the left cuspid may be a millimeter posterior to the right cuspid. There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about a millimeter to 2 mm higher than the left side. She does have some slight increased fullness in the left side of the face as compared to the right side. 

Intranasally, septum appears reasonably straight. Tonsils appear moderately enlarged but not too significant, and there appears to be adequate airway. The left turbinate was a little bit enlarged compared to the right side. 

Dental model analysis shows that there is some moderate crowding, lower anterior arch, and mild crowding in the upper arch. She does have a fairly flat curve of Wilson in the upper arch and an increased or accentuated curve of Wilson in the lower arch. There is an increased curve of Spee in the lower arch and slight reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch.

Mary has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm. Maximal incisal opening is about 40 mm and excursive movement to the right of 8 mm and to the left of about 10 mm. 

On opening, left joint seems to function smoothly, but on the right side she has an opening click at about 10 mm and a closing click at about 5 to 10 mm. 

To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the right temporalis, masseter, TMJ, and styloid area and no tenderness on the left side. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but the rest of the teeth are all present. A little calcification between the bicuspids on the mandibular left side. Sinuses appear reasonably clear, although the left one appears a little bit more cloudy than the right one. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Septum appears reasonably straight. Appears to be some flattening on the left head of the condyle. Right side appears to have a little bit of a vertical orientation associated with the anterior aspect of the condyle. 

Waters view shows the sinuses are all fairly clear. Bony septum appears reasonably straight. Turbinates appear somewhat enlarged particularly on the left side. Vertical height of the face on the right side appears a little bit shorter than the left side. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. A little flattening on the superoposterior aspect of the condylar head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Decreased joint space could be indicative of anterior displacement of the articular disc. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa and may be a slight decreased superior joint space but good anterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. A little bit of anterior beaking may be present on this condyle and a little flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.
Cephalometrically, Mary has anterior vertical maxillary excess. She has a fairly large adenoid mass in her nasopharynx and a decreased nasopharyngeal airway of about 4.5 mm. Tonsils are quite large and fill up a good part of the oropharynx and actually displace the tongue forward. She has an anterior deep bite and perhaps a mild high occlusal plane angulation. Lower incisors may be just slightly overangulated. Upper incisors are in a vertical inclination. Does note that when she sees Mary taking a nap on the couch that she oftentimes has her mouth open. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with early reductions
Anterior vertical maxillary excess and posterior vertical excess
AP mandibular deficiency
Lip incompetence of about 7 mm
Class II end-on occlusion being worse on the right side than the left side
Maxillary midline shifted a millimeter to the left, mandibular dental midline shifted 2 mm to the right 
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Anterior deep bite of 4 to 5 mm
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1.5 to 2 mm higher than the left side
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of approximately 2 mm
Headaches
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction 
Hypertrophied nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue
Hypertrophied tonsils
Recurrent sore throats
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Snoring
Daytime tiredness

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies   
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure. Use Class II elastics on the right side and Class III elastics on the left side to try to get the mandibular dental midline shifted to the left and maxillary midline shifted slightly to the right to create a more even bilateral Class II end-on occlusion and create better symmetry in both the upper and lower arch

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly, advance it, and transversely level the occlusal plane
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy
Bilateral tonsillectomy
Bilateral turbinectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 