LINDA WARD								07/21/2011

info@bellairefaces.comLinda is 58 years old, birth date 01/27/1953.  Referred by Phillip Iero, MD, DDS, 6800 West Loop South, Suite 350, Bellaire, TX 77401, phone #713-665-9200.  E-mail is info@bellairefaces.com.  

Linda’s TMJ problems began as a teenager when she would have problems with the jaw getting locked open of unknown etiology.  In about 1978 or 1979, she was a victim of spousal abuse and was hit on the left side of the jaw and she had developed significant problems after that episode.  She has had the following surgical treatments:

In 1986, left TMJ Proplast Teflon interpositional implant.
In 1986 and 1987, she had numerous debridements x10.  
She developed osteomyelitis and in 1988 was treated surgically for the left TMJ osteomyelitis including a condylectomy and resection of the masseter muscle. 
In 1988, a free flap was taken from the right upper arm to graft muscle into the left jaw.  
In 1989, the left TMJ was reconstructed with a Christensen total joint prosthesis with an acrylic head.  
In 1994, the right TMJ was reconstructed with a Christensen prosthesis probably metal on metal, but the screws loosened and the prosthesis failed.  

These first procedures were all performed by Dr. Dan Caspar in Galesburg, IL.  

7.   In 1996, she had the right TMJ prosthesis removed and a new Christensen prosthesis placed with a metal-on-metal articulation by Dr. Halfrick in Houston.  

Linda’s primary concerns include the following:

Pain in left TMJ increasing in severity over the past 2 years.
Severe left jaw bone pain.
Left-sided nerve pain.
Muscle tenseness and spasms.

Linda currently takes the following medications:

Norvasc 5 mg q.d.
Ziac 10/6.25 mg q.d. (blood pressure medication).
Clonidine 0.2 mg t.i.d. 
Nexium 40 mg q.d.
Celexa 20 mg q.d.
Ultracet p.r.n.
Advil 800 mg 3 times a day.


Linda has numbness in the left lower lip and chin area.  She has significant involvement of the facial nerve with significant paralysis associated with the frontal branch, milder association with the zygomatic branch, but the mandibular buccal and mandibular branches are nonfunctional.  She gets headaches 3 times a week at about a level of 9 in the frontal and temporal area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 6, jaw function and diet at 5, disability at 4.  

In frontal view, Linda has fairly good facial symmetry except that the left mandibular ramus posterior body area protrudes laterally about 3 to 4 mm more than the right side.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is -3 mm.  In profile, she has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Linda is missing the mandibular left second and third molar and probably right third molar.  In the upper arch, she is missing the left secondary and third molar and probably right third molar.  Linda is also missing the maxillary left cuspid.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm, but pretty close to being a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  She does have a post in the maxillary left cuspid area, but will need to have the restorative dentistry completed yet.  Oropharyngeal tissues were difficult to evaluate because of decreased jaw opening, but what I could see appeared to be healthy tissue.  Uvula may be somewhat elongated.  Linda has no difficulties breathing through her nose.  Linda reports no problems with snoring, daytime somnolence, nor sleep apnea.  She sleeps well at night.  To palpation, she has moderate to low severe pain on the left side in the left temporalis, left medial pterygoid, left TMJ, left retromandibular area and mild tenderness over the left masseter muscle.  The maximal incisal opening is 24 mm, but only 15 mm without pain.  The excursion movements are 1.5 mm in each direction.  

Six or seven years ago, Linda states that she could open her jaws to about 38 mm, but it slowly decreased to its current level of 24 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that she has had root canals on all of her maxillary teeth and her lower left bicuspids, first molar, right side bicuspids, and second molar.  She has an implant in the maxillary left cuspid area.  She has a Christensen prosthesis on the left side with an acrylic head and a metal pin in the center and it appears as though there is metal on metal contact.  There are 6 screws in the mandibular component.  On the right side, there is a Christensen with metal on metal articulation.  There are 6 screws holding the mandibular component in place.  The sinuses look relatively normal.  

Coronal radiographic shows that the sinuses appear reasonably clear.  The septum is deviated off to the right side.  The turbinates are relatively normal in size.  

Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderate in size.  There may be a spur coming off the septum towards the left side that be blocking the airway.  The sinuses I believe are fairly clear, but the left side is not as clear as the right side.  

Left TMJ coronal tomogram show that there appears to be some space between the metal and bone in the fossa on the fossa component.  There is metal on metal contact of the centric pin of the mandibular component functioning against the metal of the fossa.  There may be some heterotopic bone in the fossa area coming off the medial side. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a little better space between the fossa and the metal of the fossa component.  The mandibular component demonstrates metal on metal articulation.  It is difficult to tell if there is heterotopic bone on the medial side or whether it is just a shadow from the metal prosthesis.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a Christensen prosthesis with an acrylic head with metal on metal contact on that side.  It is difficult to tell if there is a fracture through the prosthesis, but I believe it is intact, although one view is questionable.

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows the presence of the Christensen with metal on metal articulation.  Do not see any evidence of any fracture.  There is definitely metal on metal articulation.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows Linda has basically a slight Class II skeletal relationship, but fairly good Class I occlusion.  The oropharyngeal airway as best it can be seen appears relatively normal.  She does have some metal vascular clips in the soft tissues below the inferior border of the mandible on the left side.

Basic diagnoses for Linda would be as follows:

Failed left TMJ Christensen total joint prosthesis with an acrylic head.
Left TMJ foreign body giant cell reaction secondary to metallosis and acrylic debris.
Severe left-sided TMJ pain, myofascial pain, and left-sided headaches. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Removal of left TMJ failed Christensen total joint prosthesis.
	b.	Debridement of left TMJ area.
	c.	Left TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	d.	Fat graft to left TMJ (harvest from the abdomen).
	e.	Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars. 