MICHELLE DENISE WARDLOW							7/22/05

This is a 41-year-old female who has been diagnosed with Raynaud's syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, depression and TMJ problems.  She has had the following previous surgeries: 

1.  D&C in 1985.
2.  C-section in 1986.
3.  Appendectomy in 1992. 
4.  Cervical surgery and bilateral tubal ligation in 1993.
5.  Laminectomy on L5 in 1995.
6.  Gallbladder removal in 1997.
7.  Bilateral TMJ arthroplasty 2003.

MEDICATIONS
Neurontin 300 mg 3 tablets q.i.d.
Synthroid 0.1 mg daily.
Cymbalta 60 mg per day.
Keppra 500 mg 2 tablets b.i.d.
OxyContin 10 mg t.i.d.
Celebrex 200 mg per day

She has had an adverse reaction to Benadryl, Vicodin and penicillin.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
TMJ pain with the left side greater than the right side.
Burning in the left TMJ area.
Difficulty eating.
Pain down through the jaw and neck area being greater on the left side than the right side.
Touching the left side of the face is hypersensitive.
Difficulty sleeping.
Snoring about 3 times a week.
Weight gain secondary to medications.  

Michelle gets earaches and they are more of a stabbing type of pain.  She has tinnitus on the left side and occasional vertigo.  No hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her elbows, fingers and knees.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime very frequently and sometimes during the day.  She has been diagnosed as having rheumatoid arthritis and this has been confirmed also at Mayo Clinic where she apparently runs a high RA titer.  She also, as mentioned before, has been diagnosed as having Raynaud's. 

Michelle's problems began probably back in her early 20s to about the age of 35.  She had significant problems with headaches and then they subsided fairly well.  She also had pain down through her neck and shoulders and she was aware of clenching.  She did some searching on the internet and found out that the symptoms could be related to TMJ and sought out a TMJ specialist who made her a splint in 2001 and this helped her fairly well for about 2 years.  She then began having clunking kind of noises in her jaw joints.  
MICHELLE DENISE WARDLOW			7/22/05			Page 2


In March of 2003, she underwent open joint surgery by Dr. Scott Bolding that included bilateral TMJ arthroplasty and disc repositioning with Mitek anchors.  Postsurgery, her right side which is the more problematic side to begin with, felt better, but then she began developing more problems on the left side.  She used the Therabite device for exercises for 10 weeks and a soft diet.  She developed a throbbing type of pain on the left side and burning pain.  She has undergone splint therapy since that time.  She did begin orthodontics in September of 2003 because her bite was off after the joint surgery.  Her problems are quite significant for her.  Dr. Bolding did inject the left TMJ and this pretty much eliminated her pain so it appears that her primary problems are in the left joint area.  She also does have pain in the right side, but the left side is definitely more dominant.  She gets headaches about 2 to 3 times a week at about a level of 5 and this occurs predominately in the temporal areas.  About once a month she will get a severe headache that goes up to about a level of 9 that causes nausea and vomiting.  She rates her TMJ pain and this is on all her medications at about a level of 6.  Her average daily pain while on medications is still at a level 5.  She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 5, disability at 8.  

In frontal view, Michelle has good left to right facial symmetry.  Right side of the face has a little bit more prominent lateral fullness as compared to the left side.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance in the upper lip, cheek and nose.  Mandible is retruded probably about 10 mm.  Chin neck-line is not well defined.  Intraorally, Michelle is missing mandibular right first molar and has her teeth back through the second molars.  She is in full appliances.  The lower arch appears fairly well aligned and leveled.  She wears a box elastic around the anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has an anterior open bite of about 1 mm.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side and a slight Class II on the right side.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm off to the left side.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Actually, the lower midline is only about 1 mm off towards the left side, but she is Class II end-on bilaterally.  She has a 2 mm overjet relationship.  Oropharynx is very hard to see as she has a low-positioned soft palate and her tongue is fairly large for the size of the oral cavity and fills most of the space there.  The soft palate may be a little bit elongated.  Faucial pillars do appear significantly constricted.  Intranasally, turbinates look relatively normal in size and the septum is relatively straight.  There appears to be good transverse width of the nasal cavity and there appears to be good airway there.  She does state that she has some daytime somnolence that she rates as moderate to severe.  When she sleeps, she sleeps predominately on her back and side about 50/50 each.  She has some mild to moderate tenderness over the TMJs, left styloid area and mild tenderness over the masseters, medial pterygoids, shoulders, right SCM, right posterior neck and right temple area.  She does have crepitation in the right TMJ and in the left side there are some noises in there, but not ha significant as the right side.  On maximal opening, there is 34 mm.  Excursive movement about 3 mm in each direction.  

MICHELLE DENISE WARDLOW			7/22/05			Page 3


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of mandibular right first molar and all 4 third molars.  She has root canal in the mandibular left first molar.  She has Mitek anchors that are placed way down in the neck of the condyle.  She has an osseointegrated implant in the mandibular right first molar area.  Sinuses appear relatively clear as best as can be seen on this x-ray. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have some arthritis.  There may be some joint space there, but difficult to tell on this particular radiograph.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Anchor is positioned way down in the neck probably almost 15 mm below the top of the condyle.  There is some moderate translation of the left condyle in the open view, but with evidence of anterior beaking.  The left condyle appears much smaller than the right condyle.  

Right TMJ shows a condyle that is quite arthritic and also appears that the fossa may be arthritic as well.  Decreased joint space particularly anteriorly.  Anchor is also positioned down low in the neck, although not quite as low as the left side.  It is only about 13 mm below the top of the condyle.  On opening, there is restricted translation.  

Waters view shows that the left sinus is actually full of stuff.  Septum is straight and turbinates are moderate in size.  It appears she has good functional airway.  The other sinuses appear relatively clear.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a moderate high occlusal plane angle and facial morphology.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 8 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of tongue measures closer to about 6 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis (possible rheumatoid arthritis.)
AP mandibular deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
Earaches.
Tinnitus.
Class II end-on occlusion.
 Anterior open bite.
 Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 Overangulated lower incisors. 
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 2 mm. 
 Missing mandibular right first molar.
 Raynaud's syndrome.
 Rheumatoid arthritis. 

MICHELLE DENISE WARDLOW			7/22/05			Page 4


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch and slenderize lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure.

CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly to decrease the occlusal plane angle. 
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.  

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

5.  Restorative dentistry to replace missing mandibular right first molar. 

