JOHN WALSH									05/15/2006

John is 44 years old.  In the past five years he has had a seizure.  He has had previous surgery that includes a chin implant and a neck liposuction.

MEDICATIONS:
Lamictal 400 mg daily.
Depakote 500 mg daily.
Keppra 500 mg daily. 

He has had previous orthodontics for four years and the braces were removed about four to five years ago.  He is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime.  Other joints that bother him may include his back and neck.  No problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  

He gets headaches at about a level of 5 throughout the head area.  He rates his TMJ pain at 1, overall average daily pain at 1, jaw function at 1, diet at 1, disability at 1.  Incisal opening is 
46 mm.  Excursive movements are about 6 mm in each direction.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  To palpation he has no tenderness around the head and neck area.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION 
Upper lip length is 25 mm and tooth-to-lip relationship is 4 to 5 mm.  Midlines are fairly well aligned.  Left cuspids are elevated about 2 mm higher than the right side.  In profile view, the upper lip is retruded by 4 or 5 mm and the chin is retruded probably close to 8 to 10 mm.  He has a Class II end-on cuspid molar relationship but has about a 4 mm deep bite relationship.  Uvula and soft palate are relatively normal although the faucial pillars are moderately constricted.  Nasal septum is deviated off to the right side.  Decreased nasal airway on the right side although the turbinate appears relatively normal in size.  Left side turbinate is larger than the right side and there appears to be very good airway.  He is missing all four first bicuspids and all four first molars.  

He has difficulty breathing through his nose and breathes through his mouth when sleeping and then sometimes during the day.  He is not aware of any snoring problems but he is aware of moderate tiredness during the day.  He has moderate difficulty sleeping at night.  He has some mild elevated blood pressure.  He has had a sleep study done.  

He does get pain in his jaw joints of moderate intensity.  He is not aware of any noises in the joints.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Jaw deformity.
Posterior position of both the maxilla and mandible.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:  
Panorex shows the absence of all four first bicuspids and all four third molars.  Condyles appear relatively normal although has some flattening on the anterior heads and a little bit of sclerosis there.
JOHN WALSH 				05/15/2006				Page 2


Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  The bony septum appears reasonably straight.  Turbinates appear enlarged particularly on the right side.  No frontal sinus development. 

Right TMJ shows a condyle that sits a little bit forward in the fossa with slight increased posterior joint space and decreased superior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is more centered in the fossa with a little bit of flattening on the superior aspect.  There may be slight decreased joint space at the articular eminence area.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is moderately good translation of both condyles with adequate space between the eminence and the condyle.  

Lateral cephalogram shows that the maxilla appears long vertically and both the maxilla and mandible are AP deficient.  There is a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  There appears to be a transverse cant in the occlusal plane.  There is a vertical difference at the anterior border as well as at the occlusal plane.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
AP maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
Deviated nasal septum.
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Foreign implant in the anterior mandible. 
Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior deep bite.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane.
Deviated nasal septum.
 Nasal airway obstruction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.  Move the anterior aspect superiorly, posterior aspect inferiorly.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy.
Nasal septoplasty. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
