HEATHER WALTERS								12/17/2007

Heather is 33 years old and is referred by Dr. Farhad Moshiri, 1320 E. Kinglsey, Springfield, MO 65804.  She was involved in an automobile accident in 1992 requiring back surgery where she had some plates and screws in her back.  After that, because of being on anti-inflammatories she developed some stomach ulcers but she has no problems with that now.  She has had an adverse reaction to Demerol.  

In frontal view, Heather has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 to 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is about 1 mm off towards the left side.  Mandibular dental midline is maybe 2 mm off to the left and chin is about 2 to 3 mm off to the left.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks and nose maybe just slightly by 2 to 3 mm AP deficient.  Chin is retruded by about 
25 mm.  Chin-neckline is extremely short and there is absence of a chin-neck angle.  Lateral canthal ligaments are attached probably about 2 to 3 mm lower than the medial canthal tendons.  Intraorally, Heather has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch with the cuspids significantly rotated.  The transverse width of the arch is fairly narrow.  She has a crown on the mandibular left first molar that is oversized.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  The upper second molars are tipped out laterally severely.  She has a very narrow maxillary arch.  Some moderate crowding anteriorly.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being probably 5 mm Class II.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  Transverse occlusal plain is fairly level.  In the oropharyngeal area the uvula is relatively normal but the soft palpate appears elongated.  Faucial pillars seem significantly constricted.  Cannot really evaluate the tonsils.  The nasal septum appears reasonably straight.  The turbinate on the right side is slightly enlarged but the left one is quite enlarged and seems to block most of the airway.  She has a significant nasal airway obstruction and breathes predominately through her mouth at night and also during the day.  She also has some sleep apnea problems as her husband observes that she holds her breath at times and then gasps for air.  She rates her headache at 0, TMJ pain at 0, pain in the head and neck at 0, jaw function at 3, diet at 2, disability at 0.  Incisal opening is 49 mm with about 11 mm of excursive movement to the right and 12 to the left.  On opening, there are noises in both joints greater on the left side at about 25 to 30 mm of opening.  On excursive movements there are occasional clicks in both joints.  To palpation she has some mild tenderness over the right posterior neck area.  She is not aware of clenching or grinding issues.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of 4 third molars.  The maxillary ones are horizontally impacted and the lowers are vertically impacted.  The left sinus looks a little bit cloudy. The condyles actually look as though they have fairly good morphology. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little small anteroposteriorly.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Difficult to evaluate joint space.  It may be slightly decreased.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit larger than the opposite side in the anteroposterior dimension.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There may be some decreased joint space vertically.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  
HEATHER WALTERS 			12/17/2007				Page 2



Waters view shows that there may be some cloudiness in the left sinus.  The bony septum is deviated off towards the right side with a spur.  Left nasal airway appears pretty much obliterated with the large turbinate.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a significant retruded mandible an AP microgenia.  Maxilla may also be slightly AP deficient but is posterior vertically deficient.  Still has some adenoid tissue in the nasopharyngeal area.  Oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue measures about 3.5 mm and at the soft palate level measures at the most 4 mm.  She has a high occlusal plane angle and high mandibular plane angle facial morphology.  There is tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.  There is an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch with the lower incisors being probably at least 3 or 4 mm elevated compared to the bicuspids.  In the upper arch, there is an accentuated curve of Spee with the upper incisors being 4 mm above the horizontal plane.  Hand articulating the models into a Class I cuspid molar relationship demonstrates some transverse maxillary deficiency with the crossbite on one side.  Upper lateral incisors appear small in size.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Possible microform of Treacher Collins syndrome.
Severe mandibular retrusion.
Slight AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP microgenia. 
Class II occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
Crowding of lower anterior arch.
 Accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.
 Accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.
 Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of 3 mm (normal 11 mm.)
 Sleep apnea.
 Snoring.
 Impacted third molars x4.
 Hypertrophied turbinates. 
 Nasal airway obstruction. 
 Septal spur off to the right side.  
 Sleep apnea syndrome. 
      20.  Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2.5 mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
MRI of TMJs.
Sleep study to evaluate for sleep apnea.
Extract maxillary second bicuspids and mandibular first or second bicuspids if it is elected to extract teeth.
HEATHER WALTERS			12/17/2007				Page 3

Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up spaces of 1 mm around each upper lateral incisors only if extractions are performed.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally.
Align and level mandibular arch.  If treated nonextraction, then slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2.5 to 3 mm of tooth structure. 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors if confirmed by MRI that the discs are displaced. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction and decrease the occlusal plane angle.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to slightly advance it and downgraft it posteriorly as well as expand.
Surgical removal of 4 impacted third molars.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Genioplasty. 
Removal of septal spur.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
