DIANE WALKER									8/1/05

Diane is 41 years old and is here with her twin sister.  Previous surgeries include joint prostheses in the TMJ.  She has had 2 C-sections and 3 left knee operations, partial hysterectomy and TMJ surgeries.  Each joint had 4 operations and she has also had electrical stimulation treatments to the right side of her jaws.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS
Soma 350 mg 6 times a day.
Oxycodone 5 mg every 4-6 hours p.r.n. pain. 
Topamax 1 tablet at bedtime.
Diazipam 50 mg in the morning and 25 mg at noon and then 100 mg at night.  It is an antispasmodic and antidepressant medication. 
Lortab 10, 1 to 2 q.4h. p.r.n. pain. 
Compazine 10 mg p.r.n. nausea and headache.
Kenalog and Xylocaine injections q.3 weeks.
Actonel a new arthritis medication.

Nitrous oxide does not agree with her and neither does codeine. 

Diane's problems began back in 1986 when she was working as a licensed mental health technician.  A patient struck her in the jaw and this began her TMJ problems.  She initially had headaches and earaches.  She was diagnosed as having displaced TMJ discs.  In early 1987, Dr. Milford did bilateral TMJ disc repositioning procedures.  He took her back to surgery again in 1988 for bilateral TMJ debridement and then again in 1994 for bilateral meniscectomies.  On September 29, 2001, she went to Mayo Clinic, and Dr. Gene Keller performed a right TMJ reconstruction with a metal fossa implant and a fat graft.  In December of 2001, Dr. Kurt Martin in Hays, Kansas, performed left TMJ reconstruction with a metal fossa, but did not place any fat.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Severe jaw and muscle pain.
Major difficulties eating and chewing.
Sleep disorder that requires a lot of medications in order for her to get some sleep.
Constant earaches.
Constant tinnitus. 
Episodes of vertigo.
Hearing loss.

Other joints that bother her include her neck and left knee where she has had 3 previous surgeries.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night.  She gets headaches that she registers at a level of 10 throughout the head area including the frontal, temporal, posterior head and top of the head.  These are relatively constant headaches.  She rates her TMJ pain at 10, overall average daily pain at 10, jaw function at 7, diet at 8, disability at 7.  

DIANE WALKER				8/1/05					Page 2


In frontal view, Diane has good facial symmetry and balance.  In profile, she has good facial balance.  Upper lip length in frontal view is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1 mm.  Dental midline and chin midline are fairly well aligned to the facial midline.  Intraorally, Diane has all of her lower teeth back through the 2nd molars and in the upper arch all of her teeth  back through the first molars.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally.  She has an overjet of about 2 to 3 mm.  She has about 1 mm vertical overbite.  The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars as well as mucosal structures all look relatively normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  There is a little bit of deviation of the septum off towards the right side decreasing the airway slightly and also is a little bit narrow.  To palpation, she has severe pain throughout the head and neck area.  Styloid area seems to be the most extreme area of tenderness.  Maximal incisal opening is 20 mm, but only about 12 mm without excruciating pain.  Excursive movement to the right is about 4 mm and left about 2 mm with severe pain.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the absence of maxillary second and third molars and mandibular third molars.  She has crowns on the maxillary first molars, mandibular first and second molar and the left central incisor.  It is difficult to evaluate the sinuses.  She has metal implants in her TMJ joints.  These are creases in fossas.  She has severe arthritis in both TMJs. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows the metal creases in fossa in place.  She has severe arthritis involving the mandible.  There may be a little heterotopic bone going behind and around the back end of the implant.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows quite a small condyle indicative of considerable loss of bone volume.  Metal creases in fossa are in place.  Severe degenerative changes are present in this joint.  Opening view shows very minimal translatory capabilities, although there are some.  

The right condyle actually moves forward probably about 4 mm or so.  The left also moves forward probably about 3 mm or so.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a Class II skeletal relationship.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway of only about 2 to 3 mm that possibly could be due to tongue posture.  It appears that she is holding her tongue posterior in the oropharynx.  This would push the base of the tongue and also the soft palate significantly posterior.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ Christensen metal fossa prostheses in place with possible metallosis.
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
Severe headaches.
Severe TMJ pain. 
Severe myofascial pain.
Earaches. 

DIANE WALKER				8/1/05					Page 3


Tinnitus.
Vertigo.
Class II end-on occlusion. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT 
Surgery stage I.
Bilateral TMJ removal of metal socket prostheses.

CT scan of jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)

Surgery stage II.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from abdomen or buttock.)
Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.

Postsurgical occlusal management with subsequent removal of arch bars.







DIANE WALKER				CT scan				8/1/05
Age:  41 year-old-female.

Date of Acquisition:  10/22/04.
Date of Interpretation:  8/1/05.

She appears to have a mucous retention cyst in the right maxillary sinus.  Turbinates appear somewhat enlarged.  It appears that she may have metal fossa components in her fossas on the axial views.  There are no coronal or sagittal views except with contrast which the bony factors are essentially unreadable. 

IMPRESSION:  Bilateral TMJ metal fossas.
