AMANDA WARD									03/19/2010

Amanda is 25 years old and referred by Dr. Russell Cunningham, One Lakeway Centre Court, Suite B, Austin, Texas 78734.  Amanda’s TMJ problems began in 2005 when she was 20 years old.  She fell off a horse and then the horse stepped on her face creating multiple fractures including the maxilla as well as the mandible and possibly a subcondylar type of fracture.  She had her jaws wired together for approximately one month for treatment and at least a bone plate placed in the maxilla.  She also a parasymphysis fracture and she has a bone plate placed there as well.  She has been aware of bruxing her teeth since childhood.  She received a splint in October 2006 because of pain in the jaws and headaches.  In December 2006, she was operated on the left TMJ for a meniscectomy by Dr. Timothy McConnell.  She then had physical therapy for 3 months from February through April 2007.  In May 2007, she did have a general anesthesia for jaw manipulation.  In October 2006, a bone plane in the left maxilla was removed because it was irritating.  Amanda rates her headaches at a level of 4 and describes them as being behind the eyes and in the back of her head at a level of 4.  She rates her TMJ pain on the left side at 7 and on the right side at 0.  Her average daily pain is about at a level of 2.  She rates her jaw function at 8, diet at 7, disability at 3.  She gets bilateral earaches, no tinnitus, and moderate vertigo, but no hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also during the day.  She takes the following medications:

Ryzolt 200 mg one tablet q.d. (an extended release Tramadol).
Tramadol 50 mg tablets one to three per day.
Topamax 150 mg q.d.
Maxalt 10 mg p.r.n. migraine headaches. 
Femcon (BCP).
Celebrex 200 mg q.d.
Multivitamin. 

Primary concerns that Amanda has include the following:

Severely restricted jaw opening and side to side movement.
Decreased jaw function.
Chronic pain predominantly on the left side. 
Right TMJ has some pain and it apparently can slip out of place.
Grinding noises in the left joint. 

She is not aware of snoring, daytime somnolence, or mouth breathing.  She does have moderate daytime somnolence, but this would be related to her medications.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Amanda has fairly good left-to-right symmetry and maybe just some slight increased fullness in the right angle area.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 5.5 mm.  Lip incompetence is about 6 mm.  In profile view, she may just have some minor AP deficiency in the maxilla and mandible of maybe 3-4 mm.  Amanda has all of her teeth back through the upper and lower jaw.  She has some moderate crowding in the upper and lower arch.  She has just a slight Class II cuspid relationship of maybe 1 to 2 mm.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2.5 mm.  Maximal incisal opening is 15 mm, excursion movement to the right 0, to the left 5 mm.  To palpation, she has some moderate discomfort over the left TMJ and somewhat milder tenderness over the left masseter, left medial pterygoid, and left SCM. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has some bone plates in the maxillary left infraorbital area and lateral maxillary all area.  She has a bone plate in the mandible.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints in this view.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  There is a bone plate in the left lateral maxillary area and in the symphysis area.  The septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  The turbinates appear fairly large.  

Axial view shows that sinuses are clear, but the turbinates are moderately enlarged.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a joint with significant arthritic changes affecting not only the condyle but also the fossa area.  It appears that there are areas of bony ankylosis in this joint.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The joint space may be a little bit narrow vertically.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a significantly progressed arthritis affecting both the condyle and the fossa with bony ankylosis.  Both condyle and fossa are deformed.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves significantly inferiorly probably 5 mm and at almost a 90 degree angle to the horizontal. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little bit better morphology, although there is decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably a good 4 mm.  The medial joint space looks somewhat better.  It is possible that this disc could be medially displaced.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a slight increased occlusal plane angle.  She has a lip incompetence.  The oropharyngeal airway, however, looks reasonably good.  She has some slight maxillary and mandibular AP hypoplasia.  She does have bone plates in the left maxilla and in the symphysis area.  She also has a bone plate up in the zygomatic frontal area and all along the inferior border as well as the left zygomatic buttress area.  She does have a cross bite involving the right second bicuspids.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Left TMJ bony ankylosis. 
Right TMJ possible medial displacement of the articular disc and mild arthritis. 
TMJ pain.
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain.  
History of clenching and bruxism at nighttime and daytime.
Severe limited jaw function.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI evaluation of right TMJ. 
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Left TMJ condylectomy, debridement, and joint reconstruction with TMJ 				Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Management of right TMJ pathology as determined by MRI that could include:
	           (1)	Right TMJ reconstruction with total joint prostheses.
	           (2)	Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 
                                    anchor 	coupled with a right mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy. 
	c.	Fat graft around TMJ prostheses (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Application of arch bars.
4.	Removal of arch bars. 