JORDAN WALSHA									06/18/2007


Jordan is 12 years old, referred by Dr. Tom Pitts, 4786 Caughlin Parkway, Ste. #305, Reno, NV.  Jordan is in good health.  She was born with right-sided hemifacial microsomia.  At the age of 2+ she sustained a subdural hematoma that required removal.  She has some residual effects from that including some fine motor skill problems particularly in the right hand.  Otherwise, she is in good health.  She takes no medications.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, headaches, TMJ pain etc.

Jordan is a triplet and the other two siblings do not have the hemifacial microsomia. 

In frontal view, Jordan has asymmetry in the right side of the face.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm off towards the left side.  Chin is off towards the right side probably 6 to 7 mm.   The right side of the face is transversely deficient by probably 10 to 12 mm.  Cheekbones are fairly symmetric and it is mainly in the mandibular ramus and masseter area that the deformity is primarily involved.  She has approximately 12 mm of lip incompetence in the relaxed position.   On the right side, Jordan does have some ear tags present.  Her ear actually for the most part is fairly well formed considering the syndrome.  In profile, the maxilla may be just slightly prominent by maybe 2 mm.  The chin is retruded by between 15 to 18 mm.  Chin-neckline is short although the chin-neck angle is mildly well defined.  Jordan has a head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, Jordan has all of her lower teeth back through the first molars present.  The second molars are unerupted yet.  She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.  She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch she has a retained primary C on the right side as well as a primary E.  On the left side she has all of her permanent teeth back through the first molars erupted in.  In her centric relation she has a Class II cuspid relationship on the left side, but on the right side she has a Class I cuspid relationship.  She has an overjet of about 4 mm.   In centric relation her lower incisors are only about 1 mm off to the left and she hits only on the right first molars and maybe the first bicuspids.  The rest of the teeth are essentially out of occlusion.  Transversely at the first bicuspid area there is a 5 to 6 mm vertical deficiency on the right side of the maxilla.  In centric relation Jordan has about a 2 to 3 mm anterior open bite.  She has a transverse yaw with both the maxilla and mandible being 4 mm further to the left as compared to the right side.  This has contributed some to the significant deficiency in the right side of the jaw structures.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy but the uvula may be slightly elongated but was harder to see it.  The soft palate appears elongated.  Faucial pillars appear moderately constricted.  There is a little difficulty seeing the tonsils.  Intranasally, the turbinates are mild to moderate in size.  The septum appears fairly straight.  She may have some mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction.  She will occasionally have severe snoring but not all the time.  She had a sleep study done that apparently was normal.  She does tire easy.  Apparently she has no sleep apnea.  Maximal incisal opening is about 45 mm.  Excursive movement is about 5 mm in each direction.  Jordan has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofacial pain, earaches, tinnitus or vertigo.


JORDAN WALSHA				06/18/2007				Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth including the third molars which all are impacted.  The second molars are unerupted at this time yet.  The maxillary right cuspid and second bicuspid are also unerupted and a retained primary C and E in the upper arch.  The right side of the mandibular ramus is severely underdeveloped and there is a rudimentary condyle present on that side.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The right sinus is much smaller than the left sinus.  Nasal septum probably has some deviation to it.  Turbinates appear relatively moderate in size.  Significant cant in the transverse occlusal plane. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  It is actually sitting down and forward in the fossa indicative of perhaps Jordan was holding the jaw forward when the radiographs were taken.  The condyle appears actually fairly large compared to the size of the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderate in inclination.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a severely deformed ramus that is small in vertical size and anteroposterior dimension and rudimentary condyle is present.  There is no articular eminence.  On opening, there is good translation in both joints.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a high occlusal plane angle with significant vertical difference at the inferior border of the mandible and at the occlusal plane.  Oropharyngeal airway is only about 2 to 2.5 mm at the soft palate area and at the most 3 mm at the base of the tongue.  It appears there is probably some transverse deficiency as well.  She has a fairly large adenoid mass that is in close approximation to the posterior aspect of the turbinates.  

It appears Jordan has some significant airway compromises at the level of the adenoid tissue as well as at the adenoid tissue as well as at the soft palate and at the base of the tongue.  She has a high occlusal plane angle and a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship.  Tooth size analysis shows that there is a Bolton's difference of about 3 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Right-sided hemifacial microsoma.  
Significant hyperplasia of the right ramus and condyle.
Right maxillary hypoplasia.
AP maxillary excess.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Class II occlusion.
Anterior left-sided open bite in centric relation.
Severely canted transverse occlusal plane with the right side being 5 to 6 mm shorter vertically than the left side.
AP microgenia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
 Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of only 2.5 mm (normal 11 mm.)
JORDAN WALSHA				06/18/2007				Page 3

 Crowding of lower anterior arch. 
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm. 
 Hypertrophied nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue.
 Impacted third molars x4.
 Unerupted maxillary and mandibular second molars.
 Posterior yaw in the maxilla and mandible with rotation towards the left side of 4 mm.
 Right-sided ear tags. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Discontinue Bionater.
Continue to monitor facial growth and development.
Removal of all 4 third molars anytime after the second molars have erupted in and at least a year prior to the scheduled surgery.
Orthodontics to begin one year prior to the scheduled surgery. 
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2 to 3 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
CT scans of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery to be done when she is 15 years old in the summer of 2010.
Right TMJ anterior mandibular reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis with mandibular advancement and lengthening. 
Left mandibular sagittal split osteotomy.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to transversely level the maxilla, decrease the occlusal plane and correct the posterior yaw. 
Surgery stage 2.
Consider lateral facial augmentation with synthetic bone materials and/or fat grafts if necessary. 
Removal of right-sided ear tags.
Consider nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy if adenoid tissues have not resolved.
Augmentation genioplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
