BARRY WARD									01-28-05


Patient Concerns

Severe sleep apnea
Severe daytime somnolence
Severe snoring
Apneic episodes that occur 39 times an hour
Teeth don’t fit
Difficulties eating and chewing
TMJs click and pop
Difficulty breathing through the nose
If he lies on the left side, the airway becomes totally blocked
Predominantly a mouth breather
Restless leg and arm problems
Severe headaches
Severe TMJ pain
Vertigo

Patient History

Barry has been aware of having clicking and popping in his jaw joints since high school of unknown etiology. More currently he started his workup for his sleep apnea and treatment on 09/08/02. He has had orthodontic appliances on for about two years and had lower first bicuspids extracted and the lower anterior teeth retracted. Approximately four years ago he had his four wisdom teeth removed. He does get chiropractic treatment about once a month for the past five years mainly for his neck problems. He takes Zoloft 100 mg at bedtime. Other joints that bother him include his neck and knees. He is not aware of clenching or bruxism. He rates his headaches that he gets about three times a week at a level of 8 in the temporal area, TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain level of 4, jaw function at 2, diet at 4, and disability at 5. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Barry has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -3 to -4 mm. Maxillary dental midline is shifted about a millimeter off to the left. Mandibular dental midline is shifted probably about 2 mm off to the right. Mandibular dental midline is about a millimeter off to the right of the chin midline.

In profile view, Barry has probably a good about 4 to 5 mm AP deficiency in the maxilla. Upper lip supralabrale is probably about 3 to 4 mm posterior to subnasale. Chin is probably at least 25 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is extremely short, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. 

Intraorally, he is missing the lower first bicuspids. Has a severe accentuated curve of occlusion. Anterior teeth have been dumped severely lingually. Spacing in the first bicuspid area is fairly well closed except about a millimeter open on the left side. Cuspids are fairly symmetric anteroposteriorly. There is a cant in the cuspids with the right cuspid being probably a millimeter or two lower than the left cuspid. In the upper arch, Barry has all of his teeth back through the second molars present. He has a super Class II cuspid relationship. Has a buccal crossbite from the first bicuspid forward bilaterally. As he postures his mandible forward as far as he can, he hits on his posterior teeth first and has a little bit of an open bite. A little tendency toward crossbite yet in the molar area. Uvula is somewhat hyperplastic but not too bad. Soft palate may be a little bit elongated. Faucial pillars are a little bit constricted. 

Turbinates are moderately enlarged. He has a severely deviated nasal septum off toward the right side. He has a large spur, however, going off to the left side. The nasal septum is visible anteriorly being off to the right side. Has relatively severe nasal airway obstruction. Columella is increased in width, but this is secondary to the deviated septum off to the right side. He has some fairly severe constricture of the luminal valve on the right side. I could hold the nose open and hold that valve open, and he could breathe significantly better on that side. He does have a severe snoring problem, severe daytime somnolence, and severe sleep apnea syndrome.

Maximal incisal opening is 53 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 12 mm and to the left 12 mm. To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the temporalis, medial pterygoids, and mild to moderate over the TMJs, styloid areas, SCMs, and mild tenderness again over the posterior neck and shoulder areas. 

Barry from a centric relation function has audible pops in both TMJs about somewhere around 25 mm of opening and probably about 15 mm of closing. Has some crepitus as well. Some of the noises were quite audible. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of the lower first bicuspids. All four third molars are absent. Upper second molars have no brackets on them. He has rather severe arthritis of both TMJs with significant anterior beaking on the right condyle and loss and significant sloping on the anterior aspect of the left condyle. Septum deviates significantly off toward the right side. Turbinates appear significantly enlarged. Sinuses appear relatively clear with the left one being just a little bit more cloudy than the right side. Styloid processes are quite prominent and calcified down toward and overlap the posterior aspect of the mandible. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows that there is rather advanced arthritis in the left TMJ. There is virtually no posterior or superior joint space remaining. Articular eminence has sort of a soft slope to it, although it is quite long. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also has some arthritic changes and some anterior beaking present. Significantly decreased vertical joint space and sort of a moderate-sized posterior joint space. Articular eminence also has sort of a soft gentle slope to it.

On opening, there is good translation of both TMJs. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. The turbinates are moderately enlarged. Bony septum has some deviation to it but not nearly as severe as the cartilaginous portion which cannot be seen on the radiographs. Shift of the mandibular dental midlines is noted and fairly significant.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Barry has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology. Upper arch looks good and good angulation of the upper incisors, although the maxilla is anteroposteriorly deficient, and the posterior aspect of the maxilla is vertically deficient. The mandible is severely AP deficient. Lower incisors have been pulled back in significantly and are rather severely decreased in angulation. Roots seem to be coming out through the buccal cortex. Oropharyngeal airway is totally blocked off, but part of this is due to tongue posture and Barry trying to get his lower jaw back in centric relation. He does have a large chin implant probably Silastic measuring 12 mm in AP dimension. Barry has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 2 mm. Hand articulating Barry’s models into a Class I cuspid position shows that there is transverse deficiency of the maxilla yet remaining. Significant accentuated curve of occlusion with the lower anterior teeth being probably 3 mm higher on the left side and probably 4 mm higher than the posterior teeth on the right side. The lower anterior six teeth are severely  tipped posteriorly. In a Class I molar position, the transverse width of the maxilla is relatively normal.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with probable significant deformation and perforations 
Severe AP mandibular deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Slight transverse maxillary deficiency
Class II molar super Class II cuspid relationship
Severely decreased inclination of the mandibular anterior teeth
Severely accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch
Missing mandibular first bicuspid extracted for orthodontic reasons
Missing all four third molars
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm
Severely deviated nasal septum off toward the right side and a large bone spur off toward the left side
Hypertrophied turbinates 
Nasal airway obstruction 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Severe headaches
Severe TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Severe sleep apnea
Severe snoring
Daytime somnolence
Vertigo

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJs

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch and re-open up first bicuspid extraction spaces to equal 6 to 7 mm. This movement also should level the curve of Spee. Strip lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy

CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it posteriorly
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)
Bilateral partial turbinectomies
Nasal septoplasty

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Dental implants to bilateral mandibular first bicuspid area

Restorative dentistry to place crowns on dental implants


