CARMEN WATERS									01/22/2010

Carmen is 58 years old.  She is referred by Dr. David Curtis, 5866 S. Staples #201, Corpus Christi, Texas 78413.  Carmen is not sure when her TMJ problems began, but thinks it was back around her 20s of unknown etiology.  She was not really treated until 2006, but she since then has been wearing splints.  She has a daytime and a nighttime splint.  She does have improvement with the splint therapy.  Carmen gets headaches at about a level of 4 in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 4, diet at 8, and disability at 6.  She wakes with headaches in the morning which would go along with the clenching that she does at nighttime, but she also clenches during the day.  She has constant earaches but no tinnitus, occasional vertigo but no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her knees, ankles, neck and back.  She has moderate snoring, moderate daytime, somnolence, but is unaware of sleep apnea issues.  She has a moderate problem sleeping and is a nighttime and daytime mouth breather.

CLINICAL EVALUATION.  In frontal view, Carmen has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1.5 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right side, and the chin is about 2 mm off to the right side.  She has a 5 mm anterior open bite.  In profile view, Carmen has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3-4 mm.  The chin is deficient by about 15 mm.  The chin neckline is not defined.  Intraorally, Carmen has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has some huge lateral exostoses on the mandibular left side.  She also has a little bit of that around the cuspids.  She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch, but has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has some buccal exostosis in the maxillary right posterior quadrant.  She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side of 1-2 mm, but on the left side she is basically Class I.  She hits primarily on her second molars and I believe all the other teeth are out of occlusion.  Intraorally, Carmen has a large lingual tori as well.  Intranasally, Carmen has a pretty open airway and turbinate area on the right side and in the left side it is a little bit more narrow.  She does have some webbing in the luminal valve area.  The nostrils appear a little bit narrow. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has the rest of her teeth.  She has a root canal on the mandibular right second bicuspid and a crown on the first molar.  The left sinus appears a little bit cloudy.  The bony septum appears reasonably straight.  The condyles appear arthritic.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses actually appear pretty clear.  The turbinates are significantly enlarged.  She has a significantly large septal spur that deviates off towards the left side and seems to impinge on the lateral nasal wall.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum has some curvature to it, and the turbinates appear moderately enlarged and appear to fill up a good part of the nasal airway.
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic and appears to have lost volume.  There is anterior beaking and sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  There is actually decreased anterior joint space and the superior and posterior joint space is increased.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic with anterior beaking and sclerosis.  There is decreased anterior joint space, but superior and posterior joint space may be slightly increased. 

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is arthritic and appears to have lost volume and perhaps a little bit of transverse width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm.  There appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact at the lateral rim of the fossa.  The medial side appears to have pretty good joint space.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is severely arthritic and there appears to be bone-on-bone contact at the lateral rim of the fossa.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm.  The medial vertical joint space looks relatively normal. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Carmen has a retruded mandible.  The maxilla may be slightly AP deficient as well.  She has a significantly reduced oropharyngeal airway of only about 2 mm at the soft palate level and 4 mm at the base of the tongue.  She has a high occlusal plane angle in the mandible.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
Anterior open bite (5 mm).
Occluding only on the second molars bilaterally.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Sleep apnea. 
11. Hypertrophied nasal turbinates	
12. Decreased oropharyngeal airway		
13. Nasal septal deviation and spurring	

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts 			total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	c.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward about 4 mm.
            d.	Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars	
            e.	Nasoseptoplasty
            f.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomy

I gave Carmen a prescription for Klonopin 1-mg tablets, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x5.  