CALLIE WATSON									03/17/2008
Callie is 20 years old, referred by Shannon Rayl.  Callie was born with a bilateral cleft lip and palate.  She has had a number of surgeries including the following:
In 1988, lip repair shortly after birth.
In 1989, palatal repair.
In 1996, alveolar cleft bone grafting.
In 1997, gum surgery around the cleft area.
In 2003, rhinoplasty including a septoplasty.

She had orthodontics sometime around the eighth through the tenth grade.  She takes Zyrtec and Ortho-TriCyclen.  She has no TMJ problems, no headache problems.  
CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Callie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  She has a repaired bilateral cleft lip.  Upper lip length in the midline is about 15 mm, but laterally measures about 21 mm.  She is missing a lot of the vermillion in the midline and has no tubercle.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 6 mm, but, if the mid part of the lip was there, the vertical height would probably be pretty good.  Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The nasal tip may just be slightly off to the left side at 1 to 2 mm.  In profile, she has a deficiency in projection of the upper lip probably due to mainly soft tissue deficiency.  Lower lip is slightly everted.  Chin may be just slightly AP deficient.  Callie has a good Class I cuspid relationship.  She has about 1 mm of vertical overbite.  There may be just a slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being maybe 1 mm lower than the right side.  Intranasally, it appears that the right airway is fairly good, but on the left side the turbinate appears a little bit enlarged and the septum may be deviated a little bit towards that side.  She has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  Joints function smoothly.  Maximum incisal opening is 56 mm.  Excursion movements are about 7 mm in each direction.   
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows she has got horizontal impacted mandibular third molars and she has probably an erupted maxillary left third molar, but absent right third molar.  Maxillary lateral incisors are also absent replaced by pontics.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  
Waters view shows that the bony septum is reasonably straight. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  There does not appear to be a very good airway.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be normal in size to the size of the fossa.  Joint space looks adequate.    
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears adequate in size compared to the fossa with good joint space.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she appears to have some AP maxillary deficiency.  Maxillary incisors appear to be over-angulated.  Lateral incisors are slightly over- angulated as well.  Oropharyngeal airway appears good.  Soft palate appears short.  She appears to have some adenoid tissue still remaining in the nasopharynx.  Callie has fairly good speech competency, and, although she would occasionally get some nasal emission, it was not consistent.  

The basic diagnoses for Callie would be as follows:
Repaired bilateral cleft lip and palate.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
Over-angulated maxillary incisors.
Bilateral cleft lip deformity.
Nasal deformity.
Hypertrophied turbinate on the left side causing nasal airway obstruction. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Surgery Stage 1.
Anterior maxillary osteotomies to upright the anterior segment advancing it about 4 mm to point A.
Bone graft anterior maxilla (harvest from the mandible).  
Construction and application of palatal stabilizing appliance.
Reduction left turbinate. 
Restorative dentistry to replace maxillary lateral incisors pontics.
Surgery Stage 2.
Reconstruction of upper lip by advancing orbicularis oris muscle across the 
midline and reconstructing the vermillion across the midline.
Nasal reconstruction.