Allison is 13 years 6 months of age.  Referred by Dr. George Adams, 2845 Parkwood Blvd. #100, Plano, Texas 75093.

Allison has always had a strong lower jaw.  She has undergone orthodontic treatment from 2006 to 2008 with a palatal expander and also appliances to try to control the growth of the lower jaw.  This did not hold and she has redeveloped a Class III occlusion.  She had a bad cold a couple of weeks ago and since then she has had some popping in her right jaw joint area of unknown etiology.  

Allison has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability at 0.  She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her wrists and ankles, but the ankles are likely due to her sports; she likes to play soccer.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  Medications she currently takes include Benadryl p.r.n. and Advil p.r.n.  She is not aware of snoring, daytime somnolence or sleep apnea problems.  She is aware of breathing predominantly through her mouth at night when she sleeps and some during the day as well.  Allison has had her adenoids removed.  

In frontal view, Allison has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 1.5 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is shirted just slightly towards the right side as is the chin.  In profile view, she has some maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 to 5 mm.  The chin is slightly strong by probably 3 mm.  The chin neckline is long, and she has a high mandibular plane angle.  The chin neck angle is well defined.  Intraorally, Allison has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch but has good attached gingiva.  The lower incisors are in slight lingual inclination.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has some minimal crowding of the upper anterior arch.  She has a 6 x 6 TPA in place.  She is a Class III on the right side by about 3 or 4 mm and on the left side by probably 4 to 5 mm.  She is almost a full Class III on the left side.  She has a s reverse deep bite of about 2 mm.  She does have an anterior cross bite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates are mild to moderately enlarged, but the septum looks reasonably straight.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the TMJs and right retromandibular area.  Joints function relatively smoothly.  The incisal opening is 50 mm and excursion movements are 5 mm in each direction.  There is a slight yaw in the maxilla and mandible with the right side of the face being slightly more full than the left side by probably a couple of millimeters.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four developing unerupted third molars.  She has a TPA present at the maxillary first molar area with extensions coming forward through the bicuspids.  She has a lingual retainer on the two central incisors.  
Coronal view shows the floor of the nose on the left side is higher than the right side.  Turbinates are significantly enlarged and appear to block a good part of the airway.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight and turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Joint space appears fairly good.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Joint space appears fairly good.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  There appears to be adequate joint space.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  There appears to be adequate joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is significant maxillary deficiency and mandibular prognathism.  Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good.  The occlusal plane may be just slightly elevated.  

Basic diagnoses for Allison would be as follows:

Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia type 1.
Mandibular prognathism.  
Maxillary AP hypoplasia but transverse maxillary excess particularly in the cuspid area.
Class III occlusion. 
Anterior cross bite.
Impacted third molars x4.
Hypertrophied turbinates creating nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up 1 mm of space around the right 			maxillary lateral incisor.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid 			roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies to remove the growth centers and 			reposition articular discs with Mitek anchors.  
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly. 
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and correct 				transverse arch discrepancy. 
	d.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
	e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
4.	Restorative dentistry to place bonding or veneer on the maxillary right lateral 	incisor. 
