CAMERON WATKINS								10/25/2010

Cameron is 20 years old, birth date is 04/13/1990.   Cameron’s TMJ problems began when he was about 16 to 17 years of age when his jaws began to pop.  Prior to that, he had orthodontics at the age of 7 that included a palatal expander by Dr. Terry Moore.  They then saw Dr. Al Bishop and from the age of 14 to 15 Cameron wore a Herbst appliance, but this did not seem to help very much.  He did have full braces with Dr. Bishop but was left with an open bite.  He had splint therapy by Dr. Charles Holt beginning in March 2008.  Last week he began orthodontic treatment again with Drs. Johnson and Collins. 

Primary concerns Cameron has include the following:

Cannot bite very well.
Jaw pain.
Wearing down of his molars.

Cameron’s jaws used to click and pop, but now they only click and pop occasionally.  Cameron gets headaches at about a level of 3.  The headaches are relatively infrequent and Cameron cannot remember exactly where the headaches occur.  He rates his TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 2, jaw function and diet at 2, disability at 1.  Cameron has no facial numbness.  The only medication Cameron is currently taking is Proventil 2 puffs p.r.n.  

He has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo.  Cameron feels he has some slight hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He does have a diagnosis of asthma and scoliosis.  Cameron is aware of clenching and bruxing at night and, in fact, has worn out the splint that Dr. Holt had given him.  

In frontal view, Cameron has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 6 mm.  In frontal view, the maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are fairly well aligned with each other and may be just slightly off to the left side about 1 mm.  The chin also is off a bit to the left side about 1 mm or so.  In profile view, the maxilla is at least 6 mm AP deficient and the chin about 20 mm.  The chin neckline is extremely short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Cameron has a lip incompetency of about 10 mm.  Intraorally, Cameron is missing lower first bicuspids, but has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch, he is missing first bicuspids, but has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars.  Upper lateral incisors appear a little bit small in size.  He has almost a full Class II cuspid relationship.  When he bites down, he feels as though he occludes only on the right second molar.  He has an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.  The second molars appear a little bit flat.  There is some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.  He has about a 1 mm open bite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Cameron does have some mild to moderate snoring.  He has some mild daytime somnolence.  He is not aware of having sleep apnea.  At nighttime, he is predominantly a mouth breather.  He does have a head postured forward neck position.  Cameron does see a chiropractor once a week and a massage therapist about every 2 weeks currently.  To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the masseter muscles and shoulder area.  On opening, he has a little bit of a glitch in the right TMJ, but the left joint seems relatively smooth.  The maximal incisal opening is 53 mm, excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction.  Intranasally, the turbinates are probable moderate in size.  The septum appears relatively straight.  There is probably moderate nasal airway obstruction.  Columella is wide and the nostrils are narrow.  There is a slight cant to the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1 mm higher than the right side.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  The lower first and maxillary first bicuspids are missing as well and removed for orthodontic reasons.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is deviated back in the bony area significantly off towards the left side, and, although the turbinates are relatively moderate in size, there is obstruction on the left side of the nose because of the deviated septum.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

Axial view shows that the septum about midway back has a spur that appears to be impinging on the turbinate.  Right turbinate appears relatively normal to small in size.  The sinuses appear clear, however, there does appear to be an obstruction on that left side of the nose. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that he actually has his jaw postured forward.  He has some anterior beaking and some sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  The condyle appears small in size and appears to have lost vertical volume.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is increased vertical and posterior joint space.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is also postured down and forward in the fossa.  There is some anterior beaking present.  There is a little bit of sclerosis in the condyle, but not quite as significant as the opposite side.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination and is actually fairly long in length as was the other side.  There is increased vertical and posterior joint space indicative of forward posturing of the mandible.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased lateral joint space, but increased medial joint space but again probably a product of the forward posturing of the mandible.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit larger than the left side, but still probably has lost some vertical volume.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  There is decreased lateral joint space compared to the middle of the joint, but again a product of forward posturing of the mandible.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that his mandible is postured forward in the fossa.  He has decreased oropharyngeal airway space.   He is actually postured in an end-on Class II occlusion and actually he is a full Class II.  He has a decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension at the base of the tongue of about 3.5 mm and at the soft palate it is closer to about 8 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Cameron would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated without reduction (AICR).
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia and anterior vertical hyperplasia. 
Mandibular hypoplasia.
Class II occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
Anterior open bite of 1 to 2 mm. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of approximately 3 mm (normal 11 mm).
AP microgenia.
Nasal septal deviation with septal spur blocking off the left side of the nose.
TMJ pain. 
Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars.  
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 1.5 to 2 mm.
Wide columella and narrow nostrils.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Disengage the second molars from the arch wire.  		Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for 			interdental osteotomies.  Try to extrude the right cuspid at least 1 mm to get it 			aligned better vertically relative to the posterior teeth.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 			about 1.5 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 				counterclockwise direction approximately 20 mm.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward, move it superiorly, and 			correct any transverse discrepancies.
	d.	Augmentation genioplasty with a Medpor implant.
	e.	Reconstruct columella.