JONATHAN WEBB									09/04/2007

Jonathan is 23 years old referred by Dr. Jim Compton, 4610 North Garfield Street, Midland, TX 79705.  Jonathan's joint problems began he believes about the age of 11 in 1995 of unknown etiology.  He had orthodontic treatment from 1989 to 1999 finishing when he was 15 years old.   At that time, his bite apparently fit together reasonably well.  Since then his bite has changed and moved.  He had his third molars removed in 1999.  He currently takes Advil as his only medication.  He gets TMJ pain at about a level of 2, average daily pain of 3, jaw function, diet and disability at 0.  Headaches are 0.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus nor vertigo.  He gets occasional problems with his knees.  His back also bothers him as he has a defect there defined as a pars defect in L5 vertebrae.  He is aware of nocturnal clenching.  

In frontal view, Jonathan has fairly reasonable facial symmetry.  The nose is a little bit deviated off to the right side maybe a couple of millimeters.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular midline and chin.  The nasal tip is about 3 mm actually off to the right side.  In profile view, Jonathan appears to have AP deficiency of both the maxilla being probably a good 6 mm AP deficient and AP deficiency in the mandible probably an equal amount.  Chin-neckline is a little bit shorter though the chin-neck angle is well defined.  There is some slight infraorbital hypoplasia of probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Intraorally, he is missing lower first bicuspids and maxillary first bicuspids.  He has an anterior end-on incisor relationship with the lower dental midline actually about 1 mm off to the right side.  He has an open bite in the left first molar area.  He has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship being about 3 to 4 mm Class III on the left side and 1 to 2 mm Class III on the right side.  On the right side he also has an open bite in the first molar area.  His lower first molars are submerged relative to the adjacent teeth.  The lower teeth appear to be in lingual inclination.  He has a crossbite tendency on the right side in the molar area as well as on the left side.   Oropharyngeal airway tissues look healthy.  The uvula is mildly elongated.  The soft palate, faucial pillars and tonsils all look relatively normal.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged but the width of the nasal airway appears a little bit broad.  Posteriorly I cannot identify whether or not the turbinates are causing any nasal airway obstruction.  The septum is reasonably straight.  There could be some mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction based on the history of snoring.  To palpation, Jonathan is essentially pain free around the head and neck area.  The joints function relatively smoothly.  Incisal opening is 58 mm.  Excursive movement in both directions about 11 mm.  Dental model analysis shows that it appears that he is missing the maxillary first bicuspids, perhaps the mandibular second bicuspids were removed.  He has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  The lower first molars are submerged and the second molars are tipped in lingually.  The lower incisors appear to be tipped lingually as well.  The upper arch appears somewhat asymmetric with the left arch being broader than the right arch.  The maxillary left first molar has an odd shape to it.  There is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of at least l mm plus.  There is a transverse maxillary deficiency of at least probably 5 to 6 mm in the molar area and probably 3 mm in the cuspid area.  The occlusal plane appears reasonably level.  The maxillary left cuspid is slightly distal to the right cuspid of maybe 1 to 2 mm.  Tapping on Jonathan's lower first molars tends to indicate that both teeth are ankylosed compared to the sound generated by the adjacent teeth. 
JONATHAN WEBB				09/04/2007				Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and probably the mandibular second bicuspids and maxillary first bicuspids.  The sinuses appear reasonably clear.  The nasal turbinates appear fairly large.  The condyles appear a little bit large and otherwise relatively normal.  There is a root canal in the maxillary right first molar.  There is a 3 x 3 retainer in the mandible.  The lower first molars are somewhat submerged compared to the adjacent teeth.  It is difficult to tell if the lower first molars are ankylosed or not. 

Waters view shows that the maxillary sinus is relatively small but appear relatively clear.  The frontal sinuses are large and clear.  The septum has a little bit deviation in the bony area but not too significant.  The turbinates appear enlarged particularly on the right side.  More posteriorly it may be causing a little bit of airway compromise.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  There is a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it.  Joint space appears fairly well balanced.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle has fairly good morphology.  The joint space looks reasonably good.  Articular eminences in both joints have a moderate inclination.  On opening, there is good translation of both TMJs.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Jonathan has a Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship and an end-on incisor relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway looks fairly good.  The vertical height of the mandible is slightly elongated compared to the upper lip length.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Mandibular prognathism.
Class III end-on cuspid relationship being worse on the left side as compared to the right side.
End-on incisor relationship.
Missing mandibular second bicuspids and maxillary first bicuspids as well as all four third molars.
Ankylosed mandibular first molars bilaterally.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Partial nasal airway obstruction.
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1 to 2 mm. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up 1 mm space between the upper laterals and cuspids.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.

JONATHAN WEBB				09/04/2007				Page 3

Align and level mandibular arch.  Place a step downward to the mandibular first molars since they are ankylosed.  
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and move it superiorly greater in the posterior aspect as compared to the anterior aspect.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a clockwise direction.
Bilateral partial turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry.
Place bonding or veneers on maxillary lateral incisors.
Place crowns on lower first molars. 