MADONNA WEAN								07/15/2011

Madonna is 55 years old, birth date 12/04/1955.  Referred by Dr. Tom Walsh, 99696 Overseas Highway, Key Largo, FL 33037.  

Madonna is not sure when her TMJ problems began, but at least 3 years ago she began developing problems predominantly in the right TMJ area of unknown etiology.  To date, she has had no treatment, but she gets headaches about 2 times per week at about a level of 4 in the right frontal and temporal area and behind the eye.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 6, jaw function, diet, and disability at 0.  She gets frequent earaches in the right side.  She has no tinnitus or vertigo, but does have some hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching sometimes at night.  She has glaucoma, high cholesterol, and sleep apnea.  She takes the following medications:

Lumigan eye drops for her glaucoma.  
Welchol 625 mg 3 tablets 2 times a day for her cholesterol.
Prilosec 1 tablet q.d.
Lots of additional supplements.

In frontal view, Madonna has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Tooth lip relationship is 0.  The maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Madonna has probably about a 3 to 4 mm deficiency in upper lip projection.  The chin appears to be about 12 mm AP deficient.  The chin neckline and angles are not defined.  As Madonna postures her lower jaw forward, it improves her facial profile.  Intraorally, Madonna has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid molar relationship being probably 4 to 5 mm Class II.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3.5 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  To palpation, Madonna has high moderate pain over the right temporalis, right shoulder, and mild tenderness over the right medial pterygoid, right TMJ.  Joints function relatively smoothly.  The incisal opening is 52 mm and excursion movements in each direction about 10 mm.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderate in size.  There has been some previous trauma to the nose and so the septum is deviated off to the left side about 1 cm back in, but then off to the right side anterior to that.  Madonna does report moderate snoring at night, moderate daytime somnolence, moderate sleep apnea, and a moderate sleep disorder  at night.  She tosses and turns a lot.  She sweats significantly and wakes up numerous times at night.  She breathes through her mouth and nose at nighttime, but makes a conscious effort to breathe through her nose during the day.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and also missing the maxillary left first molar replaced by an implant and crown.  Bony septum posteriorly looks fairly straight.  The right turbinate appears enlarged.  Difficult to evaluate the joints.  

Coronal view shows that the nasal septum is deviated off towards the right side close to the junction of the cartilage and bony areas.  Turbinates are mild to moderate in size and there does appear to be an airway through the nose.  There is a little bit of obstruction on the right side because of the deviation of the septum towards that area.  The sinuses look clear.  

Axial view shows at this particular cut the septum is straight indicating that the deviation off to the right side is limited to a higher area than the level of the inferior turbinates.  Airway does look good at this level.  Sinuses appear clear. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  There is decreased superior and posterior joint space.  The articular disc is moderately shallow.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good morphology with some slight anterior beaking present.  There is decreased vertical and posterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has adequate mediolateral width, but there is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has adequate mediolateral width.  There is decreased vertical and lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a relatively low occlusal plane angle.  She has a slight skeletal Class II jaw relationship.  AP dimension from soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall is about 5.5 mm and from the base of the tongue to posterior pharyngeal wall likewise about 5.5 mm.  

A Bolton’s analysis shows that she has a 4.4 mm tooth size discrepancy with the lower teeth being smaller compared to the upper teeth.

The basic diagnoses for Madonna would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs laterally displaced.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
TMJ pain.
Sleep apnea.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of about 3 to 4 mm.
Nasal septal deviation and spurring off to the right side. 
Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level the maxillary arch.  Open up 1 mm of space between the 			upper laterals and cuspids.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid 			roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 			removing 1.5 to 2 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward 			approximately 11 mm.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward 5 mm.
	d.	Nasal septoplasty.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
4.	Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors either with bonding, 	veneers, or crowns to correct for the tooth size discrepancy. 
