DARREN WEATHERFORD								03-24-04

Darren is 39 years old and referred by Dr. David Luterman.

Patient History

Darren does have some problems with major depression. Darren otherwise is in good health except for severe sleep apnea problems. 

Darren has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No joints give him problems at all. He doesn’t clench or grind his teeth. No headaches, no TMJ pain, and no myofascial pain. He rates his jaw function and diet at 0. Darren reports that he has been in hotels where he would be sound asleep and would be snoring so loudly that the front desk would call to make sure he wasn’t having a party or creating noise inappropriately. 

Orthodontics was performed by Dr. Saunders, but he is deceased.

Darren has problems with self-mutilation and has numerous significant scars on his face, around his ears and neck area.

Current Medications

Dalmane 50 mg q.h.s.
Ambien 10 mg h.s.
Klonopin 3 mg h.s.
Prozac 80 mg q.d.
Effexor 300 mg q.d.
Remeron 15 mg q.d.
Zyprexa 10 mg used for mood modulation
Seroquel 400 mg used for mood modulation
Tegretol 1000 mg q.d. also for mood modulation
Neurontin 2000 mg q.d. for mood modulation as well

Patient Concerns

Severe sleep apnea problems
Predominantly mouth breather
Severe snoring
Extremely tired during the day
Snoring is so loud that his family can hear him throughout the entire house
Extremely long episodes of apnea that can extend over 60 seconds

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Darren has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline. Maxilla appears to be about 6 to 8 mm AP deficient. Chin is probably 10 to 15 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is short, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. 

Intraorally, he has had lower first bicuspids extracted. The rest of the teeth appear very well aligned and leveled. Transverse width of the mandible appears narrow. In the upper arch, he likewise has had first bicuspids removed but has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars present. Has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with a little bit of a tendency toward crossbite on the right side. Has about a millimeter of overbite and basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. Oropharynx is relatively clear. Uvula is of moderate size. Faucial pillars appear to be in appropriate position.

Intranasally, turbinates are somewhat enlarged. There is also a little bit of redundant tissue on the floor of the nose. Does not appear to be much passable airway. Holding the nostrils open did increase his breathing abilities fairly significantly. Nasal septum is off toward the left side and makes the left nostril a little bit smaller and more constricted than the right side. 

Darren doesn’t have any tenderness around the head and neck area to palpation. Joints seem to function smoothly. Incisal opening is about 43 mm. Excursive movement to the left is 11 mm and to the right about 10 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Darren is congenitally missing three of his wisdom teeth and only has his left maxillary third molar, and it is erupted in position. Darren has crowns on most of his upper teeth extending from the left first molar all the way around to the right first molar. The lower teeth are all natural with just a couple of restorations there. Sinuses look clear. Condyles look relatively normal but difficult to tell on that x-ray. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit larger with maybe some anterior beaking. May be a little bit of decreased posterior joint space. Articular eminence is a little bit toward the shallow side. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology and fairly well centered in the joint with good joint spaces. 

Open views show moderate translation of both condyles. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. He does have large turbinates and some deviation of the septum off toward the left side, although more posteriorly in the bony area it is centered. Turbinates are of fairly significant size and appear to block most of the functional airway. 

Cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible appear to be retruded. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 mm and At the base of the tongue measures about 5 or 6 mm, but there is a double shadow there, and in some areas in the double shadow the anterior part of that shadow there is probably less than a millimeter. Tongue seems to full a good portion of the oral cavity, although there is a little bit of space superiorly. 

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with a measurement of 2 mm at the soft palate area (normal 11) and 5 mm at the base of the tongue (normal 11 mm)
Severe snoring
Daytime somnolence
Severe apneic episodes of greater than 60 seconds
Missing all four first bicuspids and bilateral mandibular third molars and maxillary right third molar (left maxillary third molar retained)
Malaligned maxillary left third molar and a nonfunctioning tooth
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal septal deviation
Nasal airway obstruction
Hypertrophied soft palate and uvula

Recommended Treatment

Surgery
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward 8 mm at the incisal edge and downgraft it 4 mm posteriorly
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction with the chin point coming forward 15 mm
Partial turbinectomies 
Septoplasty
Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars
Extract maxillary left third molar
UPPP procedure with lateral inversion flaps