LOIS WATKINS									12-10-04

Lois is 62 years old and referred by Dr. Robert Talley, 448 36th NW, #103, Norman, OK  73072.

Patient History

Lois has had previous cervical fusion in 1993 then had a repeat surgery in 2000 on her neck. She had a tonsillectomy in 2001 and a hysterectomy in 1986. For the most part, she is in good health except for her jaw problems. She takes the following:

Zocor tablets 40 mg q.d.
Clonazepam 0.5 mg h.s.
Amitriptyline 25 mg for pain and for sleep
Benadryl as needed for allergies

She gets occasional earaches, tinnitus, and more frequently has problems with vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her left shoulder, wrists, hands, fingers, and occasionally her hips. She is allergic to CODEINE AND MORPHINE, and she is allergic to a lot of chemicals, particularly those used in cleaning, etc. She has no known allergies to jewelry. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night. 

Her TMJ problems began about 36 years ago of unknown etiology. She has had two previous neck surgeries to try to eliminate the neck pain problems. About one year ago she got some bite splints or devices, but these have not helped her significantly. She went to see Dr. Talley, and he referred her down here without doing any initial treatment. Lois gets daily headaches that occur in the frontal and temporal area that average about a level of 5. She has constant pain through the head, jaw, and neck area at a level of 9. TMJ pain is at 9, jaw function at 8, diet and disability at 6. 

There are times when Lois just will say that she hurts all over, and this means she has achiness throughout her entire body. When Lois had her tonsils removed, she said that the doctor told her that there was a bone spur growing out from her neck into her tonsil on the left side, and he had to chisel that bone spur out of there. 

Patient Concerns

Headaches
TMJ pain
Tight painful muscles through the jaw area
Muscles in the throat area get extremely tight particularly in the mornings when she gets up

Clinical Examination

Lois has fairly good facial symmetry and balance. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm to the left. Chin is probably 4 to 5 mm to the left. 

In profile view, Lois has fairly good facial balance vertically and anteroposteriorly. Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular right second and third molar and mandibular left second and third molar. The rest of the teeth are present. There is a crown on the mandibular left second bicuspid. Some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. A lot of attrition on the teeth. Good attached gingiva present.

In the upper arch, she is missing her maxillary left and right second and third molars but has the rest of her teeth. Has a Class II end-on occlusion on the right side and a Class II end-on occlusion on the left side, but it is worse on the right side than the left side. She has an anterior deep-bite of about 3 mm. 

Intranasally, the turbinates are mildly enlarged but not too significant. It appears that she has a fairly good airway. Her snoring is described as moderate. She probably has some moderate daytime somnolence. She is not aware of any other sleep apnea symptoms at this time. 

To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the TMJs, styloid areas, moderate pain over the SCMs, and milder pain over the posterior neck, shoulders, masseters, and left temporalis muscle. Maximal incisal opening is about 45 mm but only about 33 mm without significant pain or discomfort. Excursive movement to the right is about 4 mm and to the left 3 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all second and third molars. She has crowns on the maxillary four incisors, mandibular right first molar, and mandibular left second bicuspid. Root canal in the maxillary right lateral incisor and perhaps on the right central but difficult to tell. Sinuses look relatively clear. Turbinates look moderate in size. Vertical dimension of the right mandibular ramus appears larger than the left ramus. Some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle on the right side. Appears to be some erosive changes in the left condyle with loss of vertical height. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane. The mandible is shifted off to the left side probably 4 to 5 mm. Vertical height of the mandible on the left side is shorter than the right side. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the superior head in one of the views. Good space appears to be present. Articular eminence is moderately steep and fairly long in length. 

Left TMJ shows a joint that appears arthritic with flattening on the anterior head and some of what appears to be erosion in the midportion of the condylar head. Articular eminence is flatter than the opposite side and appears to have undergone some significant bone changes. 

On opening, there is good translation of the right TMJ where the condyle comes anterior to the fossa. In the left joint, the mandible comes forward underneath the articular eminence. It appears that there are some significant degenerative changes present in the condylar head. 

Cephalometrically, on the lateral ceph there is a fairly good Class I skeletal relationship. Significant difference in the vertical  height of the mandible at the occlusal plane level as well as at the inferior border with a vertical difference of 10 mm at the angle of the mandible with the left side being shorter vertically than the right side. Slight tip in the occlusal plane angle is present as well. There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane, and the left side may be about 2 mm higher than the right side. Angle of the mandible is visibly lower on the right side as compared to the left side by probably at least 6 to 8 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe deformation and perforations
TMJ pain
Headaches
Myofascial pain
Masticatory dysfunction
Vertigo

Recommended Treatment

CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)
Surgery
Left mandibular condylectomy, meniscectomy, debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Left TMJ fat graft (harvested from the abdomen)
Application of arch bars and removal of arch bars
 