CHRISTINA WARNKE								11-10-04

Christina is 29 years old and referred by Dr. Mike Steffan.

Patient History

She is in good health except for some jaw problems. She takes a multivitamin but no other medications. Christina’s problems began at about the age of 15 to 16 when she was hit in the face with a softball and broke her nose. She remembers that shortly after that her jaws began to lock up where she could not open. She progressed on in this situation and had no treatment. About two years ago, her condition started to get worse with increase in pain, headaches, dysfunction, etc. Her jaws began to lock up more frequently again. The treatment she has had for this condition so far includes the following: (1 ) Equilibration (no improvement), and (2) Splint therapy by Dr. Robert Talley, but this tended to make her situation worse. She was referred to Dr. Mike Steffan for orthodontic treatment, and Dr. Steffan referred Christina here. She has had extensive chiropractic treatment for back problems. The only medications she current takes are as follows: 
Multiple vitamins
Tylenol 
Ibuprofen
Maxalt 10 mg for migraine headaches

She does get earaches bilaterally. She gets occasional tinnitus but no vertigo or hearing loss that she is aware of. Other joints that bother her include her back, wrists, fingers, knees (she has had surgery on the right knee x 2), and her right ankle which she recently injured about four months ago and continues to have some problems with it. She is very much aware of nocturnal clenching and bruxism. She said when Dr. Talley put her in the splints that he saw evidence that she was continuing to do some significant clenching even with the splint in place. Christina gets headaches about three times per week at about a level of 7 that she gets predominantly in the temporal area and then it goes around to the back to the head particularly around the mastoid area. She rates her TMJ pain that occurs fairly severely two or three times a week with sharp pains at about a level of 8. Her average daily pain is at about 4, jaw function is at 7, diet at 7, and disability at 6.

Patient Concerns

Closed lock
Pain in the jaw joints with the right side being greater than the left side
Headaches
Right side feels like bone coming through ear at times
Bilateral earaches 
Pain associated with the jaw joints
Difficulties eating
Nocturnal bruxism

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Christina has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular midline. 

In profile, she has good facial balance. The maxilla appears to be AP deficient and the mandible appears to be about 8-10 mm AP deficient.

Intraorally, Christina has all of her lower teeth back to the molars. She has some transverse narrowness in the lower jaw. Has adequate attached gingiva, lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She is fairly close to being Class I cuspid by about 5 mm. Uvula is mildly hyperplastic. Soft palate is a little bit elongated. Tonsils are present. Faucial pillars are mildly constricted and appear to be posteriorly positioned. 

Intranasally, she has severe deviation of the nasal septum off toward the right side. Turbinates are moderate in size; however, the right side appears to have decreased functional airway due to the severe deviation of the nasal septum. On the left side, the nasal septum appears wide open. 

To palpation, she has some mild discomfort over the temporalis muscles but no other pain around the head and neck area. On opening, she has a click at about 20 mm of opening on the right side and at about 10 mm of closing. The left side seems to function more smoothly. On excursive movements, she does have some clicking and crepitus kind of noises on the right side. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Missing all four third molars. Root canal in the mandibular right first molar. Both joints are a little bit arthritic with the right side being perhaps a little bit worse than the left side. Huge nasal spur coming off the septum toward the right side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. Nasal airway actually looks fairly good on this x-ray. Some deviation of the nasal septum off toward the right side. 

Left TMJ tomograms show what appears to be an osteophyte sticking off the top of the condyle. Joint space is a little bit decreased particularly posteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears smaller on this side than the opposite side. It has decreased superior and posterior joint spaces. Articular eminence is moderately steep and actually a little bit more toward the shallow side. Condyle on this side appears a little bit more arthritic than the opposite side.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. The right condyle does appear smaller than the left one.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the inferior borders of the mandible are uneven with the right side being shorter vertically than the left side, although the occlusion doesn’t look quite as asymmetric. She has some adenoid tissue still left up in the nasopharynx. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm at the base of the soft palate and 6 mm at the base of the tongue.

Basic Diagnoses

Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and with severe deformation
Left TMJ mild arthritis but articular disc appears to be in position
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Severely deviated nasal septum
TMJ pain
Headaches
Myofascial pain
Earaches 
Masticatory dysfunction
Partial right nasal airway obstruction
Chronic nocturnal bruxism

Recommended Treatment

Medications
Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s. to eliminate nocturnal clenching

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch
Align and level mandibular arch 

Surgery
Right TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it posteriorly
Left mandibular ramus osteotomy to advance the mandible
Right coronoidectomy
Right TMJ fat graft (harvested from the abdomen)
Arch bars if the patient decides not to have orthodontic treatment 

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

I gave Christina a prescription for Klonopin 1 mg tablets, disp. 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x 4.