TONYA WASHBURN								10/18/2005

Tonya is 42 years old, referred by Michael Steffen, DDS, in Edmond, Oklahoma.  She has had previous surgery in 2002 for a left ovarian hemorrhage and she had a hysterectomy in January of 2003.  She had a tonsillectomy in 1974.  She had her wisdom teeth removed in 1988 and a right ovarian tumor removed in 1996.  Tonya is in good health except for her ovaries for which she takes estrogen.  Relative to the TMJ problems, Tonya has no idea when the problems began or what started the situation.  She did have orthodontics as a teenager and as previously mentioned she had her wisdom teeth removed in 1988.  She has known neck problems involving C5-6 and C7.   She has a kyphosis.  Tonya's onset of TMJ problems is unknown and the etiology is unknown.  She had orthodontics as a teenager and wisdom teeth out in 1988.  She takes estrogen and takes her private supply of Bextra as needed.   She gets earaches on the left side but no tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints except her neck give her problems.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  She has no problems with headaches.  She rates her TMJ pain on the left side at 4 and on the right side at 2 and average daily pain at 4.  She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 3, disability at 1.  Tonya does have moderate snoring but has no apparent problems with daytime somnolence nor sleep apnea problems.  

In frontal view, Tonya has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline may be just a mm to the left.  In profile view, Tonya has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably 2 to 3 mm.  Chin is retruded about 12 to 15 mm.  She appears to have short lower third facial height, predominantly decreased in the lower two-thirds.  Chin-neckline and angle are not well defined.  Intraorally, Tonya is missing lower first bicuspid.  She has moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch.   She has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she is missing her upper bicuspids as well and has a reverse curve of Spee with the upper incisors being at least 3 mm lower than the posterior teeth.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 6 to 7 mm.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship.  Intraorally, the oropharynx appears clears.  Tonsils are absent.  The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear relatively normal.  Tonya feels that she is a mouth breather particularly when she sleeps.  To palpation she has moderate pain over the left styloid area and milder pain over the SCMs, posterior neck, shoulders, left medial pterygoid and left TMJ.  On opening, the right joint functions relatively smooth.  On the left side, she has a thump noise as her condyle probably goes into the depression in the articular eminence.  The maximum level is about 46 mm but that is with some significant discomfort, at 24 mm she was comfortable.  Excursive to the right 9 mm, to the left 10 mm.  On excursive movement, she does have a click noise in the left joint, again most likely due to the unusual architecture of the articular eminence and fossa on that side.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side.  The right turbinate is fairly large for the constricted airway available.  On the left side, the turbinate is quite a bit larger and may be contributing to some airway obstruction as well.  The left turbinate is much larger than the right but both seem to decrease the nasal airway significantly.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars and all 4 first bicuspids.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

TONYA WASHBURN			10/18/2005				Page 2


Left TMJ has severely advanced osteoarthritic changes.  The right joint has some flattening and a little bit of anterior beaking on the condyle. 

Waters view show that the sinuses are clear.  She has fairly large frontal sinuses.  The nasal septum in the bony area at least is fairly straight.  The turbinates appear quite large and seem to block off a good portion of the airway.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows that she has some arthritic change in the condyles.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  Significantly decreased vertical joint space.  The stylohyoid ligaments are partially calcified.  They extend right up to the posterior border of the mandible.  

Left TMJ tomograms show a condyle that is quite arthritic and the condyle has decreased joint space superiorly and posteriorly.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  On opening, there is moderate translation of both condyles with the left one having a little bit more restriction than the right one.  On the left side, I do not see the styloid process.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a retruded maxilla and mandible with a Class II skeletal relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate of only about 5 mm (normal 11 mm.)  At the base of the tongue, there is a double shadow there and so it is difficult to tell but it is somewhere between 3 to 7 mm of airway space.  She has a deep overbite anteriorly due to a significant reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior deep bite of 6 to 7 mm. 
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Earaches.
Missing all 4 first bicuspids and all 4 third molars.
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Partial nasal airway obstruction.
TONYA WASHBURN			10/18/2005				Page 3


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary.
Align and level mandibular arch.
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and down graft it posteriorly. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
