JERRIE WERKMAN									6/22/05

Jerrie is 45 years old, referred by Dr. William Hang, Westlake Village, CA.  Jerrie is in good health with no major medical problems.  She had an adverse reaction to erythromycin and this gave her stomach cramps.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Headaches.
Aching in the jaw joints. 
Popping and clicking in the jaw joints which are worse in the morning when she wakes up.
Difficulties eating some foods and chewing. 
Earaches.
Lightheadedness and dizziness.

Jerrie has had problems with earaches over the past couple of years.  She does have problems with lightheadedness and dizziness.  She may have some problems with the vertebrae in her neck but she is not sure if it is strictly bone or muscle.  She has an allergic reaction to erythromycin, pollens, dust and other seasonal factors.  She is not aware of any reaction to jewelry.  She gets headaches about 2 to 3 times a per week at a level of 5 and they involve predominantly the frontal, temporal and posterior head areas.   She gets TMJ pain at an average of about a level of 6.   Overall, head and neck pain is level 5, jaw function 5, diet 3, disability at 6.  She does get headaches about twice a month that lasts for 3 days that occur at about a level of 8.  

In frontal view, Jerrie has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 24 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 3 mm.  In frontal view, Jerrie has an obtuse nasolabial.  Seems to have fairly good balance from the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  The mandible appears a little bit deficient being probably about 8 mm retruded.  Intraorally, Jerrie has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has a slight reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch.  She has good attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has some spacing between the upper lateral incisors and cuspids.  It looks as though the upper cuspids are narrower than usual.  Nasal turbinate is about 2 mm off to the left side.  Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is 2 to 3 mm off to the right.  Chin midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  It could be just 1 mm or so to the right.  Transversely the lower arch is fairly level.  In the maxilla, however, the right cuspid is up at least 2 to 3 mm on the right side compared to the cuspid on the left side.  First bicuspids, however, are more evenly level.  In the lower arch, the right cuspid is about 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch, the left cuspid may be 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  It seems basically a Class I cuspid on the left side and Class II end-on on the right side by probably 4 to 5 mm.  She has an anterior overbite of about 2 mm.  She has an overjet of probably about 2 mm.  Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear relatively normal.  Intranasally, the septum is a little bit tipped off towards the left side anteriorly.  Turbinates are relatively normal in size.  Turbinates may be moderately large anteriorly but could possibly be larger posteriorly.  Jerrie does report that she is apparently a mouth breather particularly when she sleeps.  Jerrie is not aware of having any snoring problems or sleep apnea problems.  She does state that she is tired a lot during the day.  
JERRIE WERKMAN				6/22/05				Page 2


To palpation, Jerrie has some mild to moderate discomfort over the TMJs and styloid areas.  No other pain to palpation around the head and neck muscles.  On opening, she has a click bilaterally at about 10 mm and a closing click about 5 mm indicative of displacement of the articular discs. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except for the third molars which are all absent.  She has root canals on mandibular right first molar and maxillary left first molar.  There is spacing between the upper laterals and cuspids.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Condyles appear a little flattened anteriorly with the right one appearing a little bit larger than the left one.  There appears to be a little mandibular plane angle facial morphology. 

In right TMJ tomogram, I do not believe that she had her teeth together all the way.  There is relatively normal appearing joint space with flattening on the anterior head.  Decreased posterior joint space.  With the teeth together this might even be a little bit more accentuated.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a similar condylar relationship with some flattening on the anterior head but good vertical joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Condyles on both sides appear a little bit large for the size of the fossas.  Decreased posterior joint space on the left side.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  Anterior beaking is appreciated in the open views. 

Waters view shows that the bony septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side, but clinically, the cartilaginous septum is a little bit off to the left side.  Left turbinate appears quite large and appears to obliterate most of the nasal airway.  On the right side there appears to be some airway passage present.  All the sinuses do appear relatively clear.  

Cephalometrically, she has a slight Class II skeletal relationship.  Upper lip is quite in anteroposterior dimension.  She has some vertical inclination of the maxillary incisors.  Slight Class II occlusal and skeletal relationship.  Lateral incisors may be just slightly overangulated.  The uppers are perhaps slightly underangulated.  There appears to be slight reverse curve of Spee in the mandibular arch.  There appears to be a slightly accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.  

DENTAL MODEL ANALYSIS 
Tooth size analysis reveals no significant Bolton's difference, however, the upper lateral incisors appear somewhat small, but the upper cuspids appear that the mesial aspects have been trimmed back a little bit.  At least mathematically there is not an appreciable tooth size discrepancy.
 



JERRIE WERKMAN				6/22/05				Page 3


There is a reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch with the molars being at least 3 mm inferiorly positioned compared to the bicuspid teeth forward.  In the upper arch, the left cuspid is extruded slightly about 1 to 2 mm compared to the rest of the teeth in the upper arch particularly comparing to the opposite cuspid tooth which is a good 2 mm higher than the cuspid tooth on the left side.  Mandibular dental midline appears to be 1 to 2 mm to the right of the mandibular midline.  

Clinically in the left posterior segment, it appears that the lateral cuspid of the maxillary second molar is hitting the lingual cusps of the mandibular second molar keeping the buccal cusps apart from each other.  On the right side it appears that the second molar is just slightly out of occlusion.  The open bite clinically does not appear to be as significant as it is on the dental models with probably less than 1 mm on the right side and maybe 1.5 mm to 2 mm on the left side.  

DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction.  
Anterior vertical maxillary excess. 
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Mandibular dental midline and chin shifted to the right side approximately 2 mm. 
Class I cuspid on the left side, Class II end-on cuspid on the right side.  
Reverse curve of Spee in mandibular arch. 
Posterior open bite involving predominately the second molars.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
High-occlusal plane angle. 
Nocturnal clenching.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Maintain current spacing between the upper laterals and cuspids. 
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Consider taking lower second molars out of the arch wire to see if this will help improve the reverse of Spee.  Try to elevate the incisors about 1 mm which will also help correct the reverse curve of Spee.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior maxilla superiorly about 2 to 3 mm and down graft the posterior aspect slightly. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction and correct the midlines.
3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.