JESSICA WELTGE									3/24/05
Date of Birth:  11/6/1990

Jessica is 14 years old and referred by Dr. George Adams.  She has had her tonsils and adenoids removed.  She has had myringotomies tubes x3 and she has had some tooth extraction.  Jessica is in good health with no major medical problems. She takes Sinus Advil p.r.n. and that is the only medication she takes.  Jessica has no allergies.  Jessica's problems began about 1 year ago.  She had been under orthodontic treatment with Dr. Greg Cohlmia since May of 2002.  About a year ago, he had placed her in Class II elastics and this is when she first became aware of clicking and popping in her jaw joints predominantly on the right side.  Jessica feels she probably had some popping in the left joint early on and used to have to manipulate her jaw from side-to-side in order to get it open.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Popping, right TMJ.
Headaches.
Pain in the jaw joints.
Difficulty eating and chewing.

She states that she may have some snoring and she has some daytime tiredness, but these are probably not related to decreased oropharyngeal airway as radiographically she has good airway.  She gets some earaches on the right side.  She has no tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  She has some problems with her shoulder, but she played volleyball last year and did a lot serving exercises and her father feels it may be a residual from that.  She has some seasonal allergy problems, but not real significant.  No known problems to wearing jewelry.  She is aware that she does clench and brux her teeth at night.  She gets headaches in the frontal, temporal and particularly the posterior head areas that she registers at a level of 6 when they occur.  She may go a week or 2 without headaches, but then she may have headaches 2 days in a row.  She usually wakes up with a headache when she has them.  She rates her TMJ pain in the right side at about a level of 7 and almost every morning she wakes up with pain in the right TMJ area and she rates this pain level at 7.  She rates her facial pain and headaches on an average day at about at a level of 6.  She rates her jaw function at 5, diet 2, disability at 5.  

In frontal view, Jessica has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 5 mm.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are pretty much on the facial midline.  Maxillary midline may be just a mm off to the left.  Jessica has somewhat lip incompetence of about 5 mm.  In profile view, Jessica has some AP deficiency of the maxilla probably about 4 mm.  She has an obtuse nasal labial angle and upper lip supralabalial is about 3 mm posterior to subnasale.  Chin appears to be about 12 to 15 mm retruded.  Chin-neckline is somewhat short, although the chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined.  She has some fullness in the submental area.  Intraorally, Jessica has all her lower teeth back to the second molars.  She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anteriors.  Lower roots are quite prominent in the mandibular vestibule.  She has all her teeth back to the second molars present.  She has a Class-II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side by about 3 mm, on the left side by about 2 mm.  She has an overjet of about 2 mm.  She has anterior deep-bite of about 2.5 mm.  Oropharynx appears normal and tissues appear healthy.  
JESSIE WELTGE			3/24/05					Page 2

Uvula is of normal length as is the soft palate.  Fascial pillars are normal.  Tonsils are absent.  Intranasally, anteriorly the nasal septum has a deviation off towards the right side.  Turbinates are of moderate size.  It appears that the airway should be reasonably good.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over her shoulders and rated her discomfort to palpation at a level of 7 bilaterally in the TMJ area.  No other areas were tender.  On opening, left joint functions smoothly, but right had an opening pop at about 35 mm, in closing with less than 5 mm.  On opening, the mandible would deviate off to the right side by about 3 to 4 mm and then following the pop it would shift back to the midline and open straight.  Tooth size analysis shows that there does not appear to be any significant tooth size discrepancy.  On the dental models there is a slight tendency towards Class II occlusion by maybe 1 to 2 mm at the very most.  She does have very prominent marginal ridges on the incisors and recontouring these may make a difference.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows presence of all the teeth with the four third molars being impacted.  Incisors look relatively clear.  Cannot evaluate the nasal septal area.  Condyles appear to have relatively normal morphology.  Right lateral incisor root is tipped distally.  

Left TMJ tomogram is a little bit cloudy.  It is hard to differentiate the head of the condyle.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There could be a little bit of anterior beaking on the head of the condyle, but difficult to tell.  Joint space maybe slightly decreased at the posterior superior aspect.  

The right joint is much clearer.  Condyle has fairly shape and a little bit of tendency toward anterior beaking.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space may be slightly decreased superiorly posteriorly, but not to significantly.  On opening, there is good translation of the condyles bilaterally anterior the articular eminence.

Waters view shows that the bony nasal septum is fairly straight and the turbinates are of moderate size.  Left nasal airway appears a little bit more obstructed as compared to the right side.  

Cephalometric radiograph shows that Jessica may be postured forward just slightly.  She does have some anterior vertical maxillary excess.  There is AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency.  She has an increase in the occlusal plane angle.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Slight Class II occlusion.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Impacted third molars x4.

JESSIE WELTGE				3/24/05  				Page 3

Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Masticatory dysfunction. 
Chronic clenching and bruxism. 
Increased occlusal plane angle. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications.
Klonopin 0.5 mg 1 tablet 1 hour prior to bedtime for control of nocturnal clenching and bruxism. 

Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level the maxillary arch.  Tip maxillary right lateral incisor root mesially to make room for interdental osteotomy.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly and advance it as well as decrease occlusal plane angle. 
Bilateral ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in counter-clockwise direction and decrease occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral inferior partial turbinectomies.
Removal of 4 impacted third molars.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  