B145
B145 is 20 years old. He is referred by XXXX and XXXX. B145 had an SVT ablation in 3 years ago with a successful result. Seven months ago, he had lower jaw surgery to move the lower jaw back and advance the upper jaw forward with expansion of the maxilla, a chin reduction, and a rhinoplasty. He currently takes no medications. His primary concerns are as follows:

Lips do not come together or close when bite is closed. Upper gums show when smiling.
Bump in right jaw causes face not to be symmetric. Nasal airway obstruction causing mouth breathing at nighttime.
Increased fullness on the right side of the face compared to the left side. Fullness of the upper and lower lips.

He takes no medications. He apparently breathes through his mouth when he sleeps, but does not snore and has mild daytime somnolence. He is not aware of sleep apnea issues. He reports no problems with headaches.

B145 had his maxilla expanded when he was about 7 years of age. He began full banded orthodontics from the age of 13 to 16. It was during this time that it was noted that his lower jaw was starting to grow out of alignment. He went back into braces last year. Seven months ago, he had surgery for:

Maxillary advancement and probably expansion.
Mandibular set back.
Rhinoplasty. Genioplasty by Dr. XXXX.
When he was about 10 or 11 years of age, he did have a motorcycle accident, striking the right side of his face and he developed a large hematoma in the right side and has a residual lump on the right side that he and his family thought might be the cause of his facial asymmetry.

Apparently, the rhinoplasty was designed to vertically shorten the septal columella area because there was excessive columella show. A little bit of the nasal dorsum apparently was smoothed down, but no significant bony removal was accomplished. The family also thought that the internal nasal structures would be addressed to enable B145 to breathe easier through the nose, but apparently this may not have occurred.

In frontal view, B145 has some increased fullness in the right angle area of probably 4 to 5 mm. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. He does have some lip incompetence of probably 5 to 6 mm. In profile view, the maxilla may be about 3 mm AP deficiency and the mandibles may be 10 to 12 mm AP deficiency. The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. Intraorally, B145 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present. He has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and perhaps just a slight Class III by about 1 mm on the left side. He has about 0.5 mm over bite relationship. Transversely, the maxilla is fairly level. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandible dental midline may be just 1 mm to the left. Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy. The uvula may be just slightly enlarged and tonsils may be just mildly enlarged. He does have a little bit of a step in the columella on the caudal end. With the lips relaxed, the distance from the lower lip to the lower incisor is about 5 mm. There may be some hyperplasia of the glandular tissues in the lips, particularly the lower lip, causing some aversion. He does have some decreased sensation in the lower lip and chin area that is close to having the feeling of being numb, but it has not changed much more recently.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of 4 bone plates in the maxilla with four screws in each plate. The maxilla must have been done in a single unit. There are bone plates on the mandible with four screws on each plate and each plate is set bilaterally. There is a chin plate in the anterior mandibular area.

Coronal view shows the septum may be deviated a little bit off towards the right side. The left turbinate is quite large and appears to be obliterating a good part of the airway. The right turbinate is smaller in size and it appears that there is some airway available.

Axial view shows that the left turbinate is quite large and seems to obliterate the airway. The left side is smaller but with a slight deviation of the septum towards the right side that may as well cause some obstruction.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology with just a little tendency towards anterior beaking. There is decreased vertical and posterior joint space. Anterior joint space may be a little bit better. The articular eminence is moderately shallow.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a joint that has good mediolateral width. There appears to be significantly decreased vertical joint space. There is also decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 to 5 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. The condylar head appears long as does the other side. There is decreased joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa appears it could almost be close bone-on-bone contact. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows B145 has good oropharyngeal airway posteriorly. He has a moderate high occlusal plane angle and some slight AP mandibular hypoplasia. Lips appear somewhat full. The occlusal plane is moderately steep. There is a posterior yaw of about 3 mm off to the right side.

Basic diagnoses for B145 would be as follows:
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
AP microgenia.
Posterior yaw with the maxilla and mandible being rotated 3 to 4 mm to the right.
Class I cuspid occlusion.
Columella deformity.
Hypertrophied turbinates, particularly with the left side being obstructive of the airway.
Over angulation of the maxillary incisors. Lower lip ptosis.
Lip incompetence of 6 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2. Surgery. a.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to rotate the posterior aspect of the maxilla to the left approximately 3 to 4 mm and advance it in a counterclockwise direction. Upright maxillary incisors to decrease the axial inclination. b.	maxillary osteotomies to advance in a counterclockwise direction and shift the posterior aspect to the left 3 to 4 mm. c.	AP augmentation genioplasty. d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. e.	Reconstruction of columella. f.	Resuspension of the mentalis muscle.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B145 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. There is decreased vertical joint space. The articular disc is medially displaced with about two-thirds of the condylar head uncovered. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. There is decreased vertical joint space. The disc appears to be medially displaced with almost the total condylar head uncovered. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. There is decreased vertical posterior joint space. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced and likely medially displaced. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination to it. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is reduction of the articular disc into position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a slight anterior beaking to it. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. The discal tissue is hard to identify except over medially, however, it tends to be displaced towards the medial aspect. There is decreased vertical and posterior joint space. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is reduction of the articular disc into position.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis but articular discs that are anteromedially displaced with reduction on opening.

