MARGARET WELTER								05/03/2006

Maggie is 30 years old.  She had a several spine fusions of C6-7 in April of 2002.  She has a past history of fainting spells that were a result of mastoiditis in the left ear.  She has no other joint problems except for the TMJ.  She has had no recurrent fainting spells since her left-sided mastoiditis was resolved.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Severe pain in the jaw joints with the right side greater than the left side.
Cannot chew or talk without pain.
Limited ability to kiss.
On opening, jaw shifts to the right side.
Loud painful cracking and popping in the joints. 
Limitations to her life abilities and to concentrate.
Headaches.

PREVIOUS SURGERIES:  
Cervical fusion (04/11/2002) for C6-7.
Rhinoplasty with septum correction (10/02/2001.)
Myringotomy of the left ear (06/2003.)

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Synthroid.
Relpax 40.
Zanaflex 2 mg tablets.
Valium 5 mg occasionally.

She has hypothyroidism and takes Synthroid for it.  She has an allergy to Zyprexa.  Maggie’s problems began about 4 years ago.  She had a cervical fusion performed and after the surgery began having discomfort, clicking and popping in her jaw joints that has continued to get worse. She has had at least 5 splints and she has had 2 additional NTIs.  She has had physical therapy, trigger point injections, Botox injections x3, an arthrocentesis x3 to the right side and 1 time to the left side.  

She gets earaches, right side worse than the left side, frequent tinnitus, and vertigo 2 to 4 times per month.  She has decreased hearing in the left side.  She has no other joint problems.  She has difficulties wearing earrings.  She goes “blank” about 2 times per month and she has significant difficulties concentrating.  She has been on disability for 4 years.  She clenches likely at nighttime and some during the day as well.  She rates her headaches at about a level of 8 in the frontal, temple, posterior head and top of the head areas.  At times they are only a level of 3 but they can escalate as high as 10.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 7, jaw function 7, diet at 7, disability at 6.  

She does have difficulties breathing through her nose and reports no snoring.  She has some daytime tiredness.  She does have difficulty sleeping at night that is fairly severe for her.  

MARGARET WELTER			05/03/2006				Page 2


In frontal view, Maggie has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 0.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right but the chin is fairly much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Maggie has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Maggie has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  There is very minimal crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch Maggie has all of her teeth back through the second molars present and likewise appears to be in very good repair.  She is basically Class I cuspid molar relationship and has about 2.5 mm of vertical overbite relationship.  The soft palate, uvula and faucial pillars all appear relatively normal and the oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Nasal airway appears quite open.  It appears that she has likely had previous turbinectomies as the turbinates are almost nonexistent particularly anteriorly.  The septum is reasonably straight.  She gives no history of snoring or sleep problems. She does have usually moderate to severe daytime somnolence but this, however, may be related to her sleep disorder.  On opening, she has a soft click in the left side about 20 mm and a closing click of 15 mm on the right side.  It is a more palpable click at about 35 to 40 mm and a closing click of 30 mm although it is not always there.  Maximal incisal opening is 45 mm but she can open to about 27 mm without significant pain.  Excursive movement to right 9 mm but could not hold that and to the left side about 9 mm.  Shifting to the right was painful in the right joint.  To palpation, she rates TMJ pain and shoulder pain as severe, temporalis, masseters, styloid areas, SCMs and posterior neck is high moderate and medial pterygoids as mild.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  The rest of the teeth are present and appear to be in really good condition.  The sinuses are clear.  The nasal septum is reasonably straight with just a slight shift off to the left side and the turbinates appear small.  There appears to be some mild arthritic changes in the condyle and some flattening on the anterior heads. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum shows a spur off on the right side and the bony aspect of the nose and also some spurring off to the left side.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is flattened on the posterior and flattened anteriorly with a little bit of sclerosis on the anterior head.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Decreased joint space particularly anteriorly and superiorly.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Joint space vertically and anteriorly appear better.  There is a little bit of flattening on the anterior head.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation in both joints.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a good Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway appears normal.  She has probably moderately low occlusal plane and mandibular plane angle facial morphology.

MARGARET WELTER			05/03/2006				Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and disc dislocation being worse on the right side as compared to the left side.
Mandibular hyperplasia.
Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Earaches.
Tinnitus.
Vertigo.
Masticatory dysfunction.
Sleep disorder.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications. 
Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s.

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization.
Application of arch bars. 
