DAVID WEI										6/17/05

David is 17 years old, referred by Dr. George Adams.  David is in good health with no major medical problems.  The primary concern that David has is that his jaws and teeth do not fit together.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain etc.  No other joints bother him.  He is not aware of any nocturnal clenching or bruxism and he is not aware of any noises in his jaw joints.

In frontal view, David has very good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0.  Maxillary midline shifted about 1 mm to the left, mandible shifted 1 mm to the right and chin is shifted about 2 to 3 mm to the right.  In profile view, David has fairly good balance between his nose, lips and chin.  He has a high mandibular plane angle in facial morphology.  Intraorally, David has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, David has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He appears to have accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.  David is slightly Class III on the right side by probably about 2 to 3 mm and on the left side he is Class III by about 2 to 3 mm.  He has some space between the lower left lateral incisor and cuspid.  He has 0 overbite relationship. There is slight reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch.  He basically has a crossbite anteriorly and on the right side.  The uvula is mildly enlarged.  The soft palate appears relatively normal as do the faucial pillars.  Intranasally, David's turbinates are very large, but the transverse width of his nose is large as well.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  He appears to have adequate airway around the turbinates despite their significant size.  David's mother says that when David does sleep he does not snore, but he sometimes has some drooling.  Transverse occlusal plan particularly in the maxilla is fairly level.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Lateral cephalogram shows that the 4 third molars are missing but all the rest of the teeth are there.  Roots in the upper centrals appear short.  Some of the bicuspid roots appear narrow mesial laterally and do not appear very long.  Molar roots also appear somewhat short.  Sinuses appear relatively normal.  Difficult to evaluate the condyles as they are both partially cut off in the x-ray.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  He has some unusual definition within the sinuses bilaterally at the left side coming from the medial superior aspect of the sinus extending out near the sinus bilaterally.  It is more calcified and more prominent on the left side as compared to the right side.  The septum appears straight. Turbinates appear moderate in size radiographically. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows the condyle that appears a little bit small mediolateral.  Width appears to be a little bit short vertically.  Articular eminence is quite steep.  Joint space actually looks reasonably good.  There does appear to be some osteogenic changes on the top of the condyle. 

Left TMJ condyle appears significantly larger anteroposteriorly than the opposite side.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space is well balanced.  Condyle appears to have more normal morphology.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  
DAVID WEI				6/17/05					Page 2


Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that David has a Class III skeletal relationship and extreme overangulation of the maxillary incisors.  Lower incisors appear to be in reasonable inclination.  The occlusal plane appears moderately steep.  Oropharyngeal airway is quite open.  Maximal incisal opening is about 63 mm.  Excursive movements in each direction are about 12 mm.  David has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.  Dental model analysis shows that he has a transverse deficiency in the cuspid area and may in fact have a transverse excess in the bicuspid molar area.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ condylar hyperplasia.
Right TMJ articular disc dislocation.
Deviated mandibular prognathism.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Slight transverse maxillary excess.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior crossbite and tendency towards crossbite on the left side.
Significant overangulation of maxillary incisors.
High occlusal plane angle.
Maxillary midline shifted 1 mm to the left, mandibular dental midline shifted 1 mm to the right and chin 3 mm to the right.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Extractions.
Extract bilaterally either the maxillary first bicuspids or second bicuspids but treat the mandible non-extraction. 

MRI of left and right TMJ.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Close extraction space.  Leave residual space around the upper lateral incisors of 1 to 1.5 mm of spacing around each lateral incisor.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Evaluate growth to determine the presence or absence of active condylar hyperplasia.  
5.  Surgery.
     a.   Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies if condylar hyperplasia is confirmed.
     b.   Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
     c.   Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly and 
           decrease the occlusal plane angle.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, expand as well as level the occlusal    
      plane.

 Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.