HELEN WELLS									11/14/2005

Helen is 52 years old, referred by Dr. Wayne Ku, 6101 Chapel Hill Blvd., #203, Plano, TX 75093.  Helen has had previous surgery for gallbladder removal in October of 2002.  Helen is in good health.  Helen has had problems with headaches since childhood of unknown etiology.  Her mother also has migraines.  Helen had orthodontic treatment at the age of 22 for approximately two years in Rochester, NY.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Teeth and jaws do not align.
Headaches.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Severe snoring.
Awakes at night, unable to catch her breath.
Predominate mouth breather.

MEDICATIONS:
Corgard 40 mg, which is a beta blocker for migraine headaches.
Cholesterol medication. 
Imitrex which controls her migraines quite well.

She has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus but no vertigo or hearing loss.  She has a reaction to aspirin.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  She gets headaches when not on Imitrex that can escalate to a level of 10.  On Imitrex, she can function fairly well.  Without Imitrex she would be totally debilitated.  She rates her TMJ pain at 0, average daily pain at 3, although it can escalate to 10, jaw function at 0, diet at 2.  Other joints that bother her include her shoulder occasionally in which she would get some tendonitis and her right knee bothers her occasionally.  

In frontal view, Helen has good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin.  Mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline but she has only 3 lower incisors as 1 tooth was extracted probably for orthodontic reasons.  She also has had her wisdom teeth removed.  In profile view, Helen has some slight AP maxillary deficiency probably about 3 to 4 mm.  The chin appears to be retruded by probably 15 to 18 mm.  Chin-neckline is very short and chin-neck angle is not well defined.  It appears that probably the right lower central incisor was extracted.  The lower incisors are in lingual inclination in relative to the cuspids.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  She has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch, she has had first bicuspids extracted bilaterally.  She has an end-on Class II cuspid relationship bilaterally by probably about 3 mm.  She is super Class II in the molar area.  She has almost a 2 mm overbite relationship anteriorly.  When Helen occludes in centric relation, she hits only on her second molar and all other teeth are out of occlusion.  Helen had a UPPP procedure and a tonsillectomy done at the age of 33.  This helped her with her sore throats but did not help her significantly with her snoring or sleep apnea problems.  

HELEN WELLS				11/14/2005				Page 3


To palpation, she has some mild tenderness of her TMJs and styloid area but otherwise no areas of pain or tenderness.  On opening, she had a click in the right TMJ about 25 mm of opening but difficult to identify the closing click.  The left joint seems to function relatively smoothly.  On excursive movements, she did have some popping noises in the right side.  Helen does sleep on her side.  When she lays on her back, she cannot breathe very well and has to elevate her head.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately to severely enlarged relative to the size of the nasal airway.  In fact, the left turbinate appears to have chronic inflammatory changes.  The septum kicked off at the base towards the left side and she has a spur in that area.  She has constricture of the luminal valves intranasally.  Holding those valves open did enable Helen to breathe easier through her nose.  At least anteriorly the right turbinate appeared larger than the left most likely because the septum is deviated off towards the left side.  Tooth size analysis shows that there is a Bolton's difference of a +4.5 mm with the upper arch being larger than the lower arch primarily due to the missing mandibular right central incisor.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars and right central incisors as well as maxillary first bicuspids.  She has root canals on the maxillary right lateral incisor cuspid, mandibular right second bicuspid first molar and mandibular left first molar.  She has a significant amount of bone loss around the mandibular right first molar and perhaps bifurcation involvement.  The sinuses look reasonably clear but difficult to assess.  She has what appears to be relatively severe arthritis at least on the right joint and to a lesser degree in the left joint.  She appears to have hypertrophied turbinates and a wide septum. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The bony septum appears relatively straight.  The turbinates appear enlarged particularly on the left side.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be maybe postured slightly forward in the fossa but has a decreased superior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  There appears to be some arthritic changes in this joint.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is significantly posteriorly positioned in the fossa with a decreased posterior and superior joint space.  Articular eminence is a little bit steeper on this side.  The condyle appears much smaller anteroposteriorly as compared to the opposite side.  On opening, the condyle seems to translate reasonably well.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla is retruded and the mandible is really retruded.  The UPPP procedure is noted on the soft palate.  However, she has only about maybe 1 mm of airway space between the soft palate and posterior pharyngeal wall.  At the base of the tongue she has probably about 3 mm of airway space.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Significant AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.

HELEN WELLS				11/14/2005				Page 3


Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion. 
High occlusal plane angles. 
TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Severe decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Severe snoring.
Moderate to severe sleep apnea.
Missing maxillary first bicuspids, mandibular right central incisor and all 4 third molars.
Significant periodontal problems associated particularly with the mandibular right second molar.
Significant reversed tooth size discrepancy of +4.5 mm (secondary to missing mandibular right central incisor.) 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Significantly deviated nasal septum with septal spurring. 
Significant nasal airway obstruction.
Moderate crowding of lower anterior arch.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
MRI of left and right TMJs.
Periodontal treatment and management of the mandibular right first and second molars. 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Slenderize maxillary lateral incisors removing 1 mm of tooth structure from each tooth to help compensate for the significant tooth size discrepancy.  Close the spacing.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Open up 1/2 mm of space between each of the incisor teeth extending from cuspid to cuspid.  This will help compensate for the significant tooth size discrepancy.
CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.) 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advance with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and stabilize with bone plates and hydroxyapatite grafting.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest fat grafts from the abdomen.)
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Nasoseptoplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
Restorative dentistry to build up the lower 3 incisors to eliminate the spacing in that arch.