PERRY WEISBERG									08-23-04

Perry is 47 years old and referred by Dr. Steven Reimer, 825 Meadows Drive, Bella Terre, Ste. 121, Boca Raton, FL  33486. 

Patient History

He has had previous gallbladder surgery. She has had his tonsils removed, and he has had a UPPP procedure. He has had nasoseptoplasty performed twice. He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. He does have some problems with a disintegrating disc at L5-L5. Left knee also is arthritic. He takes Clarinex 1 to 5 mg p.r.n. He was aware of having sleep apnea problems as early as the age of 12 to 14. Treatments to date have included in December of 1989 a UPPP procedure. In 2000 to 2003, he wore a TAP appliance, but this caused significant shifting and changing in his teeth to the point that he now has a malocclusion associated with it. Has no problem with headaches. No TMJ pain. No pain around the head and neck area. Rates his jaw function and diet at 5. 

Patient Concerns

Sleep apnea
Snoring
Teeth don’t fit together
Bites the sides of the cheeks
Predominantly a mouth breather

Clinical Examination

Upper lip length is 30 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1 mm. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm to the left of the maxillary midline and facial midline. Chin is about a millimeter off to the left. 

In profile view, he has some maxillary AP deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm. Chin is retruded by approximately 20 mm. Chin-neckline is fairly long, although chin-neck angle is not well-defined. He has a head postured forward chin position.

Intraorally, Perry has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Slight asymmetry in the lower arch with the left cuspid a millimeter posterior to the right cuspid. In the upper arch, Perry has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Has just a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by about 2 mm, and on the left side he is end-on Class II. In the upper arch, the right cuspid is 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. Posterior teeth do not touch on the right side. Most of the occlusion is on his incisors at this time as on both side he has an open bite. Left cuspids appear to touch on the upper first bicuspid, lower second bicuspid and perhaps the upper right cuspid, lower first bicuspid touch. Therefore, he occludes on the maxillary right cuspid, first bicuspid, lower right bicuspids, four central incisors, and left cuspids. All other teeth are out of occlusion. He has an anterior overbite of about 1 mm. Intraorally, it is very difficult to observe the oropharynx without Perry gagging. Tongue seems hyperfunctional. The glimpse I could get demonstrates that the uvula is completely gone. The soft palate appears short anteroposteriorly. 

Intranasally, the septum has been operated on a couple of times. Does deviate a little bit toward the left side but not too significantly. Turbinates appear fairly small, and he may have had a previous turbinectomy performed. Columella appears a little bit wide. Holding the nostrils open, he could breathe a little bit easier through his nose. Luminal valves appear relatively normal in size. 

On opening, Perry is aware of some clicking in his jaw joints particularly on the right side. Using a stethoscope, I could hear some clicking kind of noises in the right TMJ and also a little bit on the left side. To palpation, he has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Incisal opening is about 50 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 10 mm and to the left 11 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that he has a root canal in the maxillary left central incisor. Mandibular third molars are absent, but upper third molars are impacted. Sinuses look relatively clear. Condyles are not seen on the x-ray. He has had his orthodontic appliances on for only about a month.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are all clear. Seems to have a fairly good airway. Base of the floor of the nose does not appear to be as open. Maxillary midline appears to be pretty much on the facial midline.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic. Some anterior beaking is present. Articular eminence is fairly steep. However, superior joint space looks fairly good. 

Right TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic. Appears to be some sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Condyle appears long anteroposteriorly with a little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence does not appear as steep on this side. Joint space appears reasonably good. 

On opening, there are good excursive movements. The articular eminence appears quite flattened in the left joint. This may be due to the chronic forward posturing of the mandible. Possibly some of the changes in the condylar head could be due to the long-term splint therapy that he was under. In the right joint, the anatomical details are not as clear. Styloid processes appear to be elongated.

Cephalometrically, he was not in centric relation when the x-ray was taken as he is postured forward to an end-on incisor position. The soft palate looks quite short. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 5 mm and at the base of the tongue in one area only measures about 2 to 3 mm. The sinuses appear clear. I do not see much evidence of turbinates present in the nose. Jaws appear somewhat retruded. Lower incisors are overangulated. Probably a moderately high occlusal plane angle relationship. 

Tooth-size analysis shows that there is a Bolton’s difference of over 2.5 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and possible articular disc dislocations
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of 2 to 3 mm (normal dimension 11 mm)
Sleep apnea syndrome
Snoring
Daytime somnolence
High occlusal plane angle
Occluding on the four central incisors, maxillary right cuspid, first bicuspid and mandibular cuspid, first bicuspid, and left cuspids
Bilateral posterior open bite
Overangulation of lower incisors
Significant tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 to 3 mm
Impacted maxillary third molars x 3

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJs

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing 2.5 to 3 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy and help decrease the overangulation of the lower incisors

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward approximately 5 mm at the incisal edge and downgraft it posteriorly approximately 5 mm to level the occlusal plane
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Removal of bilateral impacted maxillary third molars x 2
Consider bilateral TMJ surgery if MRI confirms that the discs are dislocated

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
