SUZY WELFELT								02/08/2011

Suzy is 54 years old and referred by Dr. Sam Marynick, 3600 Gaston Avenue, Suite 506, Dallas, Texas 75245.

Suzy’s TMJ problems began in the past 4 or 5 years.  It seems to center around her taking any medication called Requip.  This medication or coincidental occurrence seems to have shut down a lot of her systems.  She was on the Requip for 18 to 24 months.  She developed some TMJ issues as well as migraines related around that medication.  She was originally diagnosed as having restless leg syndrome and the reason she was put on Requip to begin with.  She has a history of migraine headaches.  She has been treated so far with splint therapy including an NTI by Dr. Albus and then in 2009 she received a splint from Dr. Rick Riggs.  The last couple of months she has been seeing Dr. Steve Bender who has made a forward positioning splints for her.  Suzy gets headaches that are real constant in the frontal and temporal areas at about a level of 7. She has TMJ pain on the average at about a level of 6, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 7, diet at 4, disability at 8.  When Dr. Albus saw Suzy more recently, he noted that her bite has shifted and her teeth do not fit together as well as they used to.  Suzy has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo,  and probably has some hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her knees, neck, lower back, fingers and hips.  She has some herniated discs in her neck and lower back.  She has been previously diagnosed with restless leg syndrome, but does have significant neck and back pain and has been diagnosed with depression and dystonia.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also during the day.  

Suzy is one of five children in her family.  Everybody else in the family is healthy without any TMJ problems.  She does have one sister who has muscular dystrophy.  She also has a family history of cancer.

In frontal view, Suzy has fairly good left-to-right symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is zero.  The maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to the left.  The mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm off to the left and chin is about 2 to 3 mm off to the left.  In profile view, Suzy has some deficiency in the maxilla of probably about 3 to 4 mm at the upper incisor area and chin is retruded about 10 mm.  intraorally, Suzy has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch, but has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class II Division 2 malocclusion being about 4 mm Class II.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy.  Uvula may be just mildly elongated, but the soft palate looks relatively normal.  However, the fascial pillars are quite constricted posterior.  To palpation, Suzy has no discomfort around the head and neck area.  For pain medication, Suzy takes hydrocodone 10 mg, she usually takes three in the morning and usually two at night and sometimes she will take some in the afternoon as needed.  She does not find it particularly effective.  She also takes Baclofen 10 mg three to four tablets at bedtime.  She also has Klonopin 0.5 mg tablets that she can take p.r.n., but does not take much of it.  Since Suzy has gotten off of the Requip, she has had just a very unusual reaction to medications where medications are essentially ineffective for her.  She has been on numerous medications.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows on the left side she has implants to replace the first and second molars.  In the maxillary upper arch, she has got root canals in the first and second molars.  She has crowns on a lot of the posterior teeth.  The sinuses are clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  The condyles appear to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  She has huge calcified styloid ligaments that go all the way down it appears to the hyoid bone.  

Coronal view shows the sinuses are clear, the septum is reasonably straight, and turbinates are mildly enlarged.  

Axial view shows that the turbinates are mildly enlarged, sinuses are clear, and septum is reasonably straight.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  There are probably anteriorly displaced discs on this side with a vertical orientation.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit more sclerosis on top of the condyle.  It is somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  The disc may also be in a vertical orientation.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is a little erosion in the top of the condyle towards the medial side.  The lateral joint space is decreased, although the vertical joint space appears fairly normal. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows decreased lateral joint space.  Width of the condyle is relatively normal.  Vertical joint space appears fairly good.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are retruded.  The oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm at the soft palate level and about 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  Hyoid bone is positioned relatively high in the neckline and sits just beneath the inferior border of the mandible. There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 2 mm higher than the right side at the cuspid area.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm (normal airway dimension 11 mm).
Bilateral calcified styloid hyoid ligaments with fixated hyoid bone.
Class II end-on occlusion Division 2.
TMJ pain.
Headaches and myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch. 	
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			slight counterclockwise direction approximately 10 mm. 
	c.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a slight counterclockwise 			direction approximately 5 mm.  
	d.	Removal of calcified styloid hyoid ligaments.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  