MATTHEW WEISS									03/14/2008 

Matt is 18 years old, referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich, 3105 Legacy Drive, Suite A, Plano, Texas  75023.  Primary concerns that Matt has is that teeth are crooked and they do not fit together very well.  By history, Matt did have a scooter accident.  He had a Razor scooter accident at the age of 10 and he knocked his upper front teeth loose.  They subsequently became fairly solid, but the roots are significantly shortened by history.  He takes no medications.  He has no TMJ problems or known headache problems.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Matt has fairly good left-to-right facial asymmetry.  There may be just some slight increased fullness in the right side.  Right side of the mandible may be just slightly longer vertically by maybe 4 mm or so.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about minus 2.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin.  The lower mandibular dental midline may be just to the right about 1 mm.  In profile view, Matt has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  Chin appears a little bit retruded by maybe 5 to 8 mm.  Intraorally, Matt has all of his lower teeth 
back to the second molars.  He has some moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch.  He appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  The lower teeth appear to be in a little bit of lingual inclination.  In the upper jaw, Matt has all of his teeth back to the second molars.  He has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side with just a slight tendency towards crossbite posteriorly.  On the left side, he is a little bit end-on Class II by probably 3 mm.  He has an anterior overbite tendency of about 1 mm.  He has a crossbite tendency on the left side as well.  Uvula is mild to moderately enlarged.  Soft palate may be mildly elongated but not too significant.  Fascial pillars may be just slightly constricted.  Tonsils appear mildly enlarged.  Nasal septum appears relatively normal.  Turbinates are very mild to moderate in size.  There may be some mild nasal airway obstruction, but not too significant.  Columella is a little bit wide and nostrils are slightly narrow.  He does have some mild snoring, but no other sleep apnea symptoms.  To palpation, Matt has no tenderness around the head and neck area.   Joints seem to function smoothly.  Maximum opening is 55 mm, excursion movement to the right 8 mm, the left 9 mm.   There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 to 2 mm lower than the left side, and the left cuspid may be about 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four third molars with the maxillaries being impacted as well as the mandibular left third molar.  Perimandibular right third molar is erupted.  Sinuses appear clear.  

Waters view shows the sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear large.  Bony septum appears reasonably straight.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows what appears to be a condyle with some flattening on the head and some decreased superior and posterior joint spaces. Open view shows good translation of both joints.     

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Matt has a Class II jaw relationship.  He has an overjet of about 3 to 4 mm.  Oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal.  

The basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Transverse maxillary hypoplasia. 
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Anterior open bite.
Class I occlusion on the right side.  Class II end-on occlusion on the left side.
Mandibular left cuspid 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Snoring.
Impacted bilateral maxillary and left mandibular third molars. 
Malpositioned erupted mandibular right third molar. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

 Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch at two different occlusal plane levels.  Align the four incisors in an elevated plane above the cuspids and posterior teeth by placing an upward step in the arch wire. 	
Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider slenderizing the lower anterior teeth and removing 1 or 2 mm of tooth structure to account for a tooth size discrepancy of 2 mm.  Consider advancing the left cuspid 1 to 2 mm or trying to posteriorly position the right cuspid placing Class III elastics on the right side and Class II elastics on the left side to help correct for the asymmetric lower arch.
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand, advance slightly, and move the posterior aspect superiorly.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a clockwise direction.  
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Surgical removal of impacted maxillary third molars and mandibular left third molar.
Extract mandibular right third molar.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.