MICHELLE WEBER									03/23/2007

Michelle is 44 years old, referred by Dr. Al Bishop, 3001 Brown Trail #101, Bedford, TX 76021.  She had previous surgery for a hysterectomy, bladder suspension, breast augmentation, implant removal and lift.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Headaches.
Jaw pain.
Clicking and popping when talking or eating.

She has had no treatment for the joint problems except she is under orthodontic treatment.  She began orthodontic treatment in March of 2006.  She has actually had nightguards to help to try and control her clenching and bruxism since the age of 28.  She has worn them almost continuously since then and she has been through 4 splints.  She gets earaches that are getting worse and tinnitus is getting worse.  She gets vertigo sometimes but has no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her hips, fingers, neck and feet.  She rates her TMJ daily pain at a level of 7, average daily facial pain at level of 7, jaw function and diet at 0 and disability at 3.  She rates her headaches at level of 8 and she gets these in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Norvasc 10 mg.
Triamp/HCTZ 37.5 mg.
Zyrtec 10 mg.
Acyclovir 200 mg. 
Multiple vitamins.
Calcium citrate.
Advil.
Excedrin Migraine for her severe headaches.

In frontal view, Michelle has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary dental midline is about 2 mm off to the left side.  Mandibular dental midline may be 1 mm off to the left.  Chin is pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, Michelle has fairly good facial balance.  Intraorally, she is missing mandibular right second bicuspid.  She has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a crown on the left second molar.  Significant lower arch asymmetry near the left cuspid that is probably 5 mm anterior to the right cuspid.  In fact, the right cuspid aligns better with the first bicuspid.  In the upper arch Michelle as all the teeth back through the second molars.  She has a bridge in the upper arch placed in the second bicuspid and the first molar.  She has a slight Class III end-on cuspid relationship on the left side being about 2 mm Class III.  On the right side she has a full Class II cuspid relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 1 mm.  She has about a 1 mm overjet.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear normal.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off to the left side.  Turbinates appear normal to moderate in size and there appears to be adequate airway.  She does report some moderate snoring and some mild to moderate daytime somnolence. 
MICHELLE WEBER				03/23/2007				Page 2

She is not aware of having any sleep apnea type symptoms.  To palpation she has some moderate discomfort of masseters, TMJs and mild tenderness over the SCMs, styloid areas and temporalis muscles.  On opening, she has definite consistent pop in the right joint about 15 mm of opening and about 10 mm of closing.  On the left side it was a little bit more inconsistent and a little harder to pick up but she seemed to get a click at times at about 10 mm of opening and 5 mm of closing.  Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm.  Opening without discomfort 30 mm.  Excursive movements were 10 mm to the right and 9 mm to the left.  If Michelle lays on her back, she cannot sleep in that position at night as she blocks off her nasal airway.  She says she does not sleep much on her back.  Michelle thinks that her snoring mostly occurs when she is breathing through her mouth.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars and the mandibular right second bicuspid.  She is also missing the maxillary left second bicuspid and first molar replaced by a 4-unit bridge.  She has root canals on the maxillary left first bicuspid and second molar.  She also has a root canal of mandibular left second molar. 

Waters view shows that she has some deviation of the bony septum.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit flattened on the anterior leading edge.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space looks reasonably good.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good morphology.  Joint space actually is normal and articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a slight skeletal Class II occlusal relationship.  She appears to have a high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good with it being almost 10 mm at the soft palate level and probably 8 or 9 mm at the far base of the tongue.  There seems to be good space between the superior aspect of the tongue in the inferior aspect of the palate.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation at the lateral aspect of the joint with reduction on opening. 
TMJ pain.
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 





MICHELLE WEBER				03/23/2007				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications.
a.  Klonopin 1 mg tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s. ½ tablet b.i.d. if necessary for daytime clenching and bruxism.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Continue to align and level the arches.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to maintain occlusion and allow the condyles to drop down enough to make room for the articular discs.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
