MATTHEW WHITLOCK								6/13/05

Matt is 16 years old, referred by Ron Groves, DDS, Southlake, Texas.  Matt has had some eye surgery when he was 2 years old and 10 years old.  He had tubes in his ears when he was 16 months old.  Matt is in good health.  He takes Concerta 18 mg per day.   He apparently has no drug allergies.  

HISTORY OF PRESENT OF ILLNESS  
Matt had orthodontic treatment from the age of 10 to 13.  He has been in a retainer since that time.  However, his retainers do not fit him anymore.  He had his treatment done in Houston and in Tampa, Florida.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  He has no joint problems except he does have asymptomatic scoliosis.  He has some seasonal allergy problems.  He has been observed with clenching at nighttime.  He has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain or myofacial pain.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION  
In frontal view, Matt has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm.  Maxillary midline maybe about 1 mm off to the right.  Mandibular dental midline is off to right also and chin is off to the right probably about 3 to 4 mm.  In profile view, Matt has AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Chin is AP deficient by about 12 to 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is short.  Chin-neck angle, however, is fairly well defined.  He does have a head postured forward neck position.  In the lower arch, he is missing lower first bicuspids.  He has a little bit of crowding in the lower anterior arch.  He has fairly inflamed gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  Upper arch is also missing first bicuspids.  He has an end-on Class II cuspid relationship and probably about 3 to 4 mm Class II.  He has an overjet of about 3 mm and 0 deep bite relationship.  The structures of the soft palate and uvula look relatively normal except the uvula is a little bit enlarged but not real significant.  Fascial pillars look normal.  Intranasally, right turbinate appears fairly large and larger than the left side.  Septum is relatively straight.  No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  He does have a little bit of a click in the left TMJ and somewhere around 25 mm of opening and slight closing click about 15.  Right side seems relatively smooth.  Maximal incisal opening is 65 mm.  Matt was unable to shift his jaw from side-to-side voluntarily but probably would have relatively normal range.  There is apparently no significant history of snoring.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows absence of all 4 first bicuspids and all 4 third molars.  Sinuses appear relatively clear except there could be a little pseudocyst in the left maxillary sinus.  Right nasal airway looks good and the left looks a little bit compromised.  Condyles appear to have fairly reasonable architecture. 

Waters view shows that the septum has deviation off to the left side.  Right turbinate appears larger than the left side.  Sinuses appear clear. 



MATTHEW WHITLOCK			6/13/05				Page 2


Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that actually appears fairly large and actually somewhat larger than the opposite side.  A little bit of flattening on the anterior head.  There appears to be decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is very difficult to identify at the level of cuts performed.  It is difficult to determine condyle-fossa relationship.  On open view, there is some restricted translation in the left joint and a little bit better translation in the right joint.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Matt has some AP maxillary deficiency.  Upper incisors are slightly over-angulated.  He has an overjet relationship probably about 4 mm.  It appears to occlude only on the second molars and all other teeth appear to be out of occlusion.  Oropharyngeal airway appears fairly good.  He has a head postured forward neck position.  Turbinates do not look particularly enlarged on this view.    

There may be just a slight tooth size discrepancy of Bolton's difference of about 1 mm.  On the dental model, there does not appear to be a significant tooth size discrepancy.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation (possible ICR).
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Occluding only on second molars.
Open bite extending and including first molars forward.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hyperplastic turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Facial asymmetry with the dental midlines shifted 1 mm off to the right and chin shifted 3 to 4 mm off to the right.
Neuromuscular speech articular disorder.
Missing all 4 first bicuspids and all 4 third molars.
Slight tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1 mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
MRI of left and right TMJs.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.  Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots 
distally to make room for interdental osteotomies if they are necessary.  (Cuspid roots currently are tipped mesially. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Elevate the second bicuspids and depress the cuspids.
MATTHEW WHITLOCK			6/13/05				Page 3


Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it and down-graft it posteriorly as well as correct any transverse discrepancies that may be present.  
Partial inferior turbinectomies.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 


