CATHERINE WHEELER							02/25/2011

Cathy is 18 years old, birth date 08/05/1992.  Referred by Charles Scruggs, DDS, 2501 Palmer Highway, Suite 105, Texas City, TX 77590.  

Cathy is in good health with no major medical problems.  She apparently had a history of thumb sucking.  She began orthodontic treatment from 2007 to 2009.  During that time, she was also placed into swallowing and tongue thrust therapy and speech therapy.  She had her wisdom teeth extracted in July 2010.  The initial orthodontic results did not turn out as expected.  

Cathy has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain.  Jaws work and function normally.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  She does have some mild snoring, but no daytime somnolence nor sleep apnea.  She is mixed in reference to mouth and nasal breathing at night.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Cathy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm on the right, 3.5 mm on the left.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right and chin is probably about 2 mm off to the right side.  Upper lip and maxilla are retruded about 2 mm.  Chin is retruded about 15 mm.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth and upper teeth back through the second molars.  She has moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has an end-on Class II cuspid relationship being at least 4 perhaps 5 mm Class II.  She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.  She has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Tonsils are quite large.  They likely affect the fascial pillars which are mild to moderately constricted.  Left tonsil is larger than the right tonsil, but seemed to take up a large quantity of the space in the oropharyngeal airway.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, she has a click in the right joint at about 20 mm and a closing click at about 10 mm.  Left joint seemed to function relatively smoothly.  The maximal incisal opening is 44 mm.  The excursion movements are 6 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Sinuses appear clear.  Septum appears reasonably straight.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Condyles look small in size.

Coronal view shows that she has moderately enlarged turbinates.  She has a septal spur off to the right side in the bony septal area.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  
Axial view shows that the septum appears reasonably straight.  Turbinates are moderate in size and sinuses are relatively clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit small in size.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination, but not very long in length.  The joint space looks reasonably good.  The condyle does look smaller than expected.

Right TMJ shows a condyle that is significantly smaller than the left one.  The condyle is a little bit more posteriorly positioned in the fossa, however, the vertical joint space looks reasonably good.  Articular eminence is a little bit more shallow on this side compared to the opposite side.  There is a little bit of increased anterior joint space.  The condyle is surprisingly small.  

Left TMJ coronal view that shows moderate mediolateral width.  Vertical joint space may be a little bit decreased. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm with a just a slight decreased lateral joint space.  

Right TMJ shows a condyle that is a little bit more narrow in width compared to the opposite side.  The joint space appears reasonably good.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Cathy has a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship.  The occlusal plane is high.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 8 mm at the soft palate level and about the same at the base of the tongue.  She does have a lip incompetence of probably at least 6 mm with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Cathy would be as follows:

Right TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Maxillary anterior vertical hyperplasia and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
AP macrogenia. 
Class II occlusion.
Anterior open bite.
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. 
Crowding in the lower anterior arch.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Deviated septum with a septal spur off to the right side.  


Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJ. 
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially 			cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 			removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size 			discrepancy.



3.	Surgery.
	a.	Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect superiorly, 			posterior aspect inferiorly, level the occlusal plane, and correct any 			transverse discrepancies.
	d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.  
	e.	Nasal septoplasty.
	f.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
