JANIS WESTLAKE									11-14-03

Janis is 55 years old and referred by Dr. Danny Dugan, 613 Harwood Road West, Hurst, TX.

Patient History

Janis has had previous surgery including gallbladder surgery and some spinal cord surgery x 2. She does have a history of supraventricular tachycardia. Her last spinal cord surgery to untether the spinal cord was in December of 2002. 

Janis’ problem began probably at least 30 years ago. She was aware of having clicking and popping in her jaw joints. However, it has just been in the past three years that her problems have gotten severe. The etiology is unknown. She was over in Romania when the problems really flared up for her. She is back obviously in this country now. Dr. Charles Holt has made some splints for her and has done some iontophoresis which has helped her. She also has had steroid injections to treat her occipital neuralgia. This has been helpful for her although not completely removing the pain problems, but she has definitely experienced improvement. She has had physical therapy for her back but not for her jaws. In February of 2002, she initiated orthodontic treatment with Dr. Al Bishop, and she has been in treatment now for nine months.

Janis also had orthodontics done when she was a teenager at the age of 17 and had four bicuspids extracted at that time. She is aware of clenching her teeth at night. 

She gets daily headaches, but she gets headaches throughout the head area two or three times a week at about a level of 8. She has TMJ pain fairly constantly at a level of 4, but it can easily escalate to an 8. Overall pain is at 6, jaw function and diet at 6, and disability at 7. 

Current Medications

Lexapro 20 mg
Toprol XL 100 mg
Vioxx 25 mg
Fioricet p.r.n. 
Cyclobenzaprine 10 mg
Hydrocodone 5 mg/500 mg as needed for the back

Patient Concerns

TMJ pain
Headaches 
Difficulties to eat and chew
Jaws and teeth do not align properly
Significant difficulty eating and chewing
Pain down through the jaws and pain down into the neck and back area

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Janis has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned with the facial midline. 

In profile view, Janis has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe about 3 or 4 mm. Chin is AP deficient by probably close to 15 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. Lower third face appears a little bit elongated. She does have some lip incompetence of probably about 7 to 8 mm. 

Intraorally, she has all of the teeth back through the second molars except she is missing the first bicuspids. She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch. Has a fairly heavy arch wire on with some mild spacing around the lower incisors. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars except she is missing the first bicuspids. She has residual space of probably about 2 mm on the left side and probably 3 to 4 mm on the right side where the first bicuspid was. Has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch with the left first molar being lower than the second molar, which appears to be elevated higher than the rest of the teeth. She has a Class II occlusion bilaterally. She has an overjet of probably about 4 mm. Has just a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1 mm higher than the right side. Oropharynx appears clear, and tissues appear healthy. She does have a torus on the palate of relatively small size. Actually, intraorally she has all of her wisdom teeth present except for the maxillary right third molar. She has about a 2 to 3-mm anterior overbite relationship.

Intranasally, nasal septum is deviated a little bit off toward the right side. Turbinates are only moderate size, and nasal airway appears adequate on both sides.

Today is actually a pretty good day for Janis, and she has less pain than usual. To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the left TMJ and mild pain over the right TMJ. She has mild pain to palpation around most of the rest of the head and neck area. 

Maxillary incisal opening is 48 mm, but she can only hold that momentarily. She can open about 30 mm without severe pain. Excursive movements are about 4 mm in each direction. On jaw function, she has significant crepitation in both joints, and it was actually audible.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four first bicuspids and maxillary right third molar with the rest of the teeth and third molars present. Sinuses look clear. Turbinates are moderate in size. TMJs appear arthritic. There is some calcification of the styloid processes bilaterally with them extending beyond the posterior border of the mandible. Possibly could be a retained root in the right maxillary area. Appears as though there may be a fourth molar on the left side behind the erupted third molar. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear and of equal radiolucency comparing right to left side. Left turbinate appears a little bit enlarged on that view. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows some significant arthritis changes present. There appears to be some loss of height in the condyle and some significant anterior beaking. Toward the anterior beaking area, it appears that there is bone-on-bone. Posterior joint space is significantly decreased as is the superior joint space, although there is a little bit of space in that area. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also appears to have lost vertical dimension and appears to have bone-on-bone contact with even perhaps less space between the superior and posterior joint spaces. Condyle appears smaller in size than normal. 

On opening, there is moderately good translation of both joints with decreased vertical joint space particularly on the right side. 

Cephalometrically, Janis has a skeletal Class II relationship. She has a decreased oropharyngeal airway with the distance at the soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall being about 4 mm to 4.5 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 8 mm. She has Class II skeletal and Class II occlusal relationships. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with articular disc dislocations with severe deformation and deterioration and perforations
Mandibular hypoplasia
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia
Anterior vertical maxillary excess
Class II occlusion
Accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch
Missing all four first bicuspids and maxillary right third molar
Probable tooth-size discrepancy of 2 to 3 mm
Severe TMJ pain
Severe headaches 
Myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment

Evaluation at the Environmental Center to test for and rule out hypersensitivities to materials in the prostheses

CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Retract upper cuspids back against the second bicuspids, but leave some spacing between the upper lateral incisor and cuspids to accommodate for a tooth-size discrepancy 
Continue to align and level lower arch, but place a step in the arch wire on both sides to align the anterior six teeth in an elevated plane level as compared to the second bicuspids and molars. Close all the spacing from cuspid to cuspid

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, expand, and downgraft the posterior aspect
Anterior mandibular subapical ostectomy

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
