HANNAH WHITESIDE								02/22/2010

Hannah is 18 years old, referred by Dr. William Hang.  I have already done notes on Hannah.  Her primary concerns are:

Daily headaches.
Difficulty chewing food because of pain. 
Can only chew on her very back teeth because none of the other teeth touch.
Severe pain in the left side of the jaw almost daily.
Sleep apnea symptoms with snoring, daytime tiredness, occasionally waking up unable to catch her breath.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Hannah has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 to 4 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline may be about 1 mm to the left.  The chin is rotated to the left about 3 mm.  The left side of the face appears a little bit more full by probably 3-4 mm than the right side.  In profile, Hannah has a head postured forward neck position.  The maxilla appears to be about 4 mm AP deficient and the mandible appears to be about 15-18 mm AP deficient.  The chin neckline actually appears reasonably long, but part of that is due to the neck posture.  Intraorally, Hannah has all of her teeth back through the second molars except she is missing the left first molar, but has a spacer in place.  She has real thin attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch with a high labial frenulum.  In the upper arch, Hannah has all of her teeth back to the second molars.  She has a metal crown on the left first molar.  She has moderate crowding in the anterior arch, and she has small upper lateral incisors.  She occludes predominantly on the second molars, but on the left side she may also be hitting a little bit in the bicuspid area.  On the right side, she appears to be hitting mainly on just her second molars and maybe the first molars a little bit.  She has about a zero overbite relationship and a Class II occlusion.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off with a septal spur off to the right side.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  To palpation, she has really no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, she had a palpable pop in her right joint at probably about 25 mm and then closing probably about at 20 mm.  On the left side, particularly as she went into excursion movements, there was a more prominent pop at probably about 15 mm of opening and 10 mm of closing.  

RADIOGRAPH EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of 4 impacted third molars and a missing mandibular left first molar with a spacer present.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  She has a root canal on the maxillary right first molar.  The condyles appear small in size.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite small in size with loss of vertical volume and anteroposterior volume.  There is good joint space present.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle does demonstrate significant resorption.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little bit arthritic with a little bit of anterior beaking.  There is perhaps some loss of vertical volume.  Joint space looks fairly good.  The articular eminence is a little steeper on this side than it is on the opposite side.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost vertical as well as mediolateral volume.  Joint space looks reasonably good, although slightly decreased at the lateral aspect of the joint.  There is obvious evidence of condylar resorption on this side. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that likewise appears to have lost some vertical volume.  The joint space is actually excessive, although decreased a little bit at the lateral joint space.  

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are large, particularly on the right side.  Septum, at least in the bony area, is reasonably straight.  Sinuses are clear except for a mucous retention cyst on the left lateral sinus wall.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged, particularly on the right side.  

Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderate in size and actually the right one appears to fill most of the nasal airway.  Sinuses appear clear.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she had an oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level of about 9 mm, but at the base of the tongue at the lower aspect of the tongue it measures only about 5 mm.  Further up, it measures about 8 mm.  She has an anterior open bite tendency and a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption, being worse on the left side than the right side.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia, but vertical hyperplasia as well as transverse hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Anterior open bite.
Impacted third molars x4.
Class II occlusion. 
Missing mandibular left first molar.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 


Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJs.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Try to expand the upper arch some.  Open up 			space bilaterally between the maxillary lateral incisors and cuspids about 1 mm to 		correct for the tooth size discrepancy.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially 			and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Maintain the extraction space in the mandibular 		left first molar. 
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible approximately 			15-18 mm at pogonion.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, superiorly reposition, and expands as 			necessary.
	d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	e.	Removal of four impacted third molars.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
