MCKENNA WHEELER								07/14/2008

McKenna is 14 years old, birth date 06/17/1994.  Referred by Dr. William Hang.  McKenna is in good health.  Her jaw problems began at about the age of 7 when she developed headaches that were at one time quite severe including nausea and vomiting.  Etiology was unknown.  At age 7 to 8, she had orthodontics to include such things as an expander and a thumb sucking appliance.  More recently, she had a Herbst appliance placed that was ineffective, and she then subsequently had all four first bicuspids extracted.  She then went to see Dr. Bill Hang.  In addition, she has had previous physical therapy, chiropractic treatment, and kinesiology treatment without significant help.  

She has no current problems with headaches.  She gets headaches maybe once or twice a month that can get up to a level of 9 around the left eye which would include probably the left frontal and temporal area.  She rates her average TMJ pain about at 1, average daily pain at 0,  jaw function at 2, diet at 1, and disability at 1.  She has a leg length discrepancy with the right leg 1 inch shorter than the left.  Also, her right foot is 1 1/2 sizes smaller than the left foot. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, McKenna has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the right side.  Chin is just slightly off to the right side 1 or 2 mm.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance between her upper lip, cheeks, and nose with maybe just a slight deficiency of a couple of millimeters.  The chin is retruded by at least 15 mm.  Chin neckline is short.  Chin neck angle is not too well defined.  She has a head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids.  She has some spacing in the lower arch, but not a full bicuspid width.  In fact, the right side is closed up considerably with only about 2 to 3 mm on that side, but on the left side there is probably 4 mm of spacing.  In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids and likewise has about a 4-mm space on the left side and about a 2-mm space on the right side remaining.  She has a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1.5 to 2 mm lower than the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Uvula is slightly elongated.  The soft palate looks relatively normal.  The fascial pillars are mild to moderately constricted.  Tonsils appear mild to moderate in size.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderate in size.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  There is probably moderate nasal airway obstruction.  She has some mild snoring, but does not report daytime somnolence.  She does not report any sleep apnea episodes.  However, she has significant problems sleeping and will wake up at night and then be unable to get back to sleep.  She is predominantly a mouth breather at nighttime.  During the daytime, she has improved some with her orthodontic treatment, but still may breath a lot through her mouth. To palpation, she has some very mild tenderness over the right TMJ right retromandibular area.  Maximal incisal opening is 37 mm, excursion movement to the right 10 mm, to the left 11 mm.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:  Panorex shows the  absence of four first bicuspids and the presence of all four impacted third molars.  The condyles appear arthritic.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The left turbinate appears enlarged.  
Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  Bony septum appears reasonably straight.  Turbinates are moderate in size and there does not appear to be a significant airway passage.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle is quite small in size with a loss of volume anteroposteriorly as well as vertically.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  The anterior joint space is increased and the posterior joint space appears to be decreased.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is small in size with loss of volume vertically and anteroposteriorly.  Articular eminence is slightly more steep on this side.  The anterior joint space is decreased and the posterior joint space is decreased.  On opening, there appears to be some restricted translation in the left joint compared to the right side, although the opening is not quite as good. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship with a high occlusal plane angle.  She has some adenoidal tissue in the nasopharyngeal area.  Turbinates extend slightly beyond the hard palate.  Oropharyngeal airway dimension is about 3 mm at the soft palate level and about 3.5 mm at the base of the tongue.  
Basic diagnoses for McKenna would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ AICR.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
Class II end-on occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle. 
Missing all four first bicuspids, extracted for orthodontics.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 11 mm). 
Impacted third molars x4.   

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Surgery Stage 1.
 Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies if they are necessary.
Consider closing the spaces by losing posterior anchorage particularly on the left side more so than the right side.
Consider opening the bicuspid spaces bilaterally.
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Close spacing in the lower arch by losing posterior anchorage to a greater percent on the left side than the right side and minimize retraction of the incisors.  
Consider opening spaces in the lower arch to equal the size of the first bicuspids.  This will tip the lateral incisors significantly forward and could possibly create some asymmetry in the arch. 

Surgery Stage 2. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors if not performed as a separate procedure. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise rotation.
Maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect and advance.  
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Augmentation genioplasty if spaces are opened in the arches to replace the first bicuspids. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to replace the four bicuspids, if the spaces are opened. 