MICHAEL WETZ									07/28/2010

Mike is 41 years old and referred by Dr. William Kirk.  Michael’s jaw joint problems began on November 25, 2008.  He went in for a knee surgery, was intubated, and after that developed significant joint problems that initially started as a pain down in the throat area and then the symptoms migrated to the joint as well.  Mike has seen numerous doctors, ENT specialists, TMJ specialists, oral surgeons, and others.  He has had splint therapy since May 2009 and has had two splints to date.  He has been on lots of steroids and this seems to help his situation and feels better when he is on it, but gets worse when he stops taking it.  He had arthrocentesis on May 28, 2010, and had his best relief of pain for about 10 days and then it came back again.  He has had multiple injections through the jaw muscles and perhaps into the TMJs as well.  He currently is on the following medications:

Flexeril 10 mg 1 q.h.s.
Klonopin, probably 1 mg tablet and he takes 2 to 2-1/2 tables at night.
Ibuprofen, but he has discontinued that because it tears his stomach up.

Mike has no problems with headaches, but rates his TMJ pain on the average day at 6, but it can easily escalate to 9.  Average daily pain around the head and neck area is at 6 and can escalate to an 8.  He rates his jaw function at 4, diet at 5, disability at 7.  He gets left-sided earaches occasionally and gets occasional tinnitus.  He also gets vertigo.  Other joints that bother him are his right shoulder and right knee.  He may have some mild clenching at night.  His pain is worse after talking and eating.  He always feels best in the morning and then the pain intensifies as the day progresses.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Mike has fairly left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is zero.  The maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin are fairly close to being aligned with each other.  In profile, Mike may have AP maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia.  There is no definition to the chin neck angle.  Intraorally, Mike has got all of his teeth back through the second molars and likewise he has all of his teeth in the upper arch.  He has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal except the uvula is mild to moderately elongated.  Interestingly, Mike says that when he eats he usually feels better, but then afterwards starts to get worse again.  To palpation, Mike has moderate pain over the retromandibular area, posterior neck, and milder tenderness over the masseters, medial pterygoids, shoulders, and right TMJ.  Mike on jaw function has a little glitch in the right joint and the left side functions a little bit more smoothly.  Before the arthrocentesis, he did have an audible pop on the right side.  The maximum incisal opening is 44 mm and opening without pain 28 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 6 mm, to the left 9 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  There is part of a root left in the mandibular right third molar area.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  The bony septum appears straight.  He has a real strong lower mandibular plane angle facial morphology and a very prominent angles and gonial notches.  

Coronal view shows the turbinates are normal in size and the sinuses are clear. 

Axial view likewise shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates are normal in size. 

Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit of anterior beaking present.  It appears to be reasonably well positioned in the fossa with maybe just a slight decreased posterior joint space.  

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows some anterior beaking present and articular eminence that is relatively normal in angulation.  

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle with the medial pole is quite a bit elevated compared to the lateral pole illustrating a significant downward tipping of the medial pole of the condyle.  The joint space looks reasonably good throughout the joint.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears wider in width than the opposite side.  There is a little bit more sclerosis on the head of the condyle perhaps.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly a couple of millimeters and there is a decreased lateral joint space.   

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has basically a skeletal Class I occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airways are about 5 mm at the soft palate level and about close to 10 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnoses for Mike would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation at the lateral aspect of the joint. 
TMJ pain. 
Myofascial pain. 



Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Surgery. 
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion and create space in 			the joint to accommodate the disc. 
	c.	Application of arch bars. 
2.	Post treatment physical therapy as necessary to reestablish jaw function.  