KRISTA WEST									03/23/2009

Krista is 54 years old and referred by Dr. William Hang, 101 N. Westlake Blvd., #202, Westlake Village, CA 91362.  Krista is in good health.  She has had hepatitis C in the past.  Her primary concerns are:

Eating difficulties due to anterior open bite with inability to bite through foods. 
Four to five teeth, predominantly molars, touch and are getting worn with cracked fillings and inlays.
Mouth breathing.
Difficulties breathing through the nose. 
Crooked jaw and chin.

She has had two previous right knee surgeries, one following an automobile accident in 1985 and the same knee was operated on in 2005 to remove a bursa from the right knee.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Krista has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 2 to 3 mm off to the right side.  Chin is probably about 4 to 5 mm off to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly close to being aligned.  In profile, the upper lip and maxilla are probably about 3 to 3 mm AP deficient and the chin is probably about 10 to 12 mm AP deficient.  The chin neckline is shorter, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  She does have a slight head postured forward head position.    Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the third molars present.  She has some significant crowding of the lower anterior arch and malrotations of the teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the third molars.  She has significantly constricted maxillary arch transversely.  She has some moderate crowing in the upper arch as well.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side and closer to Class I on the left side.  Krista has an anterior open bite of about 4 mm.  She has right-sided crossbite.  She has a significantly increased curve of Wilson in the lower arch and also in the upper arch.  The lower posterior teeth are tipped lingually and the upper teeth are tipped buccally.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy and relatively normal in architecture.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Luminal valves may be slightly constricted.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the masseter muscles and retromandibular area.  On opening, initially she had no noises in her joints.  On excursion, she had some consistent clicking in the left joint.  Then on closing as she would open the first time, the left joint would click.  Maximum incisal opening is 56 mm.  Excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  There is a slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the maxillary left side being no more than a millimeter lower than the right side and in the mandibular arch on the left side is 1 to 2 mm lower than the right side.  She does demonstrate some bilateral infraorbital hypoplasia.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows a large condyle on the left side and a small condyle with significant arthritic changes on the right side.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  All the teeth are present through the third molars.  Septum appears deviated a little bit off towards the right side and turbinates are moderately large with the left one being significantly larger than the right side.  
Coronal view shows a significant deviation of the septum off towards the right side.  The turbinate on that side is not quite as a large, but with the septum deviated, it decreases the airway there. The left turbinate is quite large.  Sinus, however, appear clear.  Septum appears off towards the right side.    
Axial view shows that the turbinates are enlarged, with the left side being larger than the right side.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is enlarged vertically as well as mediolaterally.  There appears to be a little bit of anterior beaking present.  Joint space in some areas appears decreased.    
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is small in size.  There is some anterior beaking present.  Joint space appears reasonable.  
Coronal view of the left condyle shows that there appears to be significantly decreased joint space vertically.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 2 mm.  There appears to be greater decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the fossa as compared to the middle and medial side.  
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is narrow in mediolateral width.  There appears to be decreased joint space.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there appears to be AP maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia.  There is anterior vertical excess.  There is an anterior open bite of approximately 3 to 4 mm.  There appears to be a high occlusal plane angle.  The AP dimension of oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm at the base of the tongue and about 5 mm at the soft palate level as well.  Krista has a tooth size discrepancy of about 2 mm.  There is a reversed curve of Spee in the lower arch with the incisors being probably 3 mm lower than the flat plane.  In the upper arch, she has a definite rocker shaped curve of Spee with the incisors being almost 4 mm above the flat plane.  Krista occludes predominantly on the first and second molars on the left side and first, second, and third molars on the right side.  

Basic diagnoses for Krista would be as follows:    

Left TMJ condylar hyperplasia (arrested) and articular disc dislocated anteriorly at the lateral aspect of the joint and posteriorly at the medial aspect. 
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated without reduction. 
Maxillary AP hypoplasia, vertical hyperplasia, and transverse hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia and asymmetry with mandible shifted off to the right side approximately 3 mm. 
Anterior open bite of 3 to 4 mm. 
Class II end-on occlusion on the right side, Class I occlusion on the left side.  
Right-sided crossbite.
Significant crowding in the lower anterior arch and moderate crowding in the maxillary anterior arch. 
Reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch and accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. 
Increased curve of Wilson in both arches. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm (normal 11 mm).
Septal deviation off towards the right side. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal airway obstruction.
Malaligned third molars x4. 
Occludes predominantly on the first and second molars with the other teeth essentially out of occlusion.  
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1 to 2 mm lower than the right side. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Align the maxillary arch in two occlusal planes by placing a vertical step to align the four incisors at an elevated plane and to try to extrude the cuspids vertically 1 to 2 mm, if possible.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2 to 3 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy and to try to keep from flaring the lower incisors too far forward.  Upright molars over basal bone to decrease the curve of Wilson.    
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. 
Right TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Left mandibular sagittal split osteotomy to advance the mandible. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly, expand it, and eliminate the accentuated curve of Spee.  
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Nasal septoplasty. 
Fat graft to right TMJ (harvest from the abdomen).
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.