DEANN WHITE									08/23/2007

DeAnne is 57 years old and is referred by Dr. Michael Vaclav, 7200 W. 34th Ave., Amarillo, TX 79109.  DeAnne has been treated previously for breast cancer.  She has had previous surgeries including an appendectomy, two C-sections, gallbladder removed and a bilateral mastectomy and hysterectomy.  She does have some chronic pancreatitis problems.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Welchol 625 mg 6 per day.
Arimidex 1 mg daily.
Quinapril 40 mg per day.
Levothyroxine 0.05 mg per day.
Paxil CR 25 mg per day.
Prilosec over-the-counter 2 per day.

DeAnne's problems began in January 2007 when she fell on ice and struck her lower jaw.  
She cut her lip and chipped the maxillary right central incisor.  She saw her dentist in March of 2007 and it was noted that she had a decreased incisal opening and she would open her mandible and shift towards her right side.  In June of 2007 she received a splint and also was placed on muscle relaxers without any significant improvement.  Her situation has continued to worsen in reference to pain, dysfunction and effects on her life.

DeAnne rates her TMJ pain at 8 and average daily pain at 6, jaw function and diet at 7, disability at 8.  She gets right-sided headaches at about a level of 6 that occur in the right frontal and posterior head areas.  She gets right-sided earaches, right-sided tinnitus but experiences no vertigo.  Other joints that bother include her lower back, hands, knees and feet.  She was diagnosed about 15 years with fibromyalgia.  She is not aware of clenching but says she does have some cuspids that are worn down.  She also gets pain that comes down through her jaw areas particularly over the masseter muscle area on the right side and down into the neck area.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Right TMJ pain.
Unable to open her mouth very wide.
Her pain and dysfunction has become worse. 
She had an MRI that indicated anteriorly displaced disc on the open and closed positions.

DeAnne would like to accomplish the following:
Relieve pain.
Allow normal jaw function.
Be able to eat normally.
To be able to sleep.

DeAnne had her wisdom teeth removed when she was 17.
DEANNE WHITE				08/23/2007				Page 2

In frontal view, Deann has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -1.   Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Chin might be just slightly deviated off the right side about 2 mm.  Dental midlines are fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile, DeAnne has some reasonably good facial balance.  Intraorally, DeAnne has all of her lower second molars.  She has crowns on all four mandibular molars.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Adequately attached gingiva.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship and about a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship.  As DeAnne opens she shifts significantly towards the right side probably 4 to 5 mm.  Transversely she has a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 2 mm above the left side.  Oropharyngeal area looks relatively normal.  However, when she opens up she gets pain down through the right side of her neck and submandibular area.  Incisal opening maximally is only about 26 mm and only about 20 mm without significant pain.  Excursive movement to the right side about 10 mm with significant pain and lateral shifts to the left side about 4 mm with significant pain.  To palpation, she has moderate tenderness over the right masseter muscle and mild tenderness over the temporalis, TMJs, right medial pterygoid, right styloid area, right SCM and right shoulder.  On opening and closing, the right TMJ functions relatively smoothly although quite painful.  On the left side she had an opening click of about 5 mm and a closing click 5 mm or less indicative of perhaps just a slight dislocation of the left disc that would correlate to the impression on the MRI of a slight anterior displacement of the left disc at the lateral aspect of the joint.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has crowns on all four mandibular molars and maxillary right first molar with a root canal on that tooth.  Sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear normal in size and the septum appears reasonably straight.  The condyle is relatively normal.

Waters view shows that there is a deviation in the nasal septum in the bony area at the base, however, it deviates off to the left side.  The turbinates appear normal in size and there appears to be adequate airway.  The sinuses appear clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is slightly posteriorly positioned in the fossa with a decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is relatively normal inclination.  The disc is probably slightly anteriorly displaced.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly and severely positioned in the fossa.  There appears to be a little bit of sclerosis in the fossa area.  Articular eminence has relatively normal inclination.  The top of the condyle may also be just slightly sclerotic.  On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that DeAnne has a skeletal Class I and an occlusal Class I relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway is a little bit constricted being about 6 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue.  The tongue, however, is being held inferiorly somewhat as there is a space between the dorsum of the tongue and the hard palate.
DEANNE WHITE				08/23/2007				Page 3

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction in a closed lock situation. 
Left TMJ slight anterior disc dislocation with early reduction but asymptomatic.  
Sleep disorder.
Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications.
Klonopin 1 mg tablet, 1 tablet q.h.s. to help with the sleep disorder and to help decrease muscle associated pain. 
Surgery.
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning of ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Right mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy to maintain occlusion and create space for the articular disc.
Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.
 Physical therapy as necessary to maximize postsurgical jaw function. 