PATTI WHEELER									08/31/2010

Referred by Dr. Michael Dierkes, 630 W. Crossville Road, Roswell, GA 30075.   

Patti is 58 years old.  She has hypothyroidism and she also has been diagnosed with Eagle's’s syndrome.  She does have food and environmental allergies and is very motion sensitive.  

Primary concerns that Patti has at this time include the following:

Teeth constant moving on lower jaw.
Bone loss, particularly on the anterior teeth.
Gum recession.
Abnormal tongue position.
Tongue thrust concerns.

Patti has had previous treatment including orthodontics when she was in about the tenth grade.  Her current orthodontic treatment began in April 2004.  In 2004, she underwent her first surgical stage for rapid palatal expansion.  In September 2007, she had maxillary osteotomies to correct her bite relationship.  

Patti has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 0.  She has no problems with earaches or tinnitus, but does have significant problems with vertigo.  She is sensitive to vibration, movements, etc.  She does get fainting spells that is felt may be related to Eagle's syndrome.  She has had an adverse reaction to erythromycin which gave her headaches.  She also is allergic to wheat, corn, soy, MSG, peanuts, pine nuts.  The only medications she currently takes are T3 and T4 compounded supplements.

In frontal view, Patti has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are pretty much aligned to each other.  In profile, she has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Patti has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has some significant spacing between the lower anterior teeth.  She has some gingival retraction around the anterior teeth essentially from the first bicuspids on forward.  It is greater around the four incisors.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  There is no spacing in the upper arch.  She has a slight Class II occlusion on the right side of about 2 mm and likewise on the left side.  She has about a zero vertical overbite relationship and about a 1 mm over jet.  She has white distinct lines on the right buccal mucosa area adjacent to the molars.  When she opens, the lines line up fairly well with the arch wire and orthodontic appliances, but when she closes it, it is away and appears to be out of contact.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Uvula is somewhat elongated but other structures are normal.  Joints function smoothly.  She has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  The maximal incisal opening is 57 mm.  The excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four bone plates in the maxilla with about 22 screws present.  The sinuses look reasonably clear.  Third molars are absent.  There is significant bone loss around the lower anterior teeth and to a lesser degree around the upper anterior teeth.  The condylar head and necks are extremely elongated.  The nasal septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side.  The turbinates appear relatively normal in size and it appears that there is adequate airway.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle with good morphology.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  There apepars to be adequate joint space. 

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle with good morphology.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  There apepars to be adequate joint space. 

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  The joint spaces appear a little bit thin, but could be just the angle at which the x-ray is taken.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  The joint spaces appear a little bit thin, but could be just the angle at which the x-ray is taken.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Patti has basically a Class I skeletal relationship.  The lower teeth appear to be a little bit of over angulated.  She has some prominence in the chin projection.  The tongue seems to fill the majority of the oral cavity.  The AP dimension of the oropharyngeal airway measures about 6.5 mm at the base of the tongue and probably 5 mm at the soft palate level.  

Basic diagnoses for Patti would be as follows:

Post orthognathic surgery that included rapid palatal expansion December 2004 and maxillary osteotomies with rigid fixation September 2007.
Macroglossia (possibly related to hypothyroidism).
Slight Class II end-on (2 mm) cuspid-molar relationship.
Slight over angulation of lower incisors.
Multiple diastemas in the lower anterior teeth.
Significant periodontal bone loss around the mandibular anterior teeth and to a lesser extent around the maxillary anterior teeth.
Probable vestibular pathology creating chronic vertigo.  

Patti is undergoing myofunctional therapy to try to learn better tongue positioning; however, she has an extremely large tongue, and I do not know how effective the therapy will be in decreasing tongue pressure on the lower anterior teeth. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Periodontal evaluation for treatment options of the lower anterior and maxillary anterior 	arches.
2.	Evaluation by otolaryngologist specializing in vertigo.
3.	Surgery:  Reduction glossectomy.


4.	Orthodontics.
	a.	Shift the maxillary left lateral incisor 0.5 mm to 1 mm to the left to better balance 			the spaces on each side. 
	b.	Bonding of the lower anterior teeth to fill in all the bone gaps.  
	c.	Removal of orthodontic appliances.
	d.	Placement of a permanent lingual retainer.
	e.	Use of Essix type retainers to help maintain the dental alignment.


 
