B146
B146 is 40 years old. B146 is a self-referral. B146 does not know when his joint problems actually began as he has had some form of symptoms for a while, but last year is when he really developed some significant symptoms at the age of 39. His joint problems are of known etiology. He has been treated by Dr. XXXX for splint therapy for the last 7 months. B146 has also had physical therapy. He has had a TAP III constructed for sleep apnea. Primary concerns that B146 has at this time includes the following:

TMJ problems.
Cannot open mouth very wide.
Muscle spasms.
Headaches on the right side in the temporal area. Pain in the right TMJ and jaw area. Sleep apnea.

B146 gives a history of having difficulty staying awake in school classes with falling asleep. B146 has also been diagnosed at the age of 27 with diabetes. His sleep apnea was eventually diagnosed 7 months ago.

B146 gets headaches in the right side in the frontal and temporal area at about a level of 9 and in the left side at a level of 2. He rates his TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 9, jaw function at 8, diet at 5, and disability at 9. She has some numbness in the right temporal area. He has earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, but no hearing loss. No other joints bother him. He is aware of clenching his teeth at nighttime and some during the day as well. He has moderate snoring, moderate daytime tiredness, and moderate sleep apnea which was diagnosed at the age of 38 years old. He has severe difficulties sleeping at night. He wakes up unable to catch his breath occasionally. He is on a CPAP machine and he received the CPAP machine 6 months ago. He has some mild leg and arm jerking at night.

He takes the following medications:
Motrin 100 mg q.6 hours.
Voltaren 100 mg, but he has recently stopped taking that.
Metformin 850 mg.
Glipizide 10 mg.
Zanaflex 4 mg q.h.s.

In frontal view, B146 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm off to the left side. The chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline. In profile view, B146 has a little bit of AP mandibular deficiency of probably 5 to 6 mm. The chin neckline actually looks reasonably good. Upper lip looks slightly full and he has just a slight acute nasolabial angle. Intraorally, B146 is missing the mandibular right first molar but has the second and third molar in pace. On the left side, he is missing probably the first molar and the second and third molar have drifted forward with the space of about a bicuspid left that has a pontic in it. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. The mandibular left cuspid is about 3 mm posterior to the right cuspid. He has a Class II cuspid relationship on the left side, Class I on the right side. He has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. Uvula is a little bit enlarged. The soft palate may be somewhat elongated. The fascial pillars may be mildly constricted. Intranasally, he has a deviation of the base of the septum off towards the left side. The turbinates appear moderate in size.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of mandibular right first molar, maxillary right third molar, mandibular left first molar, and a maxillary left central incisor. He is also missing the maxillary left central incisor which he knocked out as a young boy. He has a 3-unit bridge in the anterior maxilla to replace the left central incisor. Sinuses look relatively clear. It is difficult to evaluate the joints.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates appear relatively normal in size. The septum is fairly straight at the position of this cut.

Axial view shows that the septum is deviated off towards the left side. The turbinates appear relatively normal in size and sinuses are clear.
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. The joint space looks reasonably good. The articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is somewhat displaced posteriorly in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. Out laterally, there appears to be more arthritic kind changes with a significant flattening of the lateral head of the condyle.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. There is decreased lateral joint space, but the mid portion of the joint space looks a little bit more reasonable. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm. Lateral joint space may be slightly compromised on the left side.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly severe arthritis and sclerosis associated with it. There is bone-on-bone contact at the lateral rim of the fossa and the condylar lateral protrusion. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly and appears to be arthritic as well. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 3 to 4 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has fairly reasonable jaw function. His head is tipped up in this x-ray. The oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue is 6 mm and at the base of the tongue level is about 8 mm.

To palpation, he has some high moderate discomfort over the right TMJ and milder tenderness over the left TMJ and his retromandibular areas. Maximal incisal opening is 47 mm, opening without significant pain 35 mm. Excursion movement to the right side 5 mm, to the left side less than 1 mm.

Basic diagnoses for B146 would be as follows:
Right TMJ severe arthritis.
TMJ pain. Right-sided headaches. Sleep apnea.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied soft palate and uvula.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary posterior vertical hypoplasia and slight AP hypoplasia.
Class II occlusion on the left side, Class I occlusion on the right side.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Treatment Option 1:
Right TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Right TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).
Left mandibular ramus osteotomy to advance the mandible. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, down graft it posteriorly, and upright the incisors. Uvulopalatopharyngeoplasty. Application of arch bars.

Treatment Option 2:
Right TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Right TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).
Uvulopalatopharyngeoplasty. Application of arch bars.

B146 MRI f
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite wide. The joint space appears a little bit decreased. It is difficult to tell where the disc is, but a little bit of it is displaced medially. The lateral rim is fairly flat on this side.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is more arthritic, particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint where it appears that there is almost bone-on-bone contact with a little bit of fluid in between the arthritic components. Both the fossa and the condyle are affected by the arthritic bony changes. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 or 4 mm. There is a little sclerosis on the head of the condyle, particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The vertical space is decreased.

Left TMJ shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. The articular disc appears to be in reasonably good position. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. Left TMJ has moderately good translation with the condyle coming out almost beneath the articular eminence. The disc remains in position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. There is sclerosis at the lateral aspect of the joint. The condyle is narrow anteroposteriorly in the mid and medial portions of the condyle. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and somewhat deformed and degenerated. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. Out lateral, there is some degenerative changes in the fossa as well as the condyle. There is some significant sclerosis on the head of the right condyle and some anterior beaking present. There is significantly decreased vertical joint space. Right TMJ opening view shows significant degenerative changes and some restriction of translation. The disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction with some fluid that appears to be surrounding the discal tissues. The condyle comes forward almost beneath the articular eminence.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ relatively normal joint.
Right TMJ advanced arthritis with articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction and with significant deformation.

