LISA WHEELER HUZELLA							05/07/2008

Lisa is a 49 years old, referred by Al Bishop, DDS, MSD, 137 Main St., Suite 201, Riverwalk Center, Edwards, CO 81632.  Lisa is in good health.  In the past, she has had some digestive issues and some low back pain.  Previous surgeries include removal of an ovarian cyst in 1984, wisdom teeth in 1975, tonsils in 1980, low back surgery in 1999.  Primary concerns that Lisa has at this time include the following:  
Dizziness.
Tight jaws.
Clenching and grinding of the jaws.
Choking feeling. 
Pressure in the head.

At the age of 16, she did have an injury to her jaw.  She had some jaw therapy done at that time to realign her jaw after the injury.  She began orthodontic treatment in January 2008.  Relative to her TMJ problems, she believes that they began around the age of 30 in 1990, but may have started as early as the age of 16.  Lisa rarely gets headaches.  She rates her TMJ pain at 2, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 7, diet at a level of 4, and disability is at a level of 1.  She takes mainly a health supplement and no prescribed medications.  She gets earaches occasionally, tinnitus occasionally, and vertigo frequently.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at night time and during the day.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  Upper lip length is 26 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 3 mm.  She has some slightly increased fullness in her upper lip on the left side that she said was present at birth.  The maxillary midline is about 1 mm to the left.  The mandibular midline is 1 to 2 mm to the left.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance with the upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  The upper lip may be retruded by maybe 2 mm.  Chin is retruded by about 15 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well defined.  Lisa does have a head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, Lisa has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth are being aligned nicely.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Lisa has an end-on Class II cuspid relationship being about 2 mm Class II on the right side and about 4 mm on the left side.  She has about a 1 to 2 mm vertical over bite.  She has about a 2 mm overjet.  Uvula, soft palate, and fascial pillars all look relatively normal.  She has a small soft tissue development off the posterior aspect of the soft palate just lateral to the uvula.  Turbinates are mild to moderate in size, but I do not see any obvious nasal airway obstruction.  She is not sure if she has any problems with snoring.   She has some mild to moderate daytime somnolence, but she is not aware of having sleep apnea issues, and she sleeps reasonably well at night.  Lisa does have some slight vertical imbalance of the pupils with the left eye being 2 mm lower than the right eye.  To palpation, she has mild to moderate pain over the left TMJ, right styloid area, and posterior neck area.  Relative to the joint function, on opening the right joint seems relatively smooth, but in the left joint she has some crepitus noises.  Maximal incisal opening is 46 mm with 25 mm without discomfort.  Excursion movements were 9 mm in each direction. 
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has a root canal on the maxillary right first molar.  It is difficult to evaluate the sinuses.  Both joints look arthritic.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of peaking on the top of the condyle.  Joint space appears somewhat decreased.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic with some sclerosis on top.  There appears to be decreased joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is moderately good translation of both condyles.  There is some anterior beaking more evident on the left condyle in the open view.  
Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The septum has a few little twists and turns in it, but for the most part is reasonably straight.  The turbinates are probably moderate in size. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Lisa has a skeletal Class II relationship with a high occlusal plane angle.  The mandible appears significantly retruded.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 mm at the soft palate level and at the most 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  
Basic diagnoses for Lisa would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and severe deformation. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP macrogenia. 
Slight Class II end-on occlusion. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 to 5 mm (normal 11 mm). 
TMJ pain. 
Myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:	
 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Be sure lateral incisor roots are tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.  
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.
Augmentation genioplasty. 
Fat grafts to bilateral TMJs (harvest from the abdomen). 
Bilateral coronoidotomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.