CARLA WILLIAMSON							05/25/2011

Carla is 51 years old, birth date 05/30/1959.  Referred by Louis Anderson, DDS, 21685 Kingsland Blvd., Katy, TX 77450, telephone #281-578-0008.  

Carla has had headaches as long as she can remember.  She gets headaches about four times week currently and they are on an average of a level of 5 predominantly in the bilateral temporal areas, left frontal area, and on the top of the head.  The headaches can escalate to 9.  She frequently wakes up with headaches in the morning.  Her TMJ pain is about a level of 3, but about a year ago it was at a level of 8 to 9.  Her average daily pain currently is at 5, jaw function at 4, diet at 2, disability at 4.  The onset of her TMJ problems she believes began in about 2008 and perhaps associated with the changing out of her veneers.  She has had 3 sets of veneers on her teeth, two of them within the last 4 years with the last set being put on 3 years ago.  When she was younger, she did have orthodontic treatment from the age of 10 to 16.  She has had 4 first bicuspids extracted.  More recently in the past year, she has had 3 bonded splints placed in her mouth and more recently she has had a removable one for a total of 4 splints.  She gets moderate development of earaches, occasional tinnitus with the right side worse than the left side, and occasional vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She does have environmental type allergies such as to grasses, etc.  She is not aware of having any significant allergy to jewelry.  She is aware of clenching her teeth at nighttime and also during the day.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Carla has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is 1 mm off to the right and chin is probably 3 to 4 mm off to the right.  In profile, she has some retrusion of the maxilla of probably 4 to 5 mm probably related to the previous extractions.  The chin is retruded by about 5 to 6 mm.  The chin neckline and chin neck angle are fairly well defined.  Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids and upper first bicuspids.  The lower teeth are in slight lingual inclination.  She is pretty close to being Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has about 3 mm overbite.  She has a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 to 1.5 mm higher than the left side perhaps.  Also, she has a little bit of a yaw with posterior maxilla and mandible being maybe 2 to 3 mm off towards the left side.  When Carla closes her teeth together, she hits on the right second molars first and then the rest of her teeth come together.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Intranasally, the turbinates may be somewhat enlarged posteriorly.  The septum looks reasonably straight.  The columella is moderately wide and nostrils are moderately narrow.  To palpation, she has just some very mild tenderness over the masseter muscles and shoulders.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  The maximal incisal opening is about 45 mm and she could open to 43 mm without significant discomfort.  The excursion movement to the right is 7 mm and to the left 6 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids.  She has a root canal in the mandibular right second molar and crowns on the mandibular second molars.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The bony septum appears reasonably straight.  

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are moderate in size and do not appear to be a major obstruction to the airway.  The sinuses are clear.  The septum does deviate a little bit towards the left side back in the bony area.  

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight.  The turbinates are moderate in size and there appears to be an adequate airway.  The sinuses are clear. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior aspect of the head and perhaps just some slight anterior beaking.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  The joint space appears reasonably well balanced. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head with maybe just some slight anterior beaking developing.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa appears to curve inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm.  There is significantly decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the fossa.  This would correlate to a medial displacement of the articular disc.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width.  Again, there is decreased joint space at the lateral rim of the fossa.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Carla has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway dimensions about 4.5 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  Chin appears a little bit strong compared to the AP position of the teeth.  She appears to have a low occlusal plane angle with a Bolton’s difference of about 2 mm. 

In evaluating her dental models, she actually had the cuspids extracted and does have her first and second bicuspids with the first cuspids in the cuspid position.  She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by about 2 mm.  On the left side, she has a 1 mm space between the lower cuspid and  second bicuspids.  The lower incisors to look as if they are lingually inclined on the dental model.

Basic diagnoses for Carla would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and anteriorly and medially displaced articular discs with early reduction.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia but vertical hyperplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Macrogenia. 
Slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being about 1.5 mm higher than the left side. 
Mandibular dental midline shifted 1 mm to the right and chin shifted about 3 to 4 mm to the right.  
Missing maxillary cuspids and mandibular first bicuspids as well as all four third molars.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Yaw in the posterior maxilla and mandible being shifted to the left about 2 to 3 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Medication:  Klonopin 1 mg tablet 1 tablet q.h.s., dispensing 30 tablets, refill x3.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip 4 incisors forward opening up 1 mm 			of space between the upper laterals and cuspids.  Tip lateral incisor roots 			mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental 				osteotomies. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly 3 mm in the molar area and 			advance it forward 6 mm at the incisal edges.  
	c.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance in a clockwise 				direction.
	d.	Consider possible AP reduction genioplasty.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
5.	Restorative dentistry to replace veneers.