LISA WILLIAMS									03/07/2008

Lisa is 40 years old, referred by Dr. James Baker, 8301 S. Walker, Suite 101, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73139.  Lisa’s jaw problems began in 2000 when she was 33 years old.  She was on vacation in San Antonio and the pain just began of unknown etiology.  She had extensive root canal therapy done beginning in 2000.  This did not seem to help her significantly.  She eventually went to the pain center at Texas Tech and saw Dr. Razc.  She had some nerve injections and some nerve blocks performed that were ineffective.  She had low voltage electroshock treatment in 2002 without success.  She had a trigeminal nerve block performed in 2003 without success.  She had a spinal cord stimulator implanted in 2004.  This also was ineffective.  The doctor finally refused to see her and she had to see someone else to have the device removed from her left pectoral area.  She then went to a pain clinic in Tulsa where she was initially treated with fentanyl patches and oral medications, but was essentially nonfunctional.  She then went to another pain specialist who put her on morphine up to 1000 mg per day.  Finally, in 2006, the root canals were redone and this did for a few weeks at least get rid of her pain, but then it started to return again.  She had kelation treatments performed IV and, with this and the root canal, she was able to get off her narcotic medications, but then the pain started to return again.  She has been on numerous medications including most all migraine medications that have been ineffective for her.  

She currently is on the following medications:

Estratest.
OxyContin 60 mg b.i.d. 
Nexium 40 mg q.d.
Elavil 40 mg q.h.s.
Allegra.
Reglan 5 mg per day.
Amantadine.
Ergomar 2 mg for headaches.

Lisa gets headaches at least five days per week at a level of 10.  They occur predominantly in the frontal and temporal areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 0, diet at 3, disability at 8.  She has no problems with earaches.  Gets occasional tinnitus and has moderate occurrence of vertigo.  She has no other joints problems.  She gets tingling and numbness in her fingers and hands and this occurs bilaterally.  She went to see a DO who said that one leg was shorter than the other and she now wears shoe lifts, but this has not affected her pain significantly.  She has problems with constipation because of the narcotic medication she is taking.  She had a hysterectomy in September 2002.  She isolates the pain predominantly in the left masseter muscle area.  She is not sure if she has pain directly in the TMJ joints themselves.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Lisa has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  Maxillary midline is just off to the right side maybe about 1 mm as is the mandibular dental midline, but chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, Lisa has an obtuse nasolabial angle.  Upper lip supra labrale is posterior just subnasale by probably about 3 mm.  The maxilla is retruded by probably at least 4 mm.  Chin is retruded about 12 to 15 mm.  Lisa has extensive restorative dentistry done with all of the teeth essentially replaced with crowns and bridges.  All the dental units are present or have been replaced back to the second molar on the right side and third molar on the left side.  In the upper arch, she has all the dental units present or replaced from the left second molar to the right third molar.  She has a full Class II cuspid relationship with an overjet of about 4 mm.  She has about 1 mm of vertical overbite.  Lisa has had MRIs and CAT scans of the brain looking for tumors and nothing has been found that has been abnormal or to account for her significant pain problems.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look healthy and normal. Intranasally, turbinates and septum look relatively normal.  She was a wide columella.  She has narrow nostrils.  Holding the nostrils open allow her to breathe through her nose easier.  She is not aware of snoring.  She has moderate daytime somnolence that could be medication related perhaps.  She is not aware of sleep apnea issues.  Maximum incisal opening is 48 mm.  Excursion movements are 10 mm in each direction.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the left masseter muscle and left TMJ area.  Lisa did have some cockatiel birds back in the 1990s that died.  She has a significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 4 mm.  In addition, the maxillary incisor crowns are quite thick linguolabially which would further increase the tooth size discrepancy.  In a Class I cuspid position, she has a transverse maxillary deficiency. In addition, she has an almost anterior crossbite relationship. When Lisa was 17, she fell and knocked her front teeth out in the upper arch.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the left central incisor, first bicuspid, and first molar on the right side missing, the central incisor, lateral incisor, and cuspid, then there are crowns on the bicuspids, then missing the first molar replaced by a pontic.  In the lower arch, she has all of her natural teeth on the left side and on the right side is missing the first and second molars and maybe the third molars in the second molar position.  She has root canals on every single tooth remaining.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Condyles look relatively normal.  Styloid processes are elongated. 

Waters view shows that sinuses look fairly equally opacified, though a little bit cloudy in the maxillary sinuses.  Nasal septum appears a little bit wide.  Turbinates are moderate in size.    

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has very good morphology.  Articular eminence is moderate in angulation. There appears to be good joint space vertically posteriorly and anteriorly.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is postured forward in the fossa, but it may be just that she was not biting in a centric relation at the time the x-ray was taken.  There appears to be increased vertical and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderate in steepness.  The condyle is a little flattened on the anterior surface, but otherwise relatively unremarkable.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows she has some slight AP maxillary retrusion of a perimandibular retrusion. Occlusal plane looks relatively normal.  Oropharyngeal airway is good at the soft palate level, but decreased at the base of the tongue measuring only about 5 to 6 mm.  

New tomogram on the left side with the condyle seated shows that there is more normal joint space.  In fact, the posterior joint space may be just slightly decreased.  It appears there may be a small osteophyte off the top of the condyle.  There could possibly be a slight anteriorly displaced disc based on this radiograph.

Basic diagnoses for Lisa would be as follows:

AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
AP maxillary hypoplasia. 
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
Class II occlusion.
Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation at the lateral aspect of the joint.
Severe myofascial pain in the left masseter muscle.
Bilateral headaches.
Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of at least 4 mm.
Missing multiple teeth including maxillary left central incisor, first bicuspid, first molar, right central incisor, lateral incisor, cuspid, first molar, and mandibular left first and second molar. 
Root canals on all remaining teeth.
Crowns and/or pontics for all maxillary and mandibular teeth.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Injection of left TMJ with Marcaine (this was performed on 3/7/08).
New medications.
a.   Klonopin 1 mg tablet dispensing 30 tablets 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x5.
Removal of anterior pontics extending from the maxillary left central incisor through right cuspid and replace with removable prosthesis.
Surgery.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible approximately 12 mm of pogonion with a slight counterclockwise rotation.  
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, down graft it, and expand it.
Application of arch bars to maxillary and mandibular teeth.
      5.   Restorative dentistry to reconstruct the dental prostheses.