THOMAS (TREY) WILLETTO						09/06/2011

Trey is 20 years old, birth date 07/10/1991.  Primary concerns are as follows:

Coordination of orthodontics.
Teeth do not fit together very well. 
Significant difficulties breathing through the nose.

Trey developed some clicking in his left TMJ at about the age of 18 to 19 of unknown etiology.  It does not cause him any significant symptoms at this time.  

Trey was born with a bilateral cleft lip and dental alveolus.  The cleft lip repair was performed in 1991.  He had a columella lengthening procedure in 1995.  In 2002, he had a bone graft to the alveolar cleft (by Dr. Steve Nelson).  He has had previous orthodontics to the upper arch only that was initiated in 1999 through 2001.  He had orthodontics again from 2006 through 2008 to help erupt in a probably maxillary cuspid that had difficulty coming into position.  He takes no medications.  He has no earaches., occasional tinnitus, no vertigo and no hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  At this point, Trey is predominantly a mouth breather and has significant difficulties breathing through his nose.  

In frontal view, Trey has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is 2 mm to the left and chin is probably 5 to 6 mm to the left.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  He has some deficiency in the tubercle area.  Upper lip tooth relationship is about 5 mm.  He has a lip incompetence of about 15 mm.  In profile, he has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 to 5 mm.  The chin appears to be AP deficient by probably about 10 mm.  In a relaxed position, Trey exposes about 8 mm of his lower incisors above the lower lip.  Intraorally, Trey has all of his teeth back through the second molars erupted in.  He has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch, however, the lower incisors appear to be in a slight decreased angulation.  In the upper arch, he is missing the lateral incisor on the left side, but he has the rest of his teeth bilaterally.  He has an end-on incisor relationship, however, would be in a cross bite if the lower teeth were aligned.  He has an end-on Class III cuspid relationship being a little bit greater on the right side than the left side.  He is probably 1 mm Class III on the left in the cuspid area, but probably 2 to 3 mm in the bicuspid area.  On the right side, he is probably 3 to 4 mm Class III.  The lower dental midline and chin are fairly aligned to each other.  There is a transverse cant in the lower occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm lower than the left side.  In the upper arch, the right cuspid is probably 4 mm higher than the left side, but the cuspid is higher than the bicuspid.  The right first bicuspid in the upper arch is probably 2 mm lower than the right side.  The right cuspid is probably 2 to 3 mm higher compared to the first bicuspid.  He has an anterior and left posterior cross bite.  He has a zero overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, Trey has severe constrictures of his nostrils due to just tissue webbing present.  The constricture is worse on the right side as compared to the left side.  The constricture is significant to the point that it is very difficult to even examine the internal structures of the nose.  

Trey has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Right joint functions smoothly, but on the left side he has a glitch at about 10 mm of opening and about 5 mm of closing.  The maximal incisal opening is 52 mm, excursion movement to the right 6 mm and to th elastic 7 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the left third molars, but presence of the right maxillary and mandibular third molars.  He also is missing maxillary left lateral incisor but has the rest of the teeth back through the second molars.  He has a mucous retention cyst in the right maxillary sinus.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  

Coronal view shows that there is a disruption of the nasal septum.  The turbinates are moderate in size, but the right one is actually quite large and appear to be almost touching the midline.  Right maxillary sinus has a little bit of thickening of the sinus membrane on the floor, but the left sinus appears fairly clear.

Axial view shows that the turbinates are large and appear to almost touch together in an area where the septum is missing.  The sinuses look relatively clear in this view.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking and a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking and perhaps some slight flattening on the anterior head.  The condyle is positioned posterior in the fossa with decreased posterior and posterior superior joint space.  The articular eminence has a relatively normal inclination.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with a little bit of anterior beaking.  There is decreased posterior and superior joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The lateral pole is located about 3 mm inferior to the medial pole.  There is decreased vertical joint space particularly towards the medial side of the joint.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 3 to 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  The lateral pole is about 2 to 3 mm lower than the medial pole.  There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 4 to 5 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla appears AP retruded and there appears to be slight vertical maxillary excess.  There is a high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway dimension at the soft palate level measures about 8 mm, but at the base of the tongue about 4.5 mm (normal 11 mm).

Basic diagnoses for Trey would be as follows:

Repaired bilateral cleft lip.
Previous bone grafts to bilateral maxillary alveolar clefts.
Rule out TMJ articular disc dislocations.
Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia as well as anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class III end-on occlusion being worse on the right side than the left side.
Mandibular asymmetry with the mandibular dental midline being shifted 2 mm to the left and chin being shifted about 5 mm to the left.
High occlusal plane angulation.
Crowding of maxillary arch.
Significant crowding in the lower anterior arch.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of about 2 mm.
Missing maxillary left lateral incisor.
Impacted right mandibular and maxillary third molars.
Anterior and left posterior cross bite.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Severely fibrosed nostrils and luminal valves.  
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Chronic mouth breathing. 
Mucous retention cyst into right maxillary sinus. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up space on the left side between the cuspid and central incisor to equal the size of the lateral incisor on the opposite side which is approximately 6.5 mm.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Expand the bicuspids some as well as 			aligning and leveling the arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 				removing 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them too far 			forward.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance in a counterclockwise direction 		and expand.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift it back on the facial 			midline and advance it in a counterclockwise rotation.  
	c.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair if MRIs 			confirm that the discs are displaced.
	e.	Removal of impacted third molars x2.
	f.	Removal of mucous retention cyst in the right maxillary sinus.
	g.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	h.	Reconstruction of the external nostrils and luminal valves with probable 			tissue grafting techniques.  