LAUREN WICKER									04-02-04

Lauren is 12-1/2 years old. She was referred by Dr. George Adams, 2845 Parkwood Blvd., #100, Plano, TX  75093. 

Patient History

Lauren’s concerns include clicking in the jaw joints. The family has just become aware of the jaw asymmetry during the last six months. Lauren’s problems began as far as the family knows about six months ago that they first became aware of it. They do have photographs from last year and this year which show that Lauren’s jaw started to grow off toward the right side. Etiology is unknown. Juice Plus is the only type of supplement that she takes. She is not aware of clenching or bruxing at all. She rates her TMJ face pain and headaches, jaw function, diet, and disability at all 0. 

Current Medications

Lauren takes no medications but she does take Juice Plus everyday.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Lauren has facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Some asymmetry in the lower jaw. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted to the right side about 2 mm. Chin is shifted to the right about 5 mm.

In profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 mm or so. She has a C-shaped curve in the upper lip. Obtuse nasolabial angle. AP position of the chin actually looks pretty good. Chin-neckline looks relatively normal, and chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. Has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. Upper right second bicuspid is not erupted in all the way. In centric relation, mandibular dental midline is shifted off to the left side a couple of millimeters. She has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side but 1 to 2 mm, and on the left side by almost 6 mm. She has about a 1-mm reverse overbite relationship. Lauren has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left right side being about 2 mm higher than the left side. She has an anterior crossbite and has some lingual tilting of the mandibular posterior teeth and an increased curve of Wilson on the right side of the upper arch. Oropharynx appears clear. Tonsils are present, but they look healthy. Turbinates appear fairly large particularly on the left side. It doesn’t appear as though there is much airway space there, but the family states that Lauren seems to breathe through her nose most of the time. Airspace does seem a little bit decreased on that left side compared to the right side. 

To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area. On opening, left joint seems to function smoothly, but on the right side she had a click at about 25 mm of opening and closing click at probably about 15. Incisal opening is 44 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 8 mm and to the left 9 mm. 
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four developing unerupted third molars. Upper second molars may not be in quite all the way yet. Maxillary right second bicuspid is erupting into position. Condylar head and neck appear longer on the left side than the right side. Sinuses look relatively clear. The left turbinate appears larger than the right turbinate. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Right frontal sinus is much larger than the left frontal sinus. Asymmetry in the lower jaw can be seen. Turbinates appear large and appear to f ill most of the nasal cavity. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little flattened on top with a little sclerosis there. Decreased posterior and superoposterior joint spaces. Slightly increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have reasonably good morphology except there is a hot spot on the top of the condyle. Joint space for the most part appears fairly well-balanced. Articular eminence is moderately steep and relatively short in length. 

Open views show good translation of both condyles. Condylar head and neck on the left side appears significantly longer than on the right side. 

Cephalometrically, Lauren appears to have a skeletal Class III relationship. A little bit of a high angle mandibular plane angle. A little bit of AP microgenia. Oropharyngeal airway appears good. Appears to be in a Class III occlusal relationship as well. Maxillary central incisors have an alteration in the shape of the tooth in the fact that the labial surface of the crown comes off at an angle compared to the root itself. 

Bolton’s analysis reveals no significant tooth-size discrepancy. Hand articulation of the dental models show that the upper jaw is actually a little bit side compared to the width of the lower jaw. Lower jaw width may be slightly narrow. Lauren did have an expander in the upper arch which may account for some of the slightly increased width there. 

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ condylar hyperplasia
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation
Deviate mandibular prognathism
Transverse maxillary excess
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Class III occlusion on the left side, slight end-on Class III occlusion on the right side
Anterior crossbite
Accentuated curve of Wilson particularly in the right posterior segment
Slight lingual inclination of some of the mandibular teeth on the right side
Mandibular dental midline shifted 2 mm to the right and chin shifted 5 mm to the right 
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm lower than the right side
AP microgenia
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally for interdental osteotomies. Consider trying to decrease transverse width of the maxilla particularly on the right side by 1 to 2 mm. 
Align and level mandibular arch. Consider slight expansion of the mandibular right side.  
Cross arch elastics on the posterior right side may address the concerns in A and B above.

MRI of left and right TMJs

Surgery
Left TMJ high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, downgraft it, and correct any transverse problems that may be present
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to shift the mandible back on the facial midline
Surgical removal of four bony impacted third molars 
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the chin about 3 to 4 mm

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Superimposition of left and right rami and condyles show that the left condyle is approximately 9 mm longer in length than the right side. The right side already has anterior beaking and flattening on the superior surface. Right joint is being affected by the increased loading and also the disc displacement on that side. 