MADELINE WHITLOW								11-22-04

Madeline is 14 years old and referred by Dr. Jesse Schroeder.

Patient History

Madeline is in good health with no major medical problems. Madeline has no apparent problems with TMJ symptoms or pain, no headache problems, no earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.

Patient Concerns

The teeth and jaws are not aligned properly.
Her chin is too strong compared to the rest of the facial structures.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Madeline has fairly good balance between the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 15 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm. Has slight orbital dystopia with the right side being about 2 mm higher than the left side. Maxillary midline is probably about a millimeter off to the left side as is the mandibular dental midline. Chin is about 2 mm off to the right side. Inferior border of the mandible on the left side is about 4 or 5 mm lower than the inferior mandible of the mandible on the right side. 

In profile, upper lip supralabrale is about even with subnasale. Maxilla may be about 3 or 4 mm AP deficient. Chin is in fairly good AP position. Lower lip is retruded. In fact, the lower lip is retruded posterior to the upper lip. Chin-neckline appears to have good length and fairly good balance. Chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular right second bicuspid but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch. The left second bicuspid is quite depressed. The crown is barely erupted through the gingiva.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars, but the second molars are not erupted in too far yet. She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and slight Class III cuspid relationship on the left side by probably about 2 to 3 mm. She has an anterior deep bite of 2 mm. Lower incisors appear to be in significant lingual inclination. She has a transverse cant in her occlusion with the right maxillary cuspid being about 3 mm higher than the left one.

Intraorally, the tissues look healthy. Uvula is normal. Soft palate may be a little bit elongated. Faucial pillars look relatively normal. She has her tonsils present, and they appear relatively normal. 

Septum looks normal. Turbinates are moderately enlarged but not too significant. Probably does not have any significant nasal airway obstruction. She does not snore when she sleeps. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Second bicuspids are developing and should erupt in. The right one is still underneath the cortical bone of the alveolar ridge. Developing all four third molars. Condyles look relatively normal. Vertical height of the mandible appears short. Overall roots appear a little bit shorter than normal throughout the anterior teeth and including the molars. The right first molar has relatively poor root formation as does the second bicuspid and the cuspid. Left upper first molar has a little bit better root formation.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good morphology and fairly good joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little hockey stick shape to it. Joint space appears reasonably good. Articular eminence appears a little bit more shallow than the opposite side. 

Open views show good translation of the condyles bilaterally. Definition of the right TMJ is not quite as good on any of the tomograms as compared to the left side. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are all clear. Right turbinate may be enlarged somewhat compared to the left side, and there may be more obstruction on the right side than the left side. Vertical facial asymmetry is seen with the right side being shorter vertically than the left side. At the inferior border, there is probably about a 3 or 4-mm vertical difference. The orbits look reasonably symmetric.

Madeline has a tooth-size discrepancy of about 1.7 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Vertical maxillary deficiency
Maxillary asymmetry with the right side being 3 mm higher than the left side
AP mandibular dentoalveolar deficiency
Macrogenia
Mandibular asymmetry with the right side being 3 mm higher than the left side
Significant lingual inclination of lower incisors
Class III end-on occlusion on the left side, Class I cuspid on the right side
Diasthemas in the lower teeth between the laterals, cuspids, and first bicuspids in the lower arch
Excessive large spacing between the first bicuspid and first molar bilaterally
Mild spacing in the upper anterior arch
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of almost 2 mm
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars
Unerupted bilateral mandibular second bicuspids
Decreased anterior mandibular height
Short upper lip length of 15 mm (normal 20 mm)

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Maintain 1 mm of spacing around each upper lateral incisor to compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies  
Align and level mandibular arch. Tip lower incisors forward approximately 4 mm to get them in proper angulation over the basal bone. Close the spacing between the lateral incisors, cuspids, and bicuspids by pushing the teeth forward. Open up the second bicuspid space to equal the size of two bicuspids (approximately 12 mm of spacing) and can distalize the first and second molar a little bit to help gain some of that space
Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward, downgraft it, increase the occlusal plane angle, and correct the vertical asymmetry
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible onto the facial midline and transversely level the occlusal plane and increase the occlusal plane angle
Removal of impacted third molars x 4
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to vertically lengthen the chin

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 