JORDAN WILEY									02/18/2008

Jordan is 15 years old, referred by Dr. Warner Young.  Primary concerns that Jordan has are lower jaw is growing faster than the upper jaw.  Jordan and his parents have noted that Jordan’s lower jaw is becoming more prominent and appears to be growing forward and downward faster than the upper jaw.  The only medication that Jordan takes is doxycycline 100 mg daily.  He has no headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain.  He rates his jaw function, diet, and disability all at zero.  During the past few years, he and his family have noted the lower jaws have been growing more than the upper jaw and becoming more prominent.  The etiology is unknown.  He has no headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain, earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, etc.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Jordan has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 2 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Nasal tip is off to the left side by about 3 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the left side, and chin may be just slightly off to the left side as well.  The AP position of the mandible is a little bit prominent in the AP direction.  Chin neckline is a little bit long and chin neck angle is well-defined.  He has a moderately high mandibular plane angle facial morphology.  The maxilla appears to have fairly good projection.    Intraorally, Jordan has all of his lower teeth back to the second molars.  He has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch with the lower incisors in an lingual inclination.  He appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  Lower cuspids are partially blocked out of the arch.  In the upper arch, he has got all of his teeth back to the second molars present.  On the left side, he has got about a 2-3 mm Class III occlusal relationship, and on the right side he has closure to about 5 mm Class III.  Anteriorly, he has got about 2.5 mm overbite relationship.  He is tending to shift a little bit towards a crossbite on the left side, but not yet.  The lower posterior teeth on the left side are in significant lingual inclination.  No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  Joints function very smoothly.  Maximal opening is 56 mm, excursion movement to the right 10 mm, to the left 9 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  Right turbinate appears quite large and appears to obliterate most of the nasal airway.  Left side turbinate is moderately enlarged, but because of the deviated septum, the airway looks fairly good. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  Sinuses appear clear.  Septum appears reasonably straight.  Right turbinate appears maybe slightly enlarged.  Condylar necks and heads on both sides are somewhat elongated.  Waters view shows that the nasal septum is reasonably straight.  Right turbinate is moderately enlarged and the left one looks relatively normal.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle head and neck that is somewhat elongated.  Joint space is narrow.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle head and neck that is elongated.  Joint space appears a little bit better balanced on this side.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints.  Lateral cephalometric radiographic shows that he has what appears to be a skeletal Class III type relationship.  Occlusal plane is moderately steep.  Oropharyngeal airway looks normal.    

Dental model analysis shows that we still get increased curve of Wilson bilaterally, but worse on the left side than the side.  There is probably 6-8 mm of crowding in the lower anterior arch.  There is a slightly accentuated curve of Spee on the lower arch.  Upper arch shows a rocker basic curve to it.  

The basic diagnoses would be as follows:

1.	Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
2.	Maxillary deviate prognathism. 
3.	Maxillary transverse hypoplasia.  
4.	Class III nonocclusion being worse on the right side than the left side. 
5.	Impacted third molars x4.
6.	Hypertrophied turbinates. 
	7.	Tooth size discrepancy with Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

	1.  	Presurgical orthodontics.
a.  Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
b.  Align and level mandibular arch.  
	2.  	Surgery.
a.  Bilateral mandibular condylar high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchors.  
b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly and align it with the facial midline.  
c.  Maxillary osteotomies to expand it.
d.  Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4. 
e.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
3.  	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.