MAYOLA WILLIAMS									     01-05-05

Mayola is 71 years old and referred by Dr. Steve Parel, 3202 Gaston Ave., Baylor College of Dentistry, Dallas, TX  75246.

Patient History

Previous surgeries include a tonsillectomy and a hysterectomy. She has glaucoma, and she has a central retina vein occlusion. She has some type of autoimmune lung condition called MAC. Apparently it comes from virus in water and can also be carried by birds. Mayola was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis back in the early 60s. She has problems with most of her joints. The symptoms she primarily has are achiness and pain and stiffness in her joints. She has had a past history of stomach ulcers but not now.

Mayola’s problems began in reference to her jaw joints sometime around the late ‘70s of unknown etiology. She was involved in a motor vehicle accident in the 50s where they feel she probably had a spontaneous fusion of C2 and C3. She has bulging discs below that level at probably C3-C4. She has had steroid injections into her neck for her cervical-associated problems. She gets some earaches on the right side, no tinnitus, but has some significant problems with vertigo particularly when her bite shifts. Also, if she turns her head significantly, and if she tips her head downward or concentrates on something for a while, she will develop the vertigo. Probably has some hearing loss. Relative to the vertigo, she has been evaluated by ENT and also a neurologist. One diagnosis involved cervical vertigo. She has problems with most all of her other joints and was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis in the late ‘60s. She gets some pain and achiness as well as stiffness in her joints. She is aware is aware of clenching and bruxism at night and sometimes during the day. Approximately 10 years ago she had ridge augmentations performed. About six years ago, dental implants were started by Dr. Bullard, and then Dr. Steve Parel completed the full-mouth reconstruction. In the summer of 2004, she did receive a night guard, and this has helped her fairly significantly. Relative to her diet, Mayola cannot eat any meat or even chew any bread. Her food has to be fairly soft.

She gets headaches almost daily, and they occur  predominantly in the temporal and posterior head area at an average level of 5. She rates her TMJ pain at 8 and overall facial pain and headaches at 8 during the last couple of weeks. She rates her jaw function and diet at 4 and disability at 2.

Current Medications

Premarin 0.312 mg q.d.
Allegra 180 mg 
Betoptic eye drops
Ambien 0.5 mg q.h.s. 
Tylenol for headaches 

Patient Concerns

Jaw locking
Headaches 
Jaw pain
Popping in the jaw joints
Pain to the jaws and head and neck area
Vertigo 
Right earaches
Difficulty eating some foods
Clinical Examination

Mayola has good facial symmetry and balance. 

Intraorally, she has dentures affixed to dental implants. She is set up in a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has about a 2-mm anterior overbite. Oropharynx appears clear and healthy with a normal-looking uvula, soft palate, and normal width of the faucial pillars. 

To palpation, Mayola has some moderate tenderness over the left TMJ, left styloid area, and milder tenderness over the left SCM, posterior neck, shoulder, and right styloid area. She has significant crepitation in the left TMJ. Right joint seems to function fairly smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is about 43 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 3 mm and to the left 5 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all the teeth and the presence of seven osseointegrated implants in the maxilla but six actively engaged in the prosthesis. In the lower arch, there are probably about five to six implants present. There is a framework over the implants. Both TMJs appear to be arthritic.

Left TMJ tomogram shows what appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space. There are arthritic changes on the condylar head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There could be a couple of areas of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit more visible than the opposite side but significantly decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is somewhat flattened. Translation is reasonably good with it being a little bit greater on the right side than the left side. Condyles appear to come down underneath the articular eminences.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. Septum appears centered. Turbinates appear moderate in size. There are five implants present in the lower arch and seven present in the upper arch. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a skeletal Class I relationship. She has a good oropharyngeal airway. Implants and framework seem appropriately aligned. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with severe deformation and perforations
TMJ pain
Headaches
Myofascial pan
Earaches 
Vertigo
Five osseointegrated implants in the mandible and seven in the maxilla with six functional
Maxillary and mandibular prostheses attached to implants
History of clenching and bruxism



Recommended Treatment

Medications
Klonopin 0.5 mg, ½ to 1 tablet q.h.s. to see if this will eliminate nocturnal clenching and bruxism
Other medications such as muscle relaxers, anti-inflammatory drugs, and analgesics if necessary to try to control pain and dysfunction

Splint therapy to open the bite and take stress off the joints. The patient currently has a night guard that has been very helpful for her, and she does wear this some during the day, but the daytime wear could be extended if necessary to improve her comfort

CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts

Postsurgical management as necessary
