B147
B147 is currently 16 years old. She was referred by Dr. XXXX. She has had previous orthodontics and the lower teeth were pulled back to try get beneath the upper teeth. I talked with the mother today. Primary concerns that B147 has includes the following:

Headaches.
Pain down through the neck and shoulder area. Difficulties eating and chewing.
Difficulties breathing through her nose. Difficulties participating in activities including school because of her headache problems and pain problems.

She rates her headaches at a level of 5, average daily pain at 2, TMJ pain at 0. She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 4, disability at 4. She is aware of clenching and grinding her teeth at night and also during the day. She gets occasional earaches, but no tinnitus nor vertigo. No other joints apparently bother her.

Clinical photographs sent show that she has mandibular prognathism and perhaps some slight AP maxillary deficiency. She has a Class III end-on occlusion with anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites. She has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm. She has an accentuated curve of Spee in both the upper and the lower arches. Radiographically, she is missing all four third molars, but has the rest of her teeth. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Condylar heads and necks appear elongated. Midline seemed to be fairly congruent. On the lateral ceph, she is skeletal Class III with an anterior open bite and Class III molar relationship. She has a decrease oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue. She has a moderately high occlusal plane angle. The condyles appear to have reasonably good shape, but the joint space is extremely thin, indicating she may have displaced articular discs or the articular discs are extremely thin. The condylar head and necks appear quite long in length.

Based on photographs and I-CAT images forwarded as well as discussion with the mother, B147's diagnoses are as follows:
Probable bilateral condylar hyperplasia with possible displaced articular discs. AP mandibular prognathism. Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
Class III end-on occlusion.
Anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
High occlusal plane angle.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction.
Anterior open bite.
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and the lower arch. Lingual inclination of the lower incisors. Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Medications: Consider Klonopin 1 mg q.h.s. to see if this will decrease her headaches, neck and shoulder pain while she is being prepared for surgery. Bilateral TMJ MRI's to rule out TMJ pathology. Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral increase roots mesially and cuspid roots distally. Place a step in the arch wire between the cuspids and the lateral incisors so that the four incisors are aligned at a higher occlusal plane level compared to the cuspids and posterior teeth. Align and level mandibular arch. Continue to monitor growth and development. Surgery. Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repairs with Mitek anchors, if condylar hyperplasia and/or articular disc dislocations are identified in the TMJs. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition the mandible posteriorly at the incisor tips and rotate upwards in a counterclockwise direction to close the open bite. Maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla and move the posterior aspect superiorly to close the open bite and maximize the occlusal fit. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. B147 is 16 years old, referred by Dr. XXXX. B147 has primary concerns that include the following:
Jaws and teeth do not line up properly.
Headaches. Difficulty eating and chewing. Difficulties breathing through the nose particularly at night time.

B147 gets headaches once or twice a week now at about a level of 4 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. Prior to taking amitriptyline, her headaches would occur daily to a level of 8 to 9. She rates her TMJ pain at zero, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 5, diet at 4, and disability at 5. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, and no hearing loss. The only other joints that really bother her at all are her knees. She did have a congenital problem with no malposition of the patellas. She has had bilateral arthroscopic knee surgery to reposition and recontour the cartilage and patellas. She is now pretty much free of significant problems with her knees. She has had her tonsils and adenoids removed, and she has had her wisdom teeth removed. The T&A was performed two years ago.

B147 does report difficulties breathing through her nose particularly at night where she is predominantly a mouth breather. She does not snore any more night since she got her tonsils and adenoids removed two years ago. She is predominantly a mouth breather and sometimes she catches herself mouth breathing during the day as well.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B147 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 5 mm. The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline. In profile view, she has fairly good projection of the upper lip. Chin appears just a little bit retruded, although the lower lip appears some protrusive. B147 is slightly AP deficient at soft tissue point A. Intraorally, B147 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. The teeth are being aligned currently with orthodontic appliances. There is a little bit of space on the left side between the cuspid and lateral incisor. There is a slight space on the right side as well. The lateral arch is fairly symmetric anteroposteriorly. In the upper arch, B147 has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. B147 is about 3-4 mm Class III bilaterally. She has an anterior open bite of about 2-3 mm. She has an anterior crossbite and bilateral posterior crossbites. She appears to have an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. Transversely, the right mandibular cuspid appears about 1 mm higher than the left cuspid. Oropharyngeal tissues all look healthy and normal. Tongue may be somewhat enlarged. Intranasally, the turbinates are enlarged and a little bit of bleeding on the anterior aspect of them. They appear to be inflamed. Septum appears relatively normal and straight. Nasal airway probably has at least moderate obstruction. Columella is somewhat wide and nostrils a little bit narrow. Opening up the nostrils improved her airway slightly, but not real significantly. B147 has less than 1 mm tooth size discrepancy.

Based on photographs and I-CAT images forwarded as well as discussion with the mother, B147's diagnoses are as follows:
Probable bilateral condylar hyperplasia with possible displaced articular discs. AP mandibular prognathism. Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
Class III end-on occlusion.
Anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
High occlusal plane angle.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction.
Anterior open bite.
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and the lower arch. Lingual inclination of the lower incisors. Bilateral medially displaced articular discs.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Medications: Consider Klonopin 1 mg q.h.s. to see if this will decrease her headaches, neck and shoulder pain while she is being prepared for surgery. Bilateral TMJ MRI's to rule out TMJ pathology.
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral increase roots mesially and cuspid roots distally. Place a step in the arch wire between the cuspids and the lateral incisors so that the four incisors are aligned at a higher occlusal plane level compared to the cuspids and posterior teeth.
Align and level mandibular arch. Continue to monitor growth and development. Surgery. Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repairs with Mitek anchors, if condylar hyperplasia and/or articular disc dislocations are identified in the TMJs.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition the mandible posteriorly at the incisor tips and rotate upwards in a counterclockwise direction to close the open bite. Maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla and move the posterior aspect superiorly to close the open bite and maximize the occlusal fit. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B147 I-CAT
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. The rest of the teeth are present. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear quite large. The condylar heads and neck appear elongated.

Coronal view shows that she has quite large turbinates. Sinuses appear clear. Septum appears reasonably straight.
Axial view shows that the patient has extremely large turbinates. Sinuses appear clear. Septum appears reasonably straight. There is a small bone spur off towards the right side in about the mid-septal area.

Sagittal view of the left TMJ shows a condylar head and neck that are elongated. Articular eminence is slightly shallow. Joint space is fairly even, but is somewhat narrow indicative of either a displaced disc or a thin disc. Sinuses appear clear. Turbinates extend slightly beyond the hard palate. Both maxillary sinuses are clear. Right TMJ condyle shows elongated condylar head and neck. Joint space is narrow and perhaps slightly narrower than the opposite site indicative of displaced disc or extremely thin disc. Articular eminence is moderate in inclination. The patient appears to have an anterior open bite. It appears that she has a Class III cuspid and molar relationship.

In coronal view, the TMJs show in the right joint that the lateral rim curves inferiorly, but very significantly, probably 4 or 5 mm or so, almost overlapping the lateral pole of the condyle. Joint space is narrow superiorly and at the lateral aspect of the joint.

Left TMJ coronal view likewise shows a lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 5 mm and actually seems to cover the lateral pole of the condyle. Joint space is narrow, but not as narrow as the opposite side.

IMPRESSION:
Elongated condylar heads and neck compatible with condylar hyperplasia. Decreased joint space with the right side being more narrow than the left side.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Sinuses are clear. Anterior open bite. Class III cuspid and molar relationship.

B147 MRI AGE: DOB:
Quality of MRI is very poor.
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that it is difficult to identify the morphology. It appears a little bit flat on top. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. There appears to be decreased superior joint space. It is very difficult to tell where the disc might be.

T2 images show fluid in the superior joint space. It is really difficult to tell where the disc is.
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have some anterior beaking. Joint space posteriorly appears somewhat decreased. Articular eminence has a moderate inclination. The disc may be anteriorly displaced. It appears that the disc could be possibly even be posteriorly displaced, but again the quality is so poor it is difficult to tell.

Coronal view shows what appears to be decreased superior joint space, but again very difficult to tell. Disc may be medially displaced, but again difficult to tell.

IMPRESSION: Very poor quality MRI with difficulties outlining the cortical bone in the condyle let alone trying to identify discal tissue. Discs may or may not be displaced.

B147 MRI AGE: 16/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is long vertically in length. Joint space appears very narrow. The disc appears thin and it appears to be medially displaced. There is significant decreased lateral joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is long vertically. There is significantly decrease joint space. There appears to be some discal tissue medially displaced. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 mm. There is significantly decreased left TMJ joint space.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle head and neck that is quite elongated. It is very difficult to tell where the disc is. Out laterally, there appears to be decreased joint space, but more medially joint space appears in the more normal relationship. It appears that there may be discal tissue over the medial aspect of the condyle. On the opening, the disc appears to be in position, although the translation is moderately good. We need to correlate with the clinical impression as to disc position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condylar head and neck that are quite long. It is difficult to identify discal tissue. Superior joint space appears more narrowed than the opposite side. In some views, particularly more medially, the disc appears it may be in position. It is possible there could be a slight posterior displacement, but for the most part the disc appears in reasonable position, particularly on the medial side. On opening, there is moderate translation and the articular disc in a reduced position.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral elongated condylar head and neck compatible with condylar hyperplasia and articular discs that may be medially displaced.
There is a preexisting x-ray from when B147 was 8 years 9 months of age that shows she had skeletal Class III and occlusal Class III relationship at that time.

