JAMES WHITMIRE									04/19/2007

James is 33 years old and is referred by Dr. Kyle Kidstrom, Minneapolis, MN, at the Mayo Clinic.  James sustained a shotgun blast injury to the face in 1999.  He said he was taking a gun out the trunk of his car.  It caused fairly significant damage to his facial structures.  Since that time he has had 14 operations in attempts to reconstruct.  These have included everything from initial debridement and stabilization to bone grafts that have been taken from the leg as well as from the right forearm.  He has also had skin grafts taken from both forearms for his reconstruction.  A number of the procedures he had have failed.  James lost the majority of his teeth and only has about 8 teeth remaining, 2 of which are wisdom teeth in the lower arch with one being horizontally impacted.  He has no problems with headaches or TMJ pain.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  

In frontal view, James has some extensive facial scarring.  He is missing the mid portion of the lower lip but has had some graft procedures in that area.  Upper lip had severe damage to it but for the most part is in reasonably condition.  He has had some deformity through the nose and has had a bone graft placed in the dorsum.  The cartilages are significantly deformed.  He is missing his columella.  In profile view, he has a significant loss of projection of the upper lip of probably about 8 to 10 mm.  He has a bone plate that is palpable in the chin area although it is positioned well above where the chin should be.  Soft tissues are fairly mobile considering the extent of the injury.  Chin is AP deficient by probably 10 to 15 mm.  Chin is probably vertically short by probably a good 10 to 15 mm as well.  Intraorally, he has a tissue flat that covers the anterior bone plate anterior mandible area.  James does have some limited incisal opening of probably maybe 25 mm.  He does have excursive movements.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows that he has had significant injury to the jaw structures.  He is missing almost all the alveolar bone in the maxilla extending from first molar to first molar.  In the lower arch, the alveolar bone is absent going from second molar to second molar.  He has retained third molars with the left third molar in a horizontal position but a good part of it exposed intraorally.  There is a bone plate extending from the second molar to second molar area.  There is a bone graft present there that appears to have taken fairly well at least on the left side.  On right side it could possible be soft tissue union there but difficult to tell on these radiographs.  The mandibular body and symphysis is absent extending from the second molar to second molar.  The ramus and coronoid processes are all present.  Sinuses look relatively clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows what appears to be relatively normal architecture. 

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows what appears to be relatively normal architecture in the joint.  On opening, there is restricted translation with there being a little bit more translation on the right side as compared to the left side.





JAMES WHITMIRE				04/19/2007				Page 2

Waters view shows that the sinuses are in reasonable condition.  Bone plates seen in the mandible along with the bone graft there.  Left turbinate appears enlarged.  The right side appears that there is good airway in the nasal septum and the bony area appears reasonably straight.  There are bone plates in the nasal frontal area presumably to support a bone graft in that area. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the significant injury anteriorly with the absence of the maxillary 10 teeth and the mandibular anterior 12 teeth.  Bone graft provides fairly minimal forward projection of the chin area.  Bone plate is seen with fairly long bone screws through the mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway appears adequate.  Tongue is postured way forward likely due to the fact that there was a resection done on it to use as an intraoral flap and the tongue is bound down anteriorly.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Post gunshot blast to the face.
Avulsed lower lip.
Avulsed anterior maxilla.
Avulsed anterior mandible.
Missing all teeth except for the maxillary left and right first and second molars and the mandibular left and right second and third molars.  
Bone graft previously placed in anterior mandible with bone plate stabilization.  Possible nonunion on the right side.
Absent columella.
Previously placed fascial sling on the right side creating significant restriction of jaw opening.  

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
CT scan with reconstruction of 3D model.
Surgery stage 1.
Bone graft to anterior maxilla.
Bone graft to anterior mandible. 
Surgery stage 2.
Soft tissue reconstruction of the lips and chin area.
Surgery stage 3.
Osseointegrated implants to maxilla and mandible. 
Restorative dentistry.

James has had numerous previous surgeries at the Oklahoma City Medical Center Plastic Surgery Dept. apparently treated by the interns and residents.  He also was seen at Parkland and may have had a procedure or two done there as well.  I would like to have an opportunity to evaluate the 3D model as it would give us a better impression as to what may able to be done for him to improve his situation.  