PAUL WILKISON									01/29/2007

Paul is a resident in rotation with us currently who presents with severe sleep apnea.  He wakes up at night unable to catch his breath.  He has significant daytime somnolence and severe snoring.  Clinically, he has good facial balance.  Occlusally, he has a Class III end-on occlusal relationship being about 3 mm Class III and he has almost an end-on incisor relationship.  Midlines are off at the mandibular dental midline about 2 mm to the left.  Oropharyngeal area shows that he has a hypertrophic uvula, hyperplastic soft palate with increased length and hyperplastic faucial pillars that present with significant transverse deficiency in oral airway dimension.  He has tonsils present but they are relatively small in size.  When he is relaxed the transverse width of the oropharynx between the posterior faucial pillars is constricted to probably no more than about 15 mm in transverse width. 

Nasal examination shows that he has some depression and collapse of the nasal valves.  He has a wide columella and somewhat narrow nostrils with the left one being a little bit more narrow than the right one.  He has severe deviation of the nasal septum off towards the left side.  The left turbinate at least anteriorly appears relatively small to normal in size.  However, the severely deviated septum causes significantly decreased airway on that side.  In fact, the lateral nasal valve almost touches against the septum.  On the right side, the turbinate is quite enlarged but the airway appears much greater because of the severe deviation of the septum towards the left side.  The intranasal mucosa appears significantly degenerated probably due to long use of nasal sprays with steroids that have caused significant degenerative changes in the nasal mucosa.  It looks very friable and fragile.  

The luminal valves appear somewhat constricted primarily due to the scrolling of the superior aspect of the lower lateral cartilages.  Holding the nostrils open with the nasal speculum significantly improved his function of nasal airway and he said it was the best that he has been able to breathe in quite some time.  With a pair of Q-tips decreasing the width of the alar base did improve his breathing ability some but not as much as using the speculum to open the nostril.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Hypertrophied soft palate.
Hypertrophied uvula.
Hyperplasia of the posterior faucial pillars with significant transverse deficiency of the airway. 
Severely deviated nasal septum off to the left side.
Hypertrophied right turbinate.
Wide columella.
Constricture of the luminal valve.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
UPPP procedure.
Nasal septoplasty. 
Right inferior turbinectomy. 
Consider reconstruction of the luminal valves.
Reconstruction of the columella. 