REBEKAH WILKINS								05/26/2010

Rebekah is 23 years old, birth date is 12/31/1986.  She is in good health with no major medical problems.  TMJ problems began when she was about 16 years old with some clicking in her joints of unknown etiology.  It was not until about 2008 when she was 21 that she began developing pain.  The pain has been predominantly in the right TMJ, although she is aware that the left side does pop.  She had orthodontics from the age of 12 to 15 and then again from the age of 16 to 18.  She had a splint made in 2009 and she wears that just when she has pain.  Stress sets off her pain issues.

She has no problems with headaches, but gets pain in the right TMJ at about a level of 8.  She rates her average daily pain at a level of 7, jaw function and diet at 0, disability at 6.  She gets right-sided severe earaches, occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She does have an allergy to penicillin.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing at nighttime.  She takes Motrin 600 mg twice a day p.r.n. pain.

In frontal and profile view, Rebekah has good facial balance.  Bekah has had 4 bicuspids extracted.  She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the left side by probably 2 mm, but Class I on the right side.  She has about slightly less than 0.5 mm of vertical overbite relatively anteriorly.  She has had her third molars extracted.  She is actually missing a maxillary right cuspid and has both bicuspids on that side with the first bicuspid into the cuspid position.  Apparently, the cuspid was horizontally impacted and had to be removed and bone graft placed in the area of the surgery.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  She has no nasal airway problems.  She is not aware of any snoring, daytime somnolence, or sleep apnea problems.  She believes she breathes through her nose when she sleeps.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the right masseter muscle area.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly, although she did have pain and discomfort in the right jaw area.  The incisal opening is about 38 mm.  The excursion movements are about 5 mm in each direction.  

Diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs anteriorly displaced. 
Bilateral TMJ pain, worse on the right side. 
Relative mandibular hyperplasia.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies.
	c.	Application of arch bars. 
2.	Removal of arch bars.