THERESA WINKIEWICZ							12/23/2009

Theresa is 58 years old and referred by Dr. Jorge Gonzales.  

On May 30, 2009, Terri was involved in a motor vehicle accident.  She sustained a hip fracture, a broken leg, pelvis fracture, shoulder fracture, and mandibular fractures.  She was treated for her mandibular fractures by having her jaws wired together for 8 weeks by Dr. Mike Sheppard in Mansfield, Texas.  She also had a tracheostomy.  She presents today to evaluate her current condition. 

Primary concerns that Terri has include the following:

1.	Difficult to eat and chew.
2.	Headaches, predominantly in the right side. 
3.	Dryness of the mouth. 
4.	Difficulties breathing through the nose.
5.	Her teeth alignment has changed significantly since the accident.
6.	Occludes only on some teeth on the left side.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Terri has more fullness in the right side of her face than the left side by probably about 3-4 mm.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 0.  Maxillary midline is just slightly off to the right side about 1 mm.  Nasal tip is off to the right side about 3 mm.  The mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile, the maxilla appears to be about 3 mm AP deficient and the mandible about 15 mm AP deficient.  Chin neckline and angle are reasonably well formed.  She does have a head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, Terri is missing the mandibular left second and third molars and the right third molar.  She has crowns on the molars bilaterally.  She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch, but has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she is missing the left second molar and the right second molar.  On the left side, the mandibular first molar and maxillary first molar have been replaced with implants.  On opening, the mandible shifts off to the right side about 4-5 mm.  Terri has about a 3 mm anterior open bite and a Class II end-on occlusion being about 2-3 mm Class II on the left side.  On the right side, she is closer to a Class I occlusion.  She actually has premature contact on the right side with the contact being between discs or the maxillary first molar or the lower second molar and the upper bicuspid and first molar.  All other teeth are out of occlusion.  She has probably a 2 mm open bite on the posterior left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy, but she has had a previous UPPP procedure and she has had her tonsils removed.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The septum is reasonably straight with just a slight deviation to the right side.  Maximal incisal opening is 37 mm and opening without pain about 30 mm.  Excursion movement to the right is 10 mm, to the left 2 mm.  To palpation, she has moderate pain on the right side over the temporalis, masseter, medial pterygoid, TMJ, and retromandibular area.  On the left side, she does not have any significant pain to palpation.  On opening, she has an audible click at 30 mm and a closing click at probably around 15 mm.  The right side functions fairly smoothly.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that she is missing all four third molars and the maxillary bilateral second molars and left second molar.  She has osteointegrated implants to replace the first molars on the left side.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Left TMJ appears arthritic.  On the right TMJ, she has a low subcondylar fracture with the condyle rotated anterior to the articular eminence.  It appears that there is evidence that she had a body fracture in the parasymphysis area on the left side.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic.  The condyle is small in size and appears to have lost some vertical and anteroposterior volume.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle is actually sitting forward in the fossa.  The condyle appears a little sclerotic towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows evidence of a previous mandibular fracture including a subcondylar fracture with the condyle tipped forward beneath the articular eminence.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears quite arthritic.  There is significant flattening of the lateral pole of the condyle.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4-5 mm.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to be anteriorly positioned to the articular eminence and also laterally displaced somewhat.  It appears that there could be bone-on-bone contact in some areas. 

Lateral cephalometric radiographic shows Terri has a high occlusal plane angle and a retruded maxilla and mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway measures only about 4.5 mm at the base of the soft palate and about 6-7 at the base of the tongue. 

Basic diagnoses for Terri would be as follows:

1.	Right mandibular previous subcondylar fracture with a displaced malunion.
2.	Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with late reduction. 
3.	Maxillary AP, posterior vertical, and transverse hypoplasia. 
4.	Mandibular AP hypoplasia. 
5.	Occludes only on the maxillary right, mandibular first and second molar, and 	maxillary second bicuspid first molar.
6.	High occlusal plane angle.
7.	Hypertrophied nasal turbinates with nasal airway obstruction. 
8.	Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 	AP dimension is 11 mm).
9.	Headaches. 
10.	TMJ pain. 
11.	Myofascial pain. 
12.	Missing maxillary second molars bilaterally, mandibular left second molar, and all 	four third molars.
13.	On the left side, the maxillary and mandibular first molars have been replaced with 	osteointegrated implants. 
14.	Anterior open bite.
15.	Right-sided posterior cross bite.
16.	External nasal deformity.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid 		roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 			removing 1-2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further 			forward and to account for a small tooth size discrepancy.  Try to tip the 			left bicuspids lingually.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement Concepts total 			joint prostheses. 
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	c.	Bilateral cornoidotomies.
	d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies.
	e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	f.	External nasal reconstruction. 
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
