SHANNON WOODHEAD								06/28/2010

Shannon is 20 years old; birth date is 11/20/1989.  She is referred by Dr. Margareta M. Gavrila, 13197 Central Avenue, Unit 5, Suite 202, Chino, CA 91710.  She has had previous orthodontics done by Dr. Ko, 16424 Bellflower Blvd., Bellflower, CA 90706-5415. 

Shannon states that her TMJ problems began sometime around the age of 13 to 14 when she developed cracking, locking, and popping in her jaw joints of unknown etiology.  She had orthodontic treatment done and the orthodontist stated he thought this would correct her TMJ problems.  She had orthodontics from 2004 through 2006 from the age of 14 to 16 years old.  Currently, Shannon has no problems with headaches, but rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 3, diet at 0, disability at 1.  She has been receiving chiropractic treatment since March 2010.  She does have a splint (night guard) that she has worn for approximately 4 months.  She has no problems with earaches, has moderate tinnitus, and no vertigo and no hearing loss  The only joints that really bother her are her knees.  She is aware of clenching during the day particularly when she is under stress.  The only medications she takes are Prozac 60 mg q.d. and vitamins.  

Shannon states she has no problems with snoring, but has been told she breathes heavily when sleeping.  She has some mild daytime somnolence and no sleep apnea.  She has a mild sleep disorder.  She does posture her head slightly forward.  She does not believe she has significant problems breathing through her nose at night. 

In frontal view, Shannon has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face except slight asymmetry in the lower third.  Upper lip length is 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 3 mm.  The maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are fairly well aligned with each other and the chin is just slightly off to the right side 1 to 2 mm.  The nasal tip is to the left 1 or 2 mm.  In profile, the maxilla is AP deficient by probably 4 to 5 mm and the chin is retruded by about 15 to 18 mm.  The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  The vertical facial balance appears fairly good.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  She has had previous gingival grafting in the lower anterior arch.  She has some inflammation around the gingiva, particularly around the 2 lower central incisor.  The lower incisors appear somewhat over angulated.  Transverse width of the lower arch appears somewhat narrow.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class II end-on occlusal relationship and probably 3 mm Class II.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 1.5 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side.  The right turbinate is large and appears to touch against the septum.  The left turbinate at least anteriorly appears more normal in size.  She could have mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction.  Columella is moderately wide, being greater on the left side than the right side.  Maximal incisal opening is 56 mm, excursion movements are about 11 mm in each direction.  She has crepitation in both joints on opening and excursion movements.  On opening, she has audible crepitation in the left TMJ.  

Shannon does have a slight cant in the transverse occlusal plane with the right side being about 1 mm higher than the right side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  The turbinates appear enlarged.  The condyles appear arthritic.

Coronal radiograph shows the septum deviated off towards the left side.  The turbinates are hyperplastic and appear to block off most of the airway.  The sinuses appear clear.  

Axial radiograph shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is deviated off to the right side anteriorly and then to the left side at the tip.  The turbinates are enlarged, and, in fact, the right one appears to touch against the septum for over half of its length.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is severely arthritic.  Out laterally, the condyle is quite flattened with loss of vertical volume.  More medially, the condyle is a little bit more rounded but with anterior beaking and a decreased joint space throughout the joint.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic with loss of significant vertical volume.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The articular eminence is fairly flat.  

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show that there is definite loss of vertical joint space.  The condyle appears to have lost vertical volume.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 1 to 2 mm.  There is decreased joint space consistently throughout the joint. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant resorption as well.  The lateral pole of the condyle is significantly lower than the medial.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  The decreased joint space is fairly uniform throughout the joint. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Shannon has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  There is a vertical difference of the inferior borders of the mandible with one side being almost 6 mm higher than the opposite site.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the soft palate level and also at the base of the tongue.  
Basic diagnoses for Shannon would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ severe adolescent internal condylar resorption with progressive joint destruction.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Anterior mandibular vertical and AP hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 6 mm (normal AP dimension is 11 mm).
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal septum deviated off to the right side. 
TMJ pain. 
Myofascial pain. 
Over angulation of lower incisors. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.   Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid 
                        roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary. 
	b.	Align and level the mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth, 				removing about 2 mm of tooth structure. 
3.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
4.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise 			direction using TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction. 
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
	e.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the chin and lengthen it 			vertically. 
	f.	Partial nasal turbinectomies.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 