JONI WILSON									7/29/05

Joni is 47 years old, referred by Dr. Edward Gray, Gardnerville, Nevada.  She has had problems with depression and has had 5 disc fusion procedures performed in the C-spine area and also some surgery on the right ankle.  She also has had a hysterectomy.  She smokes about 3/4 of a pack of cigarettes per day and has done this for about 33 years.  She has arthritis.  

MEDICATIONS
Paxil 30 mg q.d.
Trazodone 150 mg q.h.s.
Diazepam (Valium) 10 mg 1/2 tablet to 1 tablet 2 to 3 times per day.
Seroquel 100 mg tablets 1 at bedtime and 1/2 tablet during the day.

Joni has been diagnosed with posttraumatic stress disorder.  Joni also states she has some problems with memory loss.  It is not known when her problems actually began.  She remembers as a child in the late 1960s barrel bull riding with her cousins and hitting her jaw several times during that activity.  Also, riding horses and so forth she has been hit in the jaw and playing softball she has had some trauma to her jaw and she feels that may have contributed to her jaw and neck problems.  In 1987, she has bilateral TMJ surgery performed.  She is not sure exactly what was done, but she apparently had displaced disc being much worse on the left side as compared to the right side.  Apparently the disc were repositioned in some kind of pin stabilization and apparently used in both joints.  This surgery was done by Dr. Colis in Cleveland, Ohio.  Then Dr. Don Leek removed the pins at a later time.  She did fairly well until about two years ago and then her pain problems started getting worse.  She has seen about seven different doctors trying to seek help and advance and treatment for her condition.

She gets headaches on a daily basis that she rates at a level of 7 that occur predominately in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area.  These easily escalate to 10 and cause her nausea and vomiting.  She rates her TMJ pain on an average day at 8, but it can easily escalate to 10.  She rates her average daily pain at 9, jaw function at 8, diet at 10, disability at 6.  Apparently she only drinks now as she cannot chew at all.  

In frontal view, Joni has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Some slight asymmetry in the lip area.  Upper lip length is 26 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 2 mm.  Maxillary central incisor midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Maxillary dental midline is about 2 mm to the left and mandibular dental midline is on the facial midline.  In profile view, Joni has fairly good facial balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  The chin, however, is retruded by probably 12 to 15 mm.  Chin neck-line is essentially absent and there is no chin neck angle.  Intraorally, she is missing mandibular right first molar and has the rest of the teeth back through the second molar.  She has a crown on the mandibular left second molar.  In the upper arch she has all her teeth on the right side back through the second molar and on left side back through the first molar.  She has some mild crowding of upper anterior arch and lower anterior arch.  She has a Class II end-on occlusion being a little bit more Class II on the right side than the left side which is probably 4 to 5 mm Class II and on the left side she is only about 2 to 3 mm Class II.  Oropharynx as best as I could evaluate it appears clear.  Tissues appear normal in coloration and visual texture.  
JONI WILSON				7/29/05				Page 2


When sleeping, Joni reports being predominately a mouth breather.  Intranasally, her turbinates are quite large and appear inflamed.  The nasal airway is quite narrow.  The septum shows some deviation in the front, but I could not see the posterior aspect of the septum because the turbinates are so very large in the front part of the nose.  She probably has moderate to fairly severe nasal airway obstruction.  She probably has moderate to severe snoring.  She has moderate daytime somnolence, but she is not aware as to having sleep apnea.  Joni does have a head postured forward neck position. 

To palpation, Joni has severe pain over the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, styloid areas and posterior neck.  She has moderate pain over the medial pterygoids and mild tenderness over the SCMs.  No pain in the shoulders.  She is very limited in her jaw function today.  She tends to hold her mandible off towards the left side.  Placing her back in centric relation causes severe pain in the right TMJ area.  She did not have very good jaw function today.  She says that she does get popping noises in the right joint and she has grinding noises in the left side.  Maximal incisal opening that Joni could do on her own was 24 mm, but only about 15 mm where she had reasonable comfort.  Excursive movements to the right 3 mm, to the left 2 mm. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary left second and third molars, right third molar, mandibular left third molar, right first molar and third molar.  She has a root canal on the mandibular right second molar and that tooth also has a crown.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Right condyle is off the film and on left condyle it appears that there may be some kind of calcification around the condyle.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear fairly well aerated.  Frontal sinus is quite large and extensive.  Nasal septum appears severely deviated and turbinates appear to be blocked up a good part of the nasal airway.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  It appears that there may be some anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence has a moderate inclination and is not very long in length.  Styloid process appears a little bit elongated.  

Left TMJ shows a joint that has severe degenerative changes and there appears to be a calcified mass in front of the head of the condyle.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space.  The styloid process is elongated and overlaps the posterior border of the mandible.  

Open tomograms show significantly decreased translation in both joints.  In the right TMJ, there is increased joint space indicative of the disc probably reducing in that position.  Condyle appears to have reasonably morphology.  On the less open view, there is a calcified mass in front of the condyle that does move forward with the condyle.  Joint space between the condyle and articular eminence is significantly less on the left as compared to the right side.  

JONI WILSON				7/29/05				Page 3


The left condyle appears a little bit more degenerated than the right condyle.  Joni has an anterior vertical overbite of probably around 4 mm.  

Lateral cephalogram demonstrates the presence of a bone plate down to her vertebrae beginning probably about #3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 most likely.  She has a slightly retruded maxilla and a significantly retruded mandible.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  There is almost a Class II division II type of dental alignment radiographically.  She has a severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an airway dimension in some areas between 1 and 3 mm (normal dimension 11 mm.)  At the soft palate level, the measurement is about 6 mm, but she is severely constricted down to the base of the tongue.  The tongue is carried fairly low as she has an increased dimension between the top of the tongue and the hard palate.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
    1.  Left TMJ severe arthritis with indistinguishable disc and a large calcified mass that is 
         anterior to the condyle.
    2.  Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
    3.  Previous bilateral TMJ surgeries bilaterally.
    4.  Sligh AP maxillary deficiency.
    5.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
    6.  AP mandibular deficiency.
    7.  Class II end-on occlusion.
    8.  High occlusal plan angle.
    9.  Missing mandibular right first molar, maxillary left second molar and all 4 third molars.
    10.  Moderate crowding of upper anterior arch.
    11.  Crowing of lower anterior arch.
    12.  Slight overangulation of lower anterior teeth.
    13.  Severe TMJ pain.
    14.  Severe headaches.
    15.  Severe myofascial pain. 
    16.  Earaches.
    17.  Tinnitus.
    18.  Vertigo.
    19.  Severe masticatory dysfunction.
    20.  The patient's mandible is postured off towards the left side because of severe pain and    
           centric relation.
    21.   Hypertrophied turbinates.
    22.  Significant nasal airway obstruction.
    23.  Severe decreased oropharyngeal airway.
    24.  Sleep disorder. 
    25.  Snoring.
    26.  Daytime somnolence.


JONI WILSON				7/29/05				Page 4


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Can use bonded brackets to rule out both arches.

Medical management of pain.

CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

Restorative dentistry to replace missing teeth.

I gave Joni 3 prescriptions to be filled here, Vicodin 10 dispensing 40 tablets, 1 tablet q.4-6h. p.r.n. pain.  Then I gave her another prescription for Vicodin to take home and it is also labeled Vicodin 10 dispensing 40 tablets, 1 tablet q.4-6h. p.r.n. pain, refill x3.  I also gave her a prescription to get filled back home for Celebrex 200 mg dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.d., refill x3.