ROBIN WOOD									04-15-02

Robin is 38 years old and referred by Dr. Sharon Ornstein.

Patient History

Robin’s problems began in about 1991. She had a laparoscopic procedure done for endometriosis, and following that, she began with clicking and popping in her jaw joints. She also developed headaches. In 1992, she was in an MVA and sustained a whiplash injury. She has been on at least a couple of different kinds of splints. In April of 1999, she had bilateral TMJ arthroscopy by Dr. Jim Bates. She began her orthodontics in July of 1999 with Dr. Claude Stephens (511 W. Wheatland Road, Duncanville, TX  75116). She has been to see many doctors in reference to her current problem.

Robin has had a hysterectomy in June of 2001 secondary to endometriosis problems.

She gets frequent earaches, frequent ringing her ears, and she is sensitive to noise. No other joints both her. She is allergic to PENICILLIN but has no other known allergies and no problems with jewelry. 

She wakes up hurting in the mornings, and then things usually get worse for her. She rates her headaches at a level of 5. They are continuous in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area and also on top of the head. She rates her TMJ pain as 7, overall pain as 7, jaw function, diet, and disability at 5.

Current Medications

The only medication she takes currently is Cenestin, which is a hormone medication. 

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Robin has good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline and chin are shifted about 1.5 mm off to the left.

In profile view, Robin has some AP maxillary deficiency of maybe about 3 to 4 mm. Chin is retruded approximately 15 mm. Chin-neckline is short and not well-defined. Nasal dorsum is a little bit prominent. There is a little bit of ptosis of the nasal tip. 

She is missing lower first bicuspids that were extracted when she had orthodontics as a teenager. She appears to have adequately attached gingiva, although it is quite thin. In the upper arch, she is also missing first bicuspids extracted at her first round of orthodontics. She has an open bite of about 1 mm and an overjet of probably about 4 to 5 mm. She has a Class II end-on occlusion with the left side being worse than the right side. Clinically it appears that there is probably a tooth-size discrepancy.

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with adhesions to the articular eminence with reduction on opening.
Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and severe deformation.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II occlusion.
Anterior open bite of 1 to 2 mm.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Missing all four first bicuspids extracted for previous orthodontic treatment.
Significant tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton difference of 3 mm.
High occlusal plane angulation.
Severe decrease of oropharyngeal airway of 2 mm (normal 11 mm).

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.
Continue to align and level lower arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 3 mm of tooth structure if possible and close spacing and retract.

CT scan of TMJ and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, meniscectomies, debridement, and reconstruction with mandibular advancement using TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and downgraft it posteriorly.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen).

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion