DEBBIE WISDOM									05/02/2008

Debbie is 46 years old.  Referred by Duane Keller, DDS, 3929 Bayless Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63125.  She has a TMJ problems. She was treated last year for breast cancer including a right breast mastectomy.  She has severe depression.  Debbie takes the following medications:

Prevacid Slow Tabs 30 mg q.d.
BuSpar 15 mg q.d.
Women’s vitamins including vitamin D.
Aspirin, Tylenol, etc., as needed for pain, although she tries to avoid it because they upset her stomach. 

Debbie’s TMJ problems began many years ago, but it was in 1995 when she dislocated her condyles forward into an open locked position that she first sought treatment.  Up to that time, she was not really symptomatic except for clicking and popping.  She saw Dr. Duane Keller.  Dr. Keller treated her with splint for about 6 months and the pain and clicking went away.  She did relatively well until 2007 when she developed increased clicking, popping, and pain once again.  She returned to see Dr. Keller and in June 2007 he made a splint for her and this does help her some.  This relieved the clicking and shooting pains, but she still has pain down through her neck, shoulder, and back area.  She has received physical therapy since June 2007 about once a month.  She does tend to get numbness in her arms and hands, but the physical therapy seems to help relieve that.  Debbie gets headaches at about a level of 5 in the frontal and temporal areas.  She gets  some eye twitching also that is bothersome to her.  She rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain between 7 and 10 which varies with stress.  She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 7, and disability at 9.  Debbie complains of no airway problems.  Apparently, does not snore or have any sleep apnea issues.  She has difficulty sleeping at night and wakes up every 2 ½ hours or so.  She has moderate daytime somnolence.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Debbie has fairly good left-to-right facial asymmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -1 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is off to the right side about 1-2 mm.  Chin is off to the right side about 2-3 mm.  In profile view, Debbie has some AP maxillary deficiency probably about 3-4 mm.  Chin neckline is extremely short. The chin is retruded by probably 12-15 mm.  Debbie does have some crenations around her tongue.  Debbie is missing a bicuspid on the left side of the maxilla, but appears to have the rest of her teeth.  The maxillary midline actually may be about 1 mm off towards to the left side.  She has a posterior open bite on the left side and on the right side, and she has a crossbite on the right side.  She has an anterior deep overbite of about 2 mm.  She is fairly close being a Class I cuspid with just a slight Class III tendency on the left side and just a slight Class II tendency on the right side.  Transversely, she is fairly level with maybe the right side being 1 mm higher than the left side, but not real significant.  Oropharyngeal airways look relatively normal, although the fascial pillars appear moderately constricted.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear normal to moderate in size.  The septum appears to be deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  The airway intranasally appears wider on the left side as compared to the right side.  The columella is wide and nostrils are fairly narrow.  However, she does state that she breathes through her nose when she sleeps and also during the day.  To palpation, Debbie has some moderate pain over the right masseter muscle, but no other tenderness to palpation.  She has crepitation in both jaw joints.  Maximal incisal opening is 43 mm, opening without discomfort 30 mm.  She could move to the right side about 4 mm and to the left 5 mm.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of mandibular left and right first and second molars, maxillary third molars, as well as the right second molar.  She also appears to be missing the first and second bicuspids.  She has a three-unit bridge on the right side, so I assume she is maybe missing just the second bicuspid, and she has a four-unit bridge on the left side.  The right condyle appears arthritic with some anterior beaking present. 
Waters view shows that bony septum is very straight.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the right side.  Airway appears to be somewhat compromised.  Sinuses appear relatively clear, although the left maxillary sinus is just slightly cloudy compared to the right side.    
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little sclerotic on top.  Joint space seems moderately good.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit more arthritic.  There is some anterior beaking and a little bit more sclerosis in it.  Joint space appears decreased vertically and posteriorly.  On opening, there is moderate translation of both condyles.  Both condyles appear a little bit arthritic in the open views with the right side worse than the left side.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II relationship.  She has posterior open bites.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  She has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm at the soft palate level and about 9.5 mm at the base of the tongue high and low it measures more like 4 mm.  
Basic diagnoses for Debbie would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis. 
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior maxillary vertical deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:	
 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery.  
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.