REBECCA WILSON									04/20/2009

Becky is 24 years old and referred by Dr. Duane Keller, 3955 Bayless Avenue, Suite 100, St. Louis, MO 63125.  Becky’s TMJ problems began she was about 14 years in 1999.  Prior to that, she had orthodontics from the third grade and had treatment for about 2 years.  She had splint therapy from about 2002 to 2004, but not continuously.  Orthodontics was repeated in 2004 through 2006 without relief.  She has recently gotten a new splint in March 2009 to help keep her from clenching at night.  Medications she currently takes are birth control pill, Advil, Tylenol, and ibuprofen, etc. 

Becky rates her TMJ pain at a level of 10, average daily pain around the head and neck area at 10 predominantly in the neck area.  She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 6, disability at 4.  She gets occasional earaches, occasional tinnitus, and she does get vertigo.  She is very much aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and this causes her to wake up with significant pain in the mornings.  She also clenches and bruxes during the day.  Joints that bother her include her shoulders, right worse than left, elbows, right ankle, and neck.  She has no known allergies to jewelry.  She had an adverse reaction to Keflex when she was younger. 

Becky feels that her occlusion is slowly but continuously changing.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Becky has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty on the facial midline.  The nasal tip is just slightly to the left side about 2 mm.  In profile, the lower third face appears somewhat elongated.  The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  She has a head postured neck position.  The maxilla is retruded about 3 mm.  The mandible is retruded about 8 mm.  She has a lip incompetence of about 6 mm.  Intraorally, Becky has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer on the lingual side.  She has adequate attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has an inferior open bite of about 2 mm.  She is probably 5 mm Class III bilaterally.  She occludes on only her first and second molars.  In centric relation, she occludes only on the left second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.  With a little bit more force, then the right side will touch in the second molar area.  Actually, in centric relation, she occludes only on the left first molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion including at least 1-2 mm open bite posteriorly on the right side.  Actually, in her centric relation, the mandible is deviated off towards to the left side at the dental midline about 1 mm and in the chin area bout 2 mm.  Transversely, the maxilla appears level.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear maybe mildly to moderately enlarged, but not too significant.  There does not appear to be any significant nasal airway obstruction.  She has no problems with snoring, but has probably mild daytime somnolence, but no sleep apnea.  She does not sleep well at night mainly because she wakes up with grinding of her teeth and with pain and discomfort.  She believes that she is predominantly a nasal breather.  To palpation, she has no real significant pain around the head and neck area.  Maximum opening is about 47 mm, opening without discomfort 32 mm.  Excursion movement to the right about 12 mm and the to the left 9 mm.  On opening, she does deviate towards the left side bout 3-4 mm.  In the right joint on opening, she would initially have a pop in that joint and then it would be smooth after that.  On excursion movements, she would have some glitches in the right joint.  The left side functions smoothly.  Sometimes in the morning, she will wake up with a closed lock situation that is predominantly on the right side and she will have to manipulate her jaws and she will get a pop and then the jaw opens adequately.  At one point, Becky was placed on tetracycline to try to identify if there was a reactive arthritis present.  Apparently, one of the tablets got caught in her esophagus and created an ulcer which required hospitalization for treatment 

I-CAT EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of a horizontally impacted mandibular right third molar, but all other third molars are absent.  Sinuses look clear.  Right turbinate appears enlarged.  Left joint appears some arthritic as compared to the right side. 
Coronal view shows that the right turbinate does appear quite large.  Sinuses appear clear.    
Axial view shows that the right turbinate appears enlarged.    
Left TMJ tomogram sagittal view shows condyle that appears to have some erosive changes and loss of vertical volume.  Articular eminence looks relatively flat.  It is extremely flat compared to the opposite side.  
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is flattened anteriorly and may actually have an erosive lesion in the anterior head as well.  The condylar head has more of a hockey stick shape as compared to the opposite side.  Articular eminence is significantly steeper in this side than the opposite side.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows that there is significant loss of vertical volume.  In some areas, there appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact with significantly decreased vertical joint space.  There is some lateral beaking of the lateral pole of the condyle.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.   
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is relatively flat across the top.  Joint space looks a little bit better balanced.  The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph has her postured forward with the mandible not back in centric relation.  Oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue measures about 5 mm and at the soft palate level measures about 6.5 mm.  She has an anterior open bite, but in this x-ray she is postured forward.  

Basic diagnoses for Becky would be as follows:    

Left TMJ resorptive arthritis with articular disc dislocation without reduction and significant deformation.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with occasional reduction. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia. 
Maxillary AP, posterior vertical, and transverse hypoplasia.
Occluding only on the left first molars with all other teeth out of occlusion. 
Anterior and right posterior open bite. 
Class II cuspid relationship.  
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Severe TMJ pain. 
Severe myofascial pain affecting predominantly the neck, shoulders, and back. 
Difficulties eating and chewing. 
Nocturnal and daytime clenching and bruxism.  

Recommended treatment option 1 would be as follows:

Medications:  Klonopin 1 tablet q.h.s.
Removal of mandibular right impacted third molar.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1-2 mm of tooth structure to correct for slight tooth size discrepancy.  
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with mandibular advancement and TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward, down graft it slightly posteriorly, and expand.  
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral coronoidotomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

Recommended treatment option 2 would be as follows:

Medications:  Klonopin 1 tablet q.h.s.
Surgery Stage 1.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and supposition with Mitek anchors.  
Surgical removal of impacted mandibular right third molar.
 Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1-2 mm of tooth structure to correct for slight tooth size discrepancy.  
Surgery Stage 2. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward, down graft it slightly posteriorly, and expand.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

