WADE WILLIAMS									02/26/2010

Wade is 15 years old and referred by William C. Buchanan, Jr., DMD, MS, 515 Londonderry Lane, Denton, Texas 76025.  Wade states that the onset of his jaw joint problems particularly in reference to his joints began when he was about 14 approximately 6 months ago.  That is when the jaws began to click and pop.  He has had no specific treatment for that yet.  He began orthodontic treatment in May 2007 and has been in appliances since then.  The orthodontist is having difficulties getting the occlusion finalized as the bite keeps shifting and moving.  Wade has no significant problems with headaches, but rates his TMJ pain at 8 particularly when the joint clicks and pops, predominantly on the right side.  On the average day as long as his jaw does not click or pop, he does not really have any pain problems.  He rates his jaw function at 5, diet at 0, disability at 3.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, but gets occasional vertigo.  No other joints bother him.  He does have unspecified allergies.  He has been diagnosed with vasovagal response.  He also some alopecia.  He is aware of clenching during the day.  He takes the following medications:

Zoloft 50 mg q.d.
He also takes salt pills to help with his low blood pressure.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Wade has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty close to  being on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline.  Chin and nasal tip are a little bit off to the right side about 2 mm.  In profile, Wade has probably about 5 mm AP maxillary deficiency and the chin is probably moved back about 15 mm.  The chin neckline is somewhat short.  Wade does have a head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, Wade has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  The teeth appear to be nicely aligned and leveled.  In the upper arch, Wade has all of his teeth back through his first molar on the right side erupted in and on the left side he has his teeth back through the second molars, but is missing probably the first bicuspid.  In centric relation, Wade hits on only the mandibular left second molar.  The other teeth are out of occlusion.  He has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm in that position.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted off towards the right side about 2.5 to 3 mm.  The chin is also shifted towards the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy and normal with just some slight elongation of the uvula and perhaps the soft palate.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderate in size.  The septum looks reasonably straight.  There may be some moderate nasal obstruction.  The columella appears wide and the nostrils are a little bit narrow.  In centric relation, Wade is probably about 3 to 4 mm Class II on the right side, but Class I on the left side.  In centric relation, Wade tends to kick into a cross bite on the right side and a buccal cross bite on the left side.  To palpation, Wade has moderate tenderness over the temporalis, masseters, retromandibular area, SCM, and right TMJ.  He has milder tenderness over the medial pterygoids.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 47.  Excursion movement to the right is 8 mm, to the left 7 mm.

RADIOGRAPH EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of mandibular impacted third molars.  The upper third molars are missing as well as the maxillary right second molar, left probably the second bicuspid.  Turbinates appear fairly large.  The condyles appear a little bit arthritic. 

Coronal view shows that Wade has fairly large turbinates.  The septum appears wide.  The sinuses appear clear.  

Axial view shows the septum is deviated off towards the left side and touching against the turbinate.  The turbinates are hyperplastic and appear to block most of the functional airway.  The sinuses appear clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show that the mandibular condyle appears quite arthritic with loss of volume vertically.  Anteroposteriorly, there may be a little bit of loss of volume as well. The joint space looks normal.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  This condyle appears a little bit more arthritic than the opposite side. 

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has undergone significant degenerative changes with loss of vertical volume.  The slope of the articular eminence is a little bit more shallow on this side than the opposite side.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is narrow mediolaterally.  There are some erosions on the condylar head, particularly in the mid portion of the condyle.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm.  Joint space actually looks reasonably good. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has some significant arthritic changes.  It is narrow mediolateral similar to the opposite side.  There is some breakdown in the condylar bone.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably just 2 or 3 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Wade has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  The maxilla appears retruded anteroposteriorly and the posterior maxilla appears hypoplastic vertically.  The mandible is rotated backwards in a clockwise direction.  He has adenoid tissues in the nasopharynx area.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm at the soft palate level and probably 7 to 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  He does have a high occlusal plane angle.  

Basic diagnoses for Wade would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR).
Mandibular hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied turbinates with nasal airway obstruction. 
Impacted mandibular third molars x2.
AP microgenia.
Missing maxillary left second bicuspid, right second molar, and bilateral third molars.   

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  
	b.	Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 			removing about 1-2 mm of tooth structure and retract.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 				counterclockwise direction. 
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction.
	d.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
	e.	Surgical removal of mandibular impacted third molars x2.
	f.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.