ERIN WILSON 									08/09/2006

Erin is 21 years old, referred by Dan Clifford, DDS, 7520 Montgomery NE, Albuquerque, NM 87109.  Phone number is 505-883-4865.  She had a previous tonsillectomy.  She has had MRSA real bad two years ago but also had it again last year from the knees downward.  They were skin abscesses that she had.  She smokes about six cigarettes a day and has done that for about four years.  She has had an adverse reaction to Demerol.  The medication she takes is Advil four tablets q.8h. for headaches.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Unable to open mouth. 
Painful headaches.
Ear ringing.
Teeth do not match up.
Unable to eat and chew.
Pain in the jaw joints.   

TREATMENTS:
Splints, both soft and hard.
Physical therapy.
Steroid therapy.
Injections into the TMJs times two. 

Erin's problems began on March 8, 2006, when she had surgery to take her tonsils out.  Prior to that, she was unaware of any TMJ problems.  Prior to this problem, the only problem she was aware of was clenching and grinding her teeth at night some but that was only periodic.  In June of 2006 she began splint therapy.  She initially had a soft splint on the lower teeth that created no improvement for her.  She then had an arch splint made on the lower arch but this increased her pain and headaches.  She had physical therapy beginning in July and this did help her neck and back but provided no relief of her TMJs, jaws, and headaches.  She also was tried on a Therabite but this increased her pain and headaches.  She saw Dr. Rabi Gorav, an ENT specialist in Las Cruses, who did steroid injections into both TMJs with no improvement.  She saw Dr. Clifford who did repeat steroid injections into the joints and also did ionophoresis.  None of these treatments have helped her to date.  The Advil medication does help her pain some.  She has been offered narcotics but she has refused those.

She gets frequent earaches, severe tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  No other joints bother her at this time.  Erin rates her headaches at a level of 9 in the frontal and temple area with them being worse on the right side as compared to the left side.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, right side worse than the left side.  Average daily pain at 10, jaw function at 10, diet at 8, disability at 8.  She is not aware currently of clenching and bruxism.  Interestingly she has numbness of her tongue bilaterally since the tonsils were removed.  This has affected her speech.  




ERIN WILSON				08/09/2006				Page 2


In frontal view, Erin has good facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary midline and chin midline are pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 1 mm to the right.  In profile, she has good AP and vertical facial balance.  She has a low mandibular plane angle facial morphology.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back to the second molars.  She is slight Class II cuspid relationship bilaterally by maybe 1 to 2 mm.  Erin has significant difficulties even trying to bite her teeth together.  If she tries to close down she has about 1 or 2 mm of open bite bilaterally.  Trying to push her teeth, though they do go together, creates significant pain for her particularly in the right masseter and right TMJ area.  Oropharynx appears clear and uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are all relatively normal.  I can see the scar line from the removal of the tonsils.  Maximal incisal opening is about 20 mm.  Excursive movements are essentially 0.  To palpation, she has high moderate to low severe pain over the right masseter, right TMJ and moderate pain over the temporalis muscles, left masseter, left TMJ, right styloid area.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have a little cratering in the anterosuperior head.  Seems to be a slight increased joint space vertically perhaps.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Occlusion is apart.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle may have a little bit better shape and some anterior beaking.  Increased superior and posterior joint space.  Teeth are apart.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is virtually no translation and very minimal capability to open.  

Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  She has a root canal in mandibular left first molar.  Condyles appear a little bit arthritic but difficult to tell on these views.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  The septum is reasonably straight.  Turbinate on the right side may be enlarged.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she is basically a skeletal Class I and very close to an occlusal Class I relationship although she is unable to bite together all the way and has an open bite extending the entire occlusion.  She has a decreased oropharyngeal airway of only about 3 mm or so but part of this may be due to tongue placement as the tongue appears postured significantly posteriorly.  There is increased vertical space and also anteroposterior space between the tip of the tongue and the teeth and palate.  

Erin had two parakeets for about a year.  Both birds died.  She has a cat that catches and kills bird and lays them on the doorstep and she has five dogs that try to eat the birds.  She has a sister who has irritable bowel syndrome and asthma and gastritis.  Erin has an ovarian cyst.  There is no specific time during the day that her pain is worse.
ERIN WILSON				08/09/2006				Page 3


I gave Erin the following prescriptions:
Levaquin 500 mg dispensing 20 tablets, 1 tablet per day, refill times 3.
Relafen 750 mg dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet two times per day, refill times 5.
Ultram 50 mg tablets dispensing 50 tablets, 1 tablet q.4.-6h. p.r.n. pain, refill times 4.

I recommend the following laboratory tests:
CBC.
Sedimentation rate.
C-reactive protein.
ANA.
Rheumatoid factor.
Chlamydia serology.
Mycoplasma serology.
IgA, IgE, IgG and IgM.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ reactive arthritis and articular disc dislocations.
Bilateral TMJ closed lock.
Open bite of 2 mm (patient unable to close jaws to get teeth together.)
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
Severe masticatory dysfunction. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications.
Levaquin 500 mg dispensing 20 tablets, 1 tablet per day.
Relafen 750 mg dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet two times per day. 
Ultram 50 mg tablets dispensing 50 tablets, 1 tablet q.4-6h. p.r.n. pain.
Consider repeating MRI if surgical treatment is delayed for more than four to six months. 
Treatment option 1.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to correct bite and allow space in the TMJ for the articular disc.
Treatment option 2.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)  
Postsurgical physical therapy only if necessary. 





ERIN WILSON 				08/09/2006				Page 4


It appears that Erin has advanced reactive arthritis affecting both TMJs with the right side worse than the left side.  MRI shows that she has what appears to be displaced discs being worse on the right side than the left side with degenerative changes of those discs as well as arthritic changes on the condyles.  In addition, she has a history of MRSA during the past two years with recurrent infections in her legs.  She also has a history of recurrent strep infections in the oropharynx and tonsillar area that necessitated removal of her tonsils in March of 2006.  Since her tonsils were removed she has had no recurrences of sore throats.  I am concerned that she may have reactive arthritis created by either the recurrent sore throats versus the MRSA condition. 


  