JOYCE WOOD										05-05-04

Joyce is 66 years old and referred by Dr. Stephen Fennell, 600 Oglethorpe Ave., Athens, GA  30606.

Patient History

Joyce has had a hard stent placed. She has had a number of surgeries in the past, and there is a list attached to her information sheet. She has had previous TMJ surgery, the first being in 1989 where she had bilateral TMJ surgery done, but it did not help the right side. In 1995, she had additional TMJ surgery on the right side and still did not do well. She has constant pain in the jaws and a permanent earache. She does include a list of previous illnesses and diseases. She has a list of allergies included. She has had a lot of tests done including bone scans, myelograms, bronchoscopies, etc. She had an MRI done just this past week on her jaw joints. 

Joyce’s problems began in her early 20s in reference to her TMJ problems. When she was about 17 or 18, some army doctors extracted a bunch of her lower teeth. This may have overloaded the joints, and the joints became symptomatic when she was in her 20s. She has had two previous TMJ surgeries bilaterally in 1989 and then in the right joint in 1995. She has had splint therapy x 2 using hard splints and also soft splints. She has had physical therapy, and the ultrasound was effective for her but only lasted while it was being applied, and when it was stopped, the pain would return. She gets severe earaches with the right side being worse than the left side. She gets occasional tinnitus and vertigo, and just in the last few months she has developed some hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her neck, back, wrists, fingers, hips (left greater than right), knees, and ankles. 

No known food allergies or environmental allergies. No known problems with jewelry. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. She rates her headaches which are fairly constant at a level of 6 that occur predominantly in the temporal area, but they can escalate easily to 8. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, but they can escalate easily to 8. Pain on an average day is a level of 6 through the head and neck area. Jaw function and diet are at 7 and disability at 5. 

Joyce states that her pain problems are so severe associated with her jaws that if it can’t be fixed she doesn’t wish to go on.

Current Medications

Levoxyl 0.075 mg per day
Atenolol 25 mg per day
Nexium 40 mg per day
Lorazepam 0.5 mg 4 or 5 times per day
Percocet 7.5 mg/500 mg approximately 3 to 4 per day

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Joyce has fairly good balance in the middle and upper third face. May have some just slight asymmetry in the mandible with the chin being deviated just a little bit off to the left side a couple of millimeters. Right cheek appears more full than the left cheek. Inferior border of the mandible on the right side may be slightly inferiorly positioned 2 to 3 mm compared to the left side. Dental midlines appear to be fairly coincidental; however, Joyce does have problems posturing her mandible and having it in a comfortable position. The mandible seems to shift and move around quite a bit. Upper lip length is 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.

In profile, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 to 6 mm. Mandible is AP deficient by probably 15 mm. Chin-neckline is not well-defined and from the anterior part of the submental area goes straight into her neck. 

Intraorally, she is missing all of her right molars and her left probably first and second molar. In the upper arch, on the right side she is missing the bicuspids and at least the first molar and the third molar. On the upper left side, she is missing the second bicuspid, first molar, and probably the third molar. In the best fit she has, she is Class II end-on on the left side by probably 4 to 5 mm and on the right side by about 2 to 3 mm. She has about a 3-mm anterior overbite. 

To palpation, she has moderate tenderness over the temporalis muscles, posterior neck muscles, and milder pain to palpation over the TMJs and styloid areas as well as the masseter muscles. Maximal incisal opening is about 39 mm and opening without significant discomfort about 20 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 5 mm and to the left 6 mm. 

On opening and closing, she has some fine crepitation, but she says when she eats and chews, it sounds like a “war going on in her joints.”

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear relatively normal in size. She is missing all the right posterior molars and the left probably first and second molar with the third molar drifted forward. In the upper arch, she is missing the right bicuspids, first molar, and third molar. On the left side, she is missing the second bicuspid, first molar, and third molar. Joints appear short in vertical height and arthritic. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite flattened and arthritic in appearance. May be an osteophyte extending superiorly up toward the fossa area. Articular eminence is quite shallow and perhaps may have had a previous eminectomy performed just based on the extreme shallowness that exists there. Appears to be some dense calcification along the posterior wall of the fossa. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have lost vertical dimension similar to the left side. Articular eminence is extremely flat. Condyle looks quite arthritic and appears to be a little sharpness extending from the posterior aspect of the remaining condylar stump. May be some anterior beaking present. 

Translation shows moderate translation of the left condyle. Appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact with no discernable joint space. Condyle looks quite arthritic. 

In the right joint, there is a little bit better translation, but the condyle does appear arthritic and appears to be virtually no joint space present. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Appears to be asymmetry in the mandible with the left side shorter vertically than the right side. Appears to be a cant in the transverse occlusal plane. Sinuses are clear, and nasal septum has some deviation back in the bony aspects, but there appears to be airway present.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph has the head tipped upward, but oropharynx appears clear at least on these radiographs. Teeth are apart unfortunately in this x-ray. 

Joyce has recently developed some problems with snoring and finds that she at times will wake herself up at night. Turbinates look quite large, although Joyce feels that most of the time she does breathe through her nose. Joyce does have a sleep disorder and doesn’t sleep well at night. The difficulty with the sleeping is related to her pain problems that involve the jaws, head and neck area, but also she has pain problems throughout the rest of her body as well. It takes her a long time to go to sleep, and then if she moves, it will frequently wake her up. She generally sleeps on her right side and can’t sleep on her left side because her hip is so bad. She can’t breathe on her back. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis
Maxillary AP hypoplasia
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia
AP mandibular hypoplasia
Class II end-on occlusion
Missing mandibular right first, second, and third molars, mandibular left first and second molars, maxillary left second bicuspid, first and third molars, and maxillary right first and second bicuspid, first molar, and third molar
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction
Severe TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Snoring
Sleep disorder
Sleep apnea symptoms 

Recommended Treatment

CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis
Multiple maxillary osteotomies with bone plates and stabilization with hydroxyapatite grafting
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)
Bilateral partial turbinectomies
Application of arch bars

Postsurgical management that could include physical therapy, removal of arch bars at two months, etc.
