JODY WOODS									03/22/2010

Referred by Dr. David Nelson, orthodontist in Austin, Texas.  Jody has had jaw joint problems ever since her teenage years of unknown etiology.  It could possibly be AICR.  She had orthodontics done then with bicuspid extractions.  In 1994, she was involved in an MVA and this started her real severe joint problems.  Initially, she was given steroid injections and arthrocentesis and other techniques.  In April 1997, Dr. Bruce Sanders took her to surgery and performed the placement of bilateral Christensen fossa prostheses.  In 2004, she went through orthodontics a second time as well as splint therapy because her jaws felt uncomfortable and her teeth and jaws were becoming crooked.  

Primary concerns that she has at this time include the following:

Difficulties chewing and eating.
Severe headaches and migraines.
Severe vertigo.
Severe pain in the jaw joints.
Unable to receive dental treatment because of inability to open her jaws. 

She takes numerous medications and these are attached.  She has been diagnosed as having:

Lupus. 
Addison’s disease. 
Seizures. 
Migraines.
Lumbar pain, although she has had two spinal fusions.  
Memory problem.

Jody gets headaches a little bit worse on the left side than the right side probably about a level of 6 that occur in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area.  They can escalate to 9.  Her headaches at the 6 level are relatively constant.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 8, jaw function, diet, and disability at 10.  She gets left-sided earaches, moderate tinnitus, and has severe vertigo where she has to use a walker just to keep her balance.  Other joints that bother her include almost all of her joints, but particularly her thumbs, knees, hips, fingers, neck and back.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing at nighttime.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Jody has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right side.  In profile view, Jody has probably about 4 or 5 mm of deficiency in the maxilla.  In the mandible, she is 15 to 18 mm AP deficient.  Chin neckline is short in the angles and not well defined.  In the lower arch, she is missing at least one bicuspid in each arch.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm.  She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  It is difficult to see, but the oropharyngeal tissues looked reasonably healthy.  She has had four previous sinus surgeries including turbinectomies.  Intranasally, the turbinates are pretty much absent.  The septum is reasonably straight.  She does have a significant nasal airway obstruction.  Jody has high moderate to severe pain throughout the head and neck area.  Incisal opening is 8 mm.  The excursion movements are less than 0.5 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She is also missing a bicuspid in each arch likely the first bicuspid.  She has bilateral Christensen fossa prostheses in place.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is fairly straight.  She has no medial sinus wall on the left side, but does have it on the right side.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  The turbinates have been previously removed.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows the presence of the Christensen fossa prostheses in place.  The mandibular condyle is severely arthritic. There appears to be heterotopic bone in the fossa on the anterior part of the condyle and perhaps a continuation of some of the significant anterior beaking coming off the condyle.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows severe arthritis with heterotopic bone extending off the front of the condyle.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows the presence of the Christensen prostheses and the severe arthritis in the mandibular condyle.  There appears to be a bone screw or it could be a vascular clip extending out from the anterior aspect of the condyle.  

Right TMJ coronal view likewise shows advanced arthritic changes in the condyle. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Jody has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  She has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  Her oropharyngeal airway measures about 3.5 mm at the base of the tongue and 3 mm at the soft palate level.  

Basic diagnoses for Jody would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ failed Christensen fossa prostheses. 
Bilateral TMJ heterotopic bone with ankylosis. 
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Severe AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 11 mm).
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches. 
Severe myofascial pain.
Severe vertigo.
Sleep apnea. 


Treatment recommendations for Jody include:

Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with counterclockwise rotation using TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and counter-clockwise rotate.
Bilateral coronoidotomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from abdomen).
Application of surgical stabilizing appliances.
      4.   Post surgical orthodontics to refine and retain the occlusion.