MELISSA WOOLFREY								05/22/2007

Melissa is 20 years old.  Melissa's doctors are Normand S. Boucher, DDS, 1509 McDaniel Dr., Westchester, PA, 19380, phone number is 610-430-8004; pain doctor is Daniel T. Rubino, MD, 176 E. Conestoga Rd, Devon, PA, 19333, phone number is 610-688-8580, fax is 610-687-2246 and Peter D. Quinn, DMD, 5-White 3400 Spruce St., Philadelphia, PA 19104-4283, phone number is 215-662-6176.   She has had longstanding TMJ problems.  TMJ problems began when she was about 13 years old of unknown etiology.  She has had numerous surgical procedures performed.  Her problem began initially on the left side and in 2001 she had a left eminectomy and disc repositioning procedure performed.  The disc apparently came back out of place so in approximately 2002, the left disc was repositioned once again.  In 2003, she had some bilateral TMJ debridement procedures done.  Also, around 2003 or 2004, she had bilateral meniscectomies and placement of Silastic implants.  She apparently had an adverse reaction to those and they were removed sometime in 2004 a few months after they were placed.  She also had orthodontics during the past year.  Her last surgery was in 2005 where she probably had some kind of bilateral TMJ debridement.  Melissa has no problems with earaches or tinnitus but does get vertigo.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and sometimes during the day.  She has a sleep disorder and is unable to sleep even with medication.  Pain is bad in the morning but then gets worse in the afternoons and evenings.  She gets headaches at a level of 8 throughout most of the head.  Her TMJ is 9, average daily pain 4, jaw function and diet at 7, disability at 10.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Severe TMJ pain. 
Severe headaches.
Nausea associated with severe pain. 
Cannot eat and chew.
Cannot open very wide. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION: 
Melissa has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.  Maxillary dental midline, mandibular dental midline and chin are all shifted to the left about 1 to 2 mm.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  Chin does appear retruded.  Chin-neckline is a little bit short although the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Upper lip may be retruded a couple of mm and the chin may be retruded around 10 mm.  Intraorally, Melissa has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  Likewise in the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through second molars.  There is some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch and in the upper anterior arch.  She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the left side and just slightly a Class II on the right side by maybe 1 to 2 mm.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 1.5 to 2 mm.  Oropharynx is difficult to evaluate because of limited opening but the uvula appears mildly elongated.  The soft palate and faucial pillars are very difficult to see but seem to be relatively normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates may be mildly enlarged, but not too bad.  Septum is reasonably straight.  There is some mild airway obstruction.  She also has a history mild snoring and moderate daytime somnolence but she does not report any problems with sleep apnea.  

MELISSA WOOLFREY			05/22/2007				Page 2

Melissa has had her wisdom teeth removed.  To palpation, she has moderate to high moderate pain over the temporalis and masseter muscles and SCMs, moderate tenderness over the styloids, shoulders and severe pain to the TMJs.  Her left frontal nerve is nonfunctional.  Maximal incisal opening is 21 mm but opening without severe pain is 13 mm.  She has virtually no side-to-side movements that she can do without severe pain.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars but the rest of the teeth are present.  Sinuses look clear.  Joints look arthritic as best as they can be seen.  Eminectomy evident on the left joint.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Septum is relatively straight.  Turbinates are moderate in size but there does appear to be adequate airway.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows what appears to be an arthritic joint.  There may have been an eminectomy performed on this side as well.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows very arthritic joint so there appears to be bone deposition even up in the fossa area.  Eminectomy has previously been done.  There is anterior beaking and significant flattening of the condylar head.  On opening, there is very minimal translation of either joint and opening is quite constricted.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she appears to have retrusion of the maxilla and the mandible.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 mm at the soft palate level and about 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  She has some slight vertical maxillary excess and retrusion of both the maxilla and mandible.  She has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Slight AP maxillary deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
Slight anterior vertical maxillary excess.
High occlusal plane angle.
Slight Class II occlusion on the right side.
Severe TMJ pain. 
Severe headaches.
 Myofascial pain.
 Significantly decreased oropharyngeal of 4 mm (normal 11 mm.)
 Snoring.
 Sleep disorder secondary to pain. 
 Crowding in the upper arch.
 Crowding in the lower arch.

MELISSA WOOLFREY			05/22/2007				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Medications.
a.  Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s. to help control clenching and bruxism.
Presurgical orthodontics (can use bonded brackets on all the teeth.)
Maxillary arch: Place appliances on all the teeth including second molars.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally in case interdental osteotomies are required.  
Mandibular arch:  Place brackets on all the teeth including second molars and align and level the lower arch.  Slenderize the lower incisors removing about 1 mm of tooth structure. 
CT scans of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, downgraft it posteriorly to level the occlusal plane.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.  
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
