ROXANNE YAHNER							11/11/2011

Roxanne is 59 years old, birth date 09/30/1952.  Referred by Dr. Bill Hang.  Primary concerns that Roxanne has include the following:

Headaches.
Asymmetric face.
Jaw pain.
Jaw malalignment.

I had previously talked with Roxanne over the phone on 08/13/2011.  She is now 3 months since that date.  She rates her headaches at a level of 8 throughout the head, although it varies from area to area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 3, diet at 5, disability at 7.  She has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, and a moderate occurrence of vertigo that has gotten a little bit worse since she has been wearing a palatal expander device.  She has no hearing loss.  She had 2 life stopping bouts of severe vertigo in the past.  Other joints that bother her include her right hip, lower right back, and right neck.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  She has allergies to olives, grapes, and vinegar.  She really does not have any known allergies to jewelry.  She takes the following prescription medications:

Bio identical hormones.
Estradiol.
Testosterone.
Progesterone.  
Multivitamins.

In frontal view, Roxanne does demonstrate some facial asymmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm on the right and 18 mm on the left.  Upper tooth lip is 1 mm on the left and 0 on the right.  Nasal tip is about 3 mm off to the left side.  The maxillary dental midline is 2 mm off to the left, mandibular dental midline 4 mm to the left, and chin approximately 8 mm off to the left.  The mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plan with the left side being 3 to 4 mm higher than the right.  There is a posterior yaw in the face with the right side being about 6 mm more prominent than the left side at the angle area.  There is a posterior yaw in the occlusion with the maxilla and mandible being rotated about 3 mm off towards the right side.  In profile, the upper lip is about 3 to 4 mm AP deficient.  The chin is probably about 4 to 5 mm AP deficient.  Intraorally, Roxanne has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she is missing the right maxillary central incisor and has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has an expansion appliance currently in place expanding the upper arch.  She has had the device for about 3 months.  She is fairly close to being Class I cuspid relationship.  She has a 0 vertical overbite anteriorly.  She has a tendency towards a cross bite on the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy and normal.  Intranasally, she has some septal spurring anteriorly off to the left and right sides.  The turbinates appear relatively normal in size at least anteriorly.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the masseters, right TMJ, and moderate pain over the right temporalis.  She states that her pain is worse in the mornings and she has difficulties getting to sleep at night.  The incisal opening is 47 mm.  The excursion movements are 6 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has root canals on the mandibular right second molar, maxillary left first molar.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  Joints look reasonably good.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are relatively normal in size.  Slight curvature of the septum off towards the right side.  There is a little bit of increased sinus lining on the floor of the left maxillary sinus.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is reasonably straight, although the anterior portion does tip off towards the left side.  The turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with good morphology with just some slight anterior beaking.  The joint space looks well balanced.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with some slight anterior beaking.  The joint space appears normal.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width.  There is some decreased lateral joint space particularly towards the posterior aspect of the fossa.

Right TMJ coronal view shows the decreased lateral joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she is basically a skeletal and occlusal Class I, although the maxilla and mandible may be somewhat retruded.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 to 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 6 mm at the base of the tongue.  Right commissure is about 3 mm lower than the left commissure.  

Basic diagnoses for Roxanne would be as follows:

Maxillary AP hypoplasia and transverse asymmetry.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and transverse asymmetry.
Headaches.
External nasal asymmetry.
Posterior yaw with the maxilla and mandible rotated about 6 mm towards the right side.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, transversely level and expand 			as well as correct posterior yaw.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward 			and transversely level as well as correct the posterior yaw.
	c.	External rhinoplasty to correct the nasal asymmetry.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  