BETTY WRIGHT									10-07-O4

Betty is 70 years old and referred by Dr. Duane Keller, 3929 Bayless Avenue, St. Louis, MO  63125-1437.

Patient History

Previous surgeries Betty has had include tonsillectomy, gallbladder, kidney, hysterectomy, motor cortex stimulator implant, and cataract surgery. She has high blood pressure and also she has had surgery to remove the motor cortex stimulator implant. Previous history of stomach ulcers but not now. She has had an adverse reaction to CODEINE and to DEMEROL.

She gets occasional earaches on the left side but no tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. The only other joints  that bother her are her knees. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night. She tends to do that during the day but has been taught some methods to try to minimize that. 

Her problems began relative to clicking and popping in her joint probably at least 10 years ago that she can recall. It has only been in the past five years that her problems got significantly worse. The etiology is unknown. Betty developed rather severe pain. She has had the following treatments since then:
Numerous medications
Stellate ganglion block
Radiofrequency ablation of the left trigeminal nerve
Motor cortex stimulator
Extraction of teeth
Nicos therapy
Splints
Partial dentures

None of these has been effective in managing her severe pain problems. In the last three months, Betty has begun to have headaches. They occur now about three to four times per week in the left temporal area at about a level of 4. She frequently wakes up with these headaches, and they tend to get worse during the day. She rates her TMJ pain at 10, overall pain at 10, jaw function at 7, diet at 7, and disability at 7. She has numbness on the left side of her face involving her left lower lip, chin, and cheek area.

Current Medications

Hydrocodone 7.5/500 mg, 1 tablet 3 times a day
Effexor 75 mg 1 per day
Zantac 150 mg 1 tablet 2 times a day
Topamax 25 mg 1 per day
Amitriptyline 10 mg tablets, 1 per day
Tiazac 300 mg 1 per day
Methadose 5 mg 4 times a day
Oxazepam 15 mg 1 twice a day
Avalide 300/12.5, 1 per day
Centrum Silver 1 per day

Patient Concerns

Severe pain, left side of face, that has been present for four or five years
Difficulties eating
Difficulties talking
A pulling sensation recently developed in the left eye

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Betty has fairly good facial symmetry. Chin may be deviated a little bit off toward the left side probably 2 to 3 mm. Maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are pretty much on the facial midline. Left side of the mandible is shorter vertically by probably 3 to 4 mm. 

In profile, she has good facial balance. 

Intraorally, she is missing a third molar on the mandibular right side, and on the left side is missing a second bicuspid and all three molars. She has a crown on the first bicuspid. In the upper arch, she has a partial denture in. She is missing the right first, second, and third molars. She is also missing the second bicuspid and has a cantilever crown replacing that tooth. On the left side, she is missing the second and third molars. She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship. She has just a very slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1 to 2 mm higher than the right side. The oropharynx appears clear. Uvula and soft palate look pretty much normal as does the posterior pharyngeal wall area and the faucial pillars. She reports no difficulties breathing through her nose. She is not aware of any problems with snoring. Maximum incisal opening is 21 mm, and she can open about 15 without developing severe pain. Excursive movement to the right surprisingly is about 10 mm and to the left 9 mm. However, there is severe crepitus on that left joint if she does that, and it is very painful for her to do those movements. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex evaluation shows the sinuses appear relatively clear. Left side appears a little bit more fuzzy than the right side. Missing mandibular left second bicuspid and all three molars and missing the right third molar. In the maxillary arch, missing the left second and third molar and the right second bicuspid and all three molars. Appears that she may have a fairly good size lesion beneath the crown on the first bicuspid on that side. Right condyle appears somewhat arthritic. Left condyle appears severely arthritic with significant loss of anteroposterior dimension of the condyle. There is a significant amount of alveolar ridge atrophy in the mandibular arch on the left side. Appears to have loss of vertical height of the condyle on the left side as well.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite small in anteroposterior dimension. Condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Moderate decreased slope to the articular eminence. Condyle is postured posterior in the fossa. Could be a small osteophyte coming off the head of the condyle perhaps. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be fairly well-centered in the fossa. A little bit of a hockey stick shape to the condyle. A little bit of anterior beaking present. Joint space looks reasonable. Moderate slope to the articular eminence. 

On opening, there is moderately good translation. The condyle is coming down toward the inferior aspect of the eminence. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class I occlusal relationship. Inferior border of the mandible is at different levels with probably the left side being shorter than the right side. Appears to be missing some of the molars in the upper arch. 
Waters view shows that the nasal airway appears good, and the sinuses appear clear. She has a plate in the right cranium. Betty did have some significant problems with vertigo when she first developed the more severe aspect of her current situation. That has subsided. On two different occasions, Betty has had local anesthetic injected into her left TMJ area. In both instances, the pain went away. One time it was injected by Dr. Ken Rotskoff and the other time by Dr. Duane Keller. 

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe deformation of the disc and perforations
Left TMJ severe pain
Left side myofascial pain
Left side headaches
Masticatory dysfunction
Missing mandibular left second bicuspid and all three molars and missing the right third molar. In the maxillary arch, missing the left second and third molar and the right second bicuspid and all three molars
Partial dentures have been constructed, but she is unable to wear the mandibular partial

Recommended Treatment

Dental treatment as necessary to assure preservation of the remaining teeth

CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Left TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis
Left TMJ fat graft (harvested from abdomen)
Application of arch bars

Any dental restorations and restorative work that may be indicated that could include the placement of osseointegrated implants to replace missing teeth