PEGGY WYATT									08-26-02

Peggy is 49 years old.

Patient History

Peggy has had a partial hysterectomy in 1983, and she had her gallbladder removed in 1971. Early in 2000, Peggy fell on a treadmill. It apparently struck her in the mouth area and pushed the lower jaw downwards and off to the side. Since that time, she has been very much aware of having some jaw joint problems. Apparently she began having some problems after placement of some osseointegrated implants into the mandible. At times, she said, it would cause the lower jaw to go backwards. She was aware of having pain in her joints at that time. However , it wasn’t until after the fall that she developed significant worsening problems. 

Peggy received her dental implants in about ’94 or ’95. About seven months later she had her fixed lower denture placed and full upper denture placed. This is when she began to have some problems. However, it wasn’t until the fall in 2000 that her symptoms became quite a bit worse. She has a splint she wears between the upper and lower teeth that is on the lower teeth that was constructed in January of 2002.

She has problems with earaches, tinnitus, and occasional vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her neck, back, and shoulders. No significant allergies problems, and no problems wearing jewelry. She drinks about one cup of coffee per day and smokes about one-half pack per week. She has rather constant headaches that she rates at about a level of 7 and occurs in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. They can escalate to 10. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, overall pain at 7, jaw function at 8, diet at 4, disability at 9. She does have some problems breathing through her nose.

Current Medications

She currently takes the following medications:

Lodine
Soma
Oxycontin 40 mg b.i.d. 

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, middle and upper third face appear to have fairly good balance. Some mild asymmetry in the lower jaw with the left side being a little bit shorter vertically probably no more than 3 to 4 mm. The maxillary dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline, just a little bit off to the left about a millimeter. Chin is a little bit off to the left a couple of millimeters. Peggy apparently had even more foreshortening on the left side, but she has been giving herself massages and feels that the left side of the face has lengthened some for her. 

In profile, just some slight AP mandibular deficiency by maybe 4 or 5 mm. Chin-neckline is a little bit short, and chin-neck angle is not well defined.

Intraorally, she has a lower removable denture and an upper full denture. Lower denture fits over dental implants. She occludes into a fairly nice occlusion without the splint in with just a slight Class II tendency on the left side. She had a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being probably about 3 mm higher than the right side. It is also evident when she smiles that she shows more of her upper denture on the right side as compared to the left side. Oropharynx appears clear and healthy.

Intranasally, turbinates appear relatively normal in size, and there appears to be good airway and no particular significant inflammatory response. She has a very wide columella base, which makes the nostrils somewhat narrow and constricted. With opening up the nostrils with the scope, she had significant improvement in her abilities to breathe through her nose.

On opening, TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly. On excursive movements, there was some crepitation in the left joint, and right side was difficult to tell. To palpation, she has high moderate to severe pain over the TMJs, styloid areas, high moderate pain over the posterior neck and shoulder areas, SCMs, temporalis, and moderate pain over the masseter muscles. She has had some recent dentures made, but when she wears those, it sets her pain levels off to a 10. She sort of mixes and matches her dentures right how, and that in combination with the splint helps keep her a little bit more reasonably in comfort.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Nasal airway looks relatively clear. Condyles look relatively normal with maybe a little sclerosis on the left side. Seven osseointegrated implants are present in the mandible. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear, and the nasal airway appears reasonably good. Left side of the mandible is seen to be shorter vertically as compared to the right side by probably about 3 mm. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head and a little sclerosis present. Condyle actually appears to be postured forward with an increased posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There may be a slight decreased joint space anteriorly. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a joint with a decreased posterior joint space fairly significantly where it appears the bones are almost touching. Decreased anterosuperior joint space between the condyle and articular eminence. Condyle appears flattened and has a little sclerosis on the top of it. Styloid process is moderately elongated on that side. It was not quite as obvious on the opposite side. Translation is restricted in both joints. 

Cephalometrically, she appears to have perhaps a slight Class II skeletal relationship. She has significant loss of alveolar bone height in the mandible. Oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue, the posterior pharyngeal wall is about 8 mm, and from the soft palate, the posterior tongue is about 6 mm. She does not report any symptoms of sleep apnea. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with probable perforations.
Left mandibular vertical hypoplasia.
Wide columella base creating narrow nostrils.
Nasal airway obstruction due to #3 above.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Severe myofascial pain.

Recommended Treatment

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Left mandibular ramus osteotomy with bone screw stabilization.
Reconstruct columella.
Rigid fixation of dentures to maxilla and mandible to facilitate surgery.
Splint construction to control occlusion.
Restorative Prosthodontics for construction of new dentures.