JESSICA YAKER									06/16/2007

Jessica is 29 years old and is referred by Dr. Larry Stewart.  Jessica's problems to the best of her knowledge began about 7 years ago when she began waking up with soreness around her jaw areas.  She first became aware of changes occurring in her bite and in her profile about January of 2007.  She noticed that both her front teeth no longer touched together and her bite was opening more and her profile was changing with her lower jaw becoming more retruded.  About 7 years ago she did start out with some splint therapy to try to decrease her nocturnal clenching and she would wear it sometimes.  She sometimes will feel her lower jaw shifting into a different position that happens to her automatically and makes her bite and jaw relationship feel very awkward.  She did have orthodontics from the age of 13 to 14 with a good occlusal result.  She has photographs from 2001 that showed her bite undergoing some changes at that time where you can see the bite beginning to open.  The etiology of her problem is unknown.  She has had laboratory tests done for rheumatoid factor ANA, C-reactive protein etc. and all of those evaluations were negative.  Jessica feels that her speech is being affected.  She wakes up with severe soreness in her jaws that she points to primarily the masseter and the posterior mandibular area but not to the joints per se.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  She gets headaches only about 2 times a month and they are usually in the back of her head at about a level of 6.  She has no pain directly in the TMJ area at this time.  Her average daily pain is about a level of 6 and this is the pain she wakes up with in the morning.  She rates her jaw function at 7, diet at 5, disability at 4. 

In the frontal view, Jessica has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  She may have a little bit of increased fullness in the left masseter area as compared to the right side.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 to 3 mm.  Maxillary midline might be about ½ mm to the left.  Chin appears it may be about 2 mm to the left.  A little bit of orbital dystopia with the right eye being slightly higher than the left eye maybe 2 mm.  In profile view, she has some slight infraorbital hyperplasia of maybe 3 mm.  Upper lip appears to have fairly good projection.  The nasolabial angle appears well formed.  The upper lip may be retruded in the subnasale area about maybe 2 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded by about 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is extremely short though the chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined.  When Jessica is in centric relation, the mandible is deviated about 2 mm off towards the left side.  Chin is probably about 3 to 4 mm off to the left side.  Jessica has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side by probably 4 mm and on the left side she is probably 5 mm Class II.  In centric relation she occludes only on the left second molars.  All other teeth are out of occlusion.  In centric relation she does occlude at times only on the left second molar but other times as I placed her into a centric relation she could feel the right second molar also touch.  All other teeth are out of occlusion.  She has a 4 mm anterior open bite.  She has a tendency towards a buccal crossbite on the right side and a tendency towards a posterior crossbite on the left side.  To palpation, she has fairly moderate to very high moderate discomfort and pain over the masseters, TMJs, styloid areas, SCMs, posterior neck and shoulders.  On opening, left joint seems fairly smooth, the right side has some crepitus.  When she chews she tends to chew more on the right side than the left side.  Maximal incisal opening is 31 mm.  Opening without significant pain 26 mm.  Excursive movements about 6 to 7 mm in each direction.  She has moderate to severe snoring.  She has moderate daytime somnolence and probably moderate sleep apnea.  She tosses and turns a lot when she sleeps at night and does not appear to have a very restful sleep.  
JESSICA YAKER				06/16/2007				Page 2

Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The septum appears relatively normal.  She probably has some moderate nasal airway obstruction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear enlarged particularly on the left side.  Condyles appear severely degenerated and resorbed particularly with the left side worse than the right side.  There is a crown on the mandibular left first molar.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  She has large frontal sinuses.  Bony septum has a little bit of a curvature to it but not too bad.  Turbinates appear enlarged and the airway space appears constricted.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows severe resorption of the condyle and some flattening of the articular eminence.  The remaining condyle is postured somewhat forward in the fossa.  There appears to be osteophytic extension posterior and perhaps anterior as well. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone condylar resorption.  There appears to be decreased joint space superiorly.  This condyle is a little bit larger than the opposite side.  Articular eminence appears somewhat flattened.  On opening there is restricted translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Jessica has a high occlusal plane angle being greater in the mandible than the maxilla.  She has a skeletal Class II and occlusal Class II jaw relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway dimension at the soft palate level measures about 4 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 3.5 to 4 mm.  Jessica does have a feeling that she is always choking.  She has difficulties eating and swallowing because she gets a choking sensation that could be due to the decreased oropharyngeal airway dimension.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ condylar resorption (probable adolescent internal condylar resorption versus reactive arthritis versus connective tissue autoimmune disease process.)  
AP mandibular deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
Anterior open bite of 4 mm.
End-on Class II occlusion being a little bit worse on the left side as compared to the right side.
Occluding only on the second molars in centric relation. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of about 3.5 to 4 mm (normal 11 mm.)
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
 Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Nasal airway obstruction. 
 Sleep apnea. 
JESSICA YAKER				06/16/2007				Page 3

 Snoring. 
 Daytime somnolence. 
 High occlusal plane angle.
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3.5 mm. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Place brackets on second molars but do not include the second molars in the archwire.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 3 mm of tooth structure and retract.  Place brackets on the second molars but do not include them in the archwire. 
CT scans of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and decrease the occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.