TAYLOR WOODWORTH								11-24-04

Taylor is 14 years old and referred by Dr. Maryam Mojdehi-Barnes, 1223 W. McDermott Drive, #15, Allen, TX  75013.

Patient Concerns

Jaw joints pop
Jaw locks up particularly on the right side
Bite doesn’t fit very well, and he has at least three different bites
Crossbite
Nose always stopped up
Predominantly breathes through mouth
Disruptive sleep pattern
Wakes up a lot at night
Snoring
Significant tiredness during the day
No other joint problems

Patient History

Taylor has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or hearing loss but does sometimes have some lightheadedness and dizziness. No other joints bother him. His problems began within the past year of unknown etiology. He has had no treatment for his jaw problems to date. He gets weekly headaches that occur at about a level of 6 in the temporal and posterior head area. He does get fairly severe migraines about two times per month that generally occur at a level of 8. They have been getting progressively worse as far as magnitude and increased time frequency. His headaches began about the same time his TMJ problems began, particularly the migraine-type headaches. Sometimes these headaches can get to a level of 10. He rates his TMJ pain at 4, overall average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 7, diet at 3, and disability at 4. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Taylor has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary midline is shifted off to the left side a couple of millimeters. Mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline as is the chin. 

In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is fairly close to being in alignment with subnasale. Maxilla appears to be AP deficient by probably about 6 mm. Mandible is retruded by probably 20 to 25 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short and chin-neckline is not really well-defined. Taylor tends to hold his head so that his mandible is rotated forward, head tipped backward, and his chin postured forward. He has a head held forward neck posture. 

Intraorally, Taylor has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth are fairly well-aligned. Has acceptable attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side of about 1 to 2 mm, and on the left side it is closer to about 4 to 5 mm. Does have an anterior crossbite with an end-on incisor relationship. Oropharynx area appears relatively clear. Uvula is elongated. Soft palate looks relatively normal in length although could be mildly elongated. Faucial pillars may be a little bit constricted but not too bad. Tonsils are present and of moderate size. 

Intranasally, the septum looks reasonably straight. Turbinates are quite enlarged probably contributory to his nasal airway problems and probably to his allergy problems. On opening and closing, he has clicking and popping in both joints. On opening, it is a little bit more difficult to identify, but on the left side it appeared it occurred around 15 mm of opening, and on the right side at probably 20. On closing, it occurs at about 15 mm on the right side and 5 mm on the left side. Maximal opening is about 54 mm, and excursive movement to the right 9 mm and to the left 7 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four developing third molars with inadequate space to erupt into position. The rest of the teeth are all present. He has a root canal on the mandibular right second molar. Sinuses look a little bit cloudy. Condyle is fairly flattened anteriorly. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively cloudy. Nose shows that the right turbinate is significantly larger than the left. Seems to be more obstruction in the vertical midportion of the nasal cavity. Frontal sinuses are rather larger but also are clear. Maxillary sinuses are clear. 

Left TMJ tomograms show a joint that seems to have fairly good space. Articular eminence is a little bit shallow. Joint space appears fairly well-balanced but difficult to tell for sure. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Some flattening of the anterior head and some anterior beaking present.

On opening, he has good translation of both condyles. 

Cephalometrically, Taylor has a high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway actually looks fairly good. Has a skeletal Class II relationship but a slight Class III occlusal relationship. Appears that Taylor has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 4 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with reduction on the left side and nonreducing on the right side
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary excess
AP mandibular deficiency
AP microgenia
Class III end-on occlusion being worse on the left side as compared to the right side
Maxillary midline shifted to the left 2 mm
Severe headaches
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Snoring
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction
Sleep apnea symptoms
Restless sleep
Daytime somnolence
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 to 3 mm

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies  
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the tooth-size discrepancy 

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, downgraft it posteriorly, and correct any transverse discrepancy
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4
Augmentation genioplasty

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 