CHANDLER WRIGHT							08/09/2010

Chandler is 14 years old, birth date 04/28/1996.  Referred by Dr. Todd Hickman, 8001 Shelby Street, Indianapolis, IN 46227.  

Chandler has no trouble with headaches, TMJ pain, normal myofascial pain.  He rates his jaw function, diet, and disability all at zero.  The onset of his joint problems was probably around in 2005 to 2006 of unknown etiology.  He has had some orthodontic treatment involving just head gear, but he has not had full orthodontic appliances yet.  He had his wisdom teeth removed in July 2010.  He takes no medications.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  The only other joint that bothers him is his right knee.  He is aware of clenching sometimes at night and in the past did have some bruxism, but does not believe he has that currently.  Chandler reports no problems with snoring, but has some mild daytime somnolence.  He is unaware of sleep apnea or any sleep disorder.  He is predominantly a nasal breather when sleeping.  Primary concern that Chandler is resorption of the mandibular condyles.  

In frontal view, Chandler has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 to 3 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are fairly well aligned with the facial midline.  The maxilla may be retruded about 2 to 3 mm.  In profile view, he has good projection of the upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  The chin is retruded about 20 mm.  The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is obtuse.  Intraorally, Chandler has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  There is some moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch.  He seems to have adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, Chandler has all of his teeth just back through the first molar erupted.  He has a Class II occlusion and slightly more so on the left side than the right side.  He has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the turbinates may be mild to moderately enlarged.  The maximal incisal opening is 50 mm.  The excursion movements are 7 mm in each direction.  To palpation, he has no pain around the head and neck area.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The maxillary second molars and mandibular left second molar are unerupted but the right side is partially erupted.  He has significant loss of vertical height of both condyles.  He has brackets on the maxillary first molars and a transpalatal arch wire present.  His sinuses are full of fluid.

Coronal radiograph shows that the right turbinate is quite enlarged and appears to be blocking a portion of the airway, but the left side appears relatively normal.  Both sinuses are full of fluid and material.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are full of fluid and/or material.  The septum is straight.  The right turbinate is enlarged. 

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show significant vertical loss of the condyle and decreased vertical joint space anteriorly.  The condyle is postured forward in the fossa slightly.  The articular eminence is fairly flat.  There is an osteophyte extending off the posterior head of the condyle. 

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show the condyle is almost completely resorbed.  The condyle is postured forward in the fossa.  The articular eminence is fairly flat.  There is increased posterior joint space. 

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show that there has been significant loss of the mediolateral width and particularly the vertical dimension of the condyle.  The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat, although there is some decreased joint space at the lateral aspect.  

Right TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that is narrow mediolaterally and has lost significant vertical volume.  The lateral rim of the fossa is quite flat.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Chandler has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  He has a high occlusal plane angle and mandible plane angle.  The oropharyngeal airway is quite constricted with an airway dimension of about 3 mm at the base of the tongue and also at the soft palate.

Tooth size analysis reveals a Bolton’s discrepancy of about 3 mm in the anterior 6 teeth and probably about almost 0.5 mm with each of the bicuspids.  

Basic diagnoses for Chandler would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary posterior vertical hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Class II occlusion.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal AP dimension is 11 mm).
Hypertrophied right turbinate.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm.
Crowding in the lower anterior arch. 
Over angulation of lower incisors. 
Bilateral maxillary sinusitis. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	ENT consultation to treat chronic maxillary sinusitis. 
2.	Sleep study.
3.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots 		distally to make room for interdental osteotomies if they are needed.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 3 			mm of tooth structure to correct for the anterior tooth size discrepancy.  Also 			consider slenderizing the bicuspids removing about 0.5 mm from each bicuspid 			tooth.  Maximize posterior anchorage and retract.
4.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
5.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts 			total joint prostheses.  
	b.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly.
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Right inferior turbinectomy.
	e.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
	f.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy.
6.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 