QINGLIU (MARY) YANG								10/6/05

Mary is 14 years old, referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich, 3105 Legacy Dr., Ste. A, Plano, TX 75023.  Mary is in good health with no major medical problems.  She takes no medications and is not allergic to any medications.  Mary's problem began when she was about 11 years old of unknown etiology.  She first noticed then that her lower jaw was starting to shift off towards the right side.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Jaw is crooked with the lower jaw being shifted off the right side.
Popping the jaw joints.
Headaches.
Teeth and jaws do not fit together.

She gets occasional earaches and occasional tinnitus but no vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She gets headaches about two times a week about a level of 4 in the temple areas.  She is not aware of having TMJ pain per se.  On an average day her levels are about a 2.  She rates her jaw function at 2, diet at 1, disability at 3.  To date, she has had no treatment for her jaw and joint factors.  

In frontal view, Mary has good facial symmetry in middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary dental midline is just a little bit off towards the left side about 1 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is off towards the right side about 3.5 mm.  Chin is about 5 to 6 mm off to the right side.  Mandibular dental and chin are fairly well aligned with each other.  In profile, Mary has fairly good facial balance.  Chin-neckline is reasonably well defined and of normal length.  Intraorally, Mary has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars erupted in.  She has lingual inclination of the lower posterior teeth particularly on the right side.  She has some minimal crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has reverse curve of Wilson on the left side and accentuated curve of Wilson on the right side in the upper arch.  She has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and almost a full Class III cuspid relationship on the left side.  She has a crossbite tendency on the right side and width of the curves of Wilson were corrected.  On the left side, no crossbite is present.  On the anterior arch, she actually has a wear facet squared off in the right central incisor due to traumatic occlusion with the mandibular right central incisor.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively good.  However, tonsils are hyperplastic particularly the right one which comes almost to the midline but not quite.  The left one is quite large as well but smaller than the right side.  Oropharyngeal airway is obliterated at least probably half of the normal dimension because of the tonsils.  Mary's mother does report that Mary does have some mild snoring.  However, she has no daytime somnolence and apparently no sleep apnea problems.  Maximal incisal opening is about 53 mm.  Excursive movements are about 5 mm in each direction but it was uncomfortable and actually a little bit painful particularly when she went towards the right side.  
QINGLUI (MARY) YANG			10/6/05				Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of 3 impacted third molars in bilateral and lower arch in the upper right side.  The left side does not appear to have a third molar.  The rest of the teeth are present.  Apparently, the maxillary left second molar is with a little bit of delayed interruption.  The sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  The left condylar head and neck appears longer than the right side.  Vertical height of the mandible may be just a mm or two longer on the left side as compared to the right side.  

Waters view shows that the turbinates appear fairly large and seem to block most the lower airway but in the mid part of the turbinates superiorly, the airway looks better.  The bony septum appears reasonably straight.  Asymmetry of the mandible is seen vertically as well as transversely.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little flattened on the posterior head.  There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows what appears to be elongated condylar head and neck.  The top of the condyle may be a little bit oddly shaped.  Articular eminence is fairly shallow.  On opening, there is good translation in both joints.  The left condylar head and neck appear broader in width than the right side.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Mary has a relative high occlusal plane angle and skeletal Class III tendency.  The oropharyngeal airway looks fairly reasonable.  A little bit of lip incompetence is present probably about 5 mm.  Mary demonstrates a slightly reversed tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of -1 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Left mandibular condylar osteochondroma/osteoma.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations.
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Vertical maxillary excess but transverse maxillary deficiency.
Class I cuspid on the right side but Class III cuspid on the left side.
Cross bite tendency on the left side.
Increased curve of Wilson particularly on the right posterior mandibular arch and maxillary right posterior arch but reverse curve of Wilson in the left posterior arch.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Impacted mandibular third molars x2 and maxillary right third molar.
Fractured maxillary right central incisor lateral incisal edge secondary to traumatic occlusion.  
High occlusal plane angle.
Hypertrophied tonsils that obstruct about 1/2 of the available oropharyngeal airway.
Snoring.
Overangulation of maxillary incisors.  
QINGLUI (MARY) YANG			10/6/05				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Left mandibular low condylectomy.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back onto the facial midline and level transversely.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to establish occlusion.
Removal of impacted third molars x3.
Bilateral tonsillectomy (by Dr. Larry Weprin.)
     3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

