JHON YANG										07-07-04

Jhon is 15 years old and referred by Dr. Richard Ingraham, 5525 Staples, Bldg. C, Corpus Christi, TX  78411.

Patient History

Jhon has had previous surgery including a transplant of the hip bone to the alveolar cleft by Dr. Drinker in 1999. Otherwise he is in good health. Takes no medications. Has no known allergies. Jhon was born with a unilateral left cleft lip and palate. He had the lip and palate repaired in infancy. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Jhon has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -5 mm. Transverse width from commissure to commissure is slightly less than 30 mm. 

In profile view, with an increased freeway space to where his lips would start to separate, he has good AP projection of the mandible. Maxilla appears AP deficient. Perinasal areas appear deficient. The tip of the nose appears to have ptosis. Upper lip appears retruded. When Jhon bites together all the way, he is overclosed vertically, and the mandible becomes a little bit more prominent anteroposteriorly.

Intraorally, Jhon has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars except he is missing the left second bicuspid as that tooth never developed. He has a spacer in that area. Has mamelons on the lower incisors. Has very thin attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.

In the upper arch, he is missing the left bicuspid and right first bicuspid and left lateral incisor. Jhon has a severe Class III malocclusion. When he bites together he occludes only the maxillary first molars and mandibular second molars. All other teeth are out of occlusion. Jhon has a repaired soft palate. Faucial pillars come to a pyramid apex at the soft palate. May have some VPI but difficult to tell. Seems to have reasonable function of the soft palate musculature. Oropharynx appears clear. 

Jhon has severe deviation of the nasal septum off toward the left side. Cannot see the turbinate on the left side. Turbinate on the right side appears relatively normal in size. 

TMJs seem to function smoothly.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex  shows the presence of four impacted third molars. Missing maxillary first bicuspids and left lateral incisor. Nasal septum is deviated off toward the left side. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Missing mandibular left second bicuspid but with a space maintainer in position. Condylar head and necks look slightly elongated. He has a high mandibular plane angle and decreased posterior vertical mandibular height.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly normal architecture. May have some elongation of the condylar head and neck area. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Joint space looks a little bit narrow. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is shallow. Joint space is a little bit better identifiable on this side although still is somewhat thin superiorly.
On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Severe septal deviation off toward the left side with a huge septal spur that appears to be obliterating most of the airway on the left side. On the right side, the airway does not look very clear, and this could be due to perhaps the turbinate being large particularly toward the posterior aspect of the nose. 

Cephalometrically, he has a relatively high occlusal plane angle and a high mandibular plane angle. Severe Class III jaw relationship. From an occlusal standpoint, the maxilla is almost 20 mm AP deficient. Oropharyngeal airway looks adequate. 

Basic Diagnoses

Repaired unilateral left cleft lip and palate
Severe AP maxillary deficiency
Severe vertical maxillary deficiency
Mandibular prognathism
Super Class III cuspid relationship
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites
Missing maxillary left lateral incisor, first bicuspid, right first bicuspid and mandibular left second bicuspid with space maintainer present
Increased curve of Wilson, lower arch
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars
Severely deviated nasal septum and nasal spurring
Decreased nasal airway on the left side

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Try to maintain current maxillary midline
Align and level mandibular arch. Maintain the space in the lower left second bicuspid

Re-evaluate to be sure that growth is complete

Surgery
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 10 mm and downgraft it 10 mm
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4
Nasal septoplasty

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
 
Restorative dentistry to recontour maxillary left cuspid to function as a lateral incisor

