CINDY YEOMAN									12/09/2005

Cindy is 45 years old, referred by William Hang, DDS, MSD.  Cindy has had a previous collar bone that apparently was operated on and she has had her tonsils removed.  Cindy is in good health with no major medical problems.  She takes no medications except for Excedrin for her headaches.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Difficulty breathing through the nose.
Headaches.
Tension in the head and neck area.
Difficulty breathing.
Only the back teeth cut and she can only chew on the right side.
Sleeping difficulties.
Predominant mouth breather.
Significant daytime tiredness.

Cindy has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or hearing loss, but does get occasional vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her left elbow and right 5th finger.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing at night.  In fact, she feels she usually sleeps with her mouth open and she will frequently have a dry mouth in the morning and a sore throat.  The onset of her problems associated with the jaw joints may have began in her teen years of unknown etiology.  She remembers her mother taking her to the doctor for headaches in her early teens.  Cindy gets headaches about every 10 days or so and they seem to involve most of the head area at about a level of 7.  She relates no specific pain in the jaw joints.  She rates her levels on an average day at about 4 although it is not there all the time.  She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 8, disability at 8.  

In frontal view, Cindy has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 26 mm.  Maxillary midline may be 1-2 mm to the right.  Mandibular midline is 1 mm to the left facial midline.  In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale.  Maxilla is probably deficient by probably about 1 mm or so.  The maxilla is retruded by probably about 4 mm.  Chin is retruded by probably 15 to 18 mm.  Chin-neckline is short and no definition on the chin-neck angle.  Intraorally, Cindy is missing mandibular left 2nd molar and all 4 3rd molars.  She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the 2nd molars.  In centric relation, mandible and chin may be 1 mm off to the right.  In centric relation there is 2 to 3 mm of discrepancy between the midlines.  She is Class II end-on by probably 4 to 5 mm on the left side and probably 2 mm on the right .  There is about 2 mm open bite.  In centric occlusion, she occludes only on the right second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.  To palpation, Cindy has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  She does have crepitation in both joints.  Maximal incisal opening is about 50 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 10 mm, to the left 12 mm.  
CINDY YEOMAN 				12/09/2005				Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Cindy is missing all four third molars and the mandibular left second molar.  She has root canals on the maxillary right first bicuspid, second bicuspid, first molar, maxillary left central incisor, lateral incisor, first and second bicuspid, first and second molars, mandibular left first molar, mandibular right first molar.  She has crowns on all the posterior teeth from the bicuspids posteriorly as well as the left central and lateral incisors.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The joints look arthritic. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear although a little bit cloudy in both of them.  The left turbinate looks huge.  The nose is almost totally blocked off.  The nasal septum is deviated in the bony septum off to the right side.  Right turbinate looks relatively small though the entire transverse width is very constricted.  The left turbinate does look incredibly large or it is possible there could be a nasal polyp in there. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a joint that appears arthritic.  Articular eminence is relatively moderate in steepness.  Significantly decreased vertical joint space indicative of displaced disc.  Posterior joint space is also decreased.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic.  There is significant anterior beaking present.  Decreased superior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is actually fairly good translation of the condyles and both condyles come down beneath the articular eminence.  The arthritic changes in the condyles can be appreciated in this view with anterior beaking in both joints.  There is also significant decreased joint space with there even being less joint space on the right side as compared to the left side.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla appears AP retruded and the mandible is significantly AP retruded.  Anterior open bite and an overjet of about 6 mm.  The occlusal plane appears high.  The oropharyngeal airway is severely constricted with the airway dimension of about 3 mm at the soft palate level and no more than 4 mm at the base of the tongue.  The lower incisors appear a little bit overangulated.  Tooth size analysis shows a Bolton's difference of 1 mm.  However, the right maxillary central incisor crown is at least 1.5 mm larger than the left central incisor crown.

BASIC DIAGNOSES 
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe deformation, degeneration and nonsalvageable.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II occlusion being significantly worse than the left side as compared to the right side. 
High occlusal plane angle.
CINDY YEOMAN				12/09/2005				Page 3



Anterior open bite and left-sided open bite.
Occluding only on the right second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.
Left-sided crossbite.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal septal deviation.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Snoring.
Daytime somnolence.
Masticatory dysfunction. 
Headaches. 
Overangulation of lower incisors.
Sleep disorder.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip the lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward and to correct the small tooth size discrepancy (1 to 2 mm.)
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly, advance it slightly and expand.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Nasoseptoplasty. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

