DYLAN YOUNG									01/21/2010

Dylan is 20 years old and referred by Dr. George Adams.  Dylan is in good health with no major medical problems.  His TMJ problems began when he was perhaps around 10 to 12 years of age when he noted clicking in his jaws.  The etiology is unknown.  He had some orthodontic treatment from the age of 10 to 13 by Dr. Ron Perkins.  Four days ago, he had a septoplasty and possibly turbinectomies.  Primary concerns that Dylan has include the following:

Jaw pain. 
Clicking in the jaw joints. 
Difficulties talking.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Difficulties breathing.
Gummy smile.
Small lower jaw.
Airway congestion problems.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Dylan has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  The right eye is about 3 or 4 mm lower than the left eye.  Upper lip length is 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 4 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and dental midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  The nasal tip is shifted off towards the right side at least 2 mm.  In profile view, Dylan has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably 4-5 mm.  The chin is retruded by almost 20 mm.  The chin neckline is extremely short and chin neck angle is not too well defined.  Dylan has a lip incompetence of about 8 mm.  Intraorally, Dylan has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present.  He has moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch, but has good attached gingiva.  The transverse width of the lower arch is very constricted.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  His arch also is narrow.  He has just a slight Class II cuspid relationship by maybe 1-2 mm.  He has an anterior vertical overbite of about 1.5 mm.  Transversely, the right cuspid may be about 1 mm lower than the left side.  The oropharyngeal issues look relatively healthy.  The fascial pillars are mild to moderately constricted.  It is difficult to evaluate Dylan intranasally because of the recent surgery and the associated discomfort.  To palpation, Dylan has some moderate tenderness over the TMJs and milder tenderness over the temporalis, retromandibular area and SCMs.  On opening and closing, the joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 41 mm, but opening without pain and discomfort 23 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 8 mm, to the left 10 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but the rest of the teeth are present.  Bony septum looks reasonably straight.  There is a little bit of fluid in the sinuses more so on the left side than the right side, but could be associated with his previous surgery done just 4 days ago. 


Coronal view shows that there is fluid in the sinuses, greater on the left side than the right side, but again likely from the previous surgery.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  The septum appears wide and probably due to the edema from the recent surgery.  The turbinates do appear to be moderate in size.  In one view, it shows that there is a mucocele on the posterior wall of the right maxillary sinus.

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that appears to have undergone some resorption.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence has a mild inclination.  The joint space appears fairly well balanced. 

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle with some anterior beaking present.  The joint space looks fairly well balanced.  Cortical bone on top of the condyle appears a little bit thin. 

Left TMJ coronal view tomograms show a condyle that appears to have lost some vertical dimension.  The mediolateral width may be a little bit narrow.  The joint space looks fairly well balanced.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.
 
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have thin bone on top, but has a little bit better shape than the opposite side.  There appears to be reasonably good joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Dylan has an anterior vertical maxillary excess and posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.  The mandible is AP deficient.  He has a high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway measures maybe 3 mm at the base of the tongue and at the soft palate level.  He has significant lip incompetence present.

Basic diagnosis for Dylan would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ condylar resorption and articular disc dislocations without reduction with significant degeneration and deformation of the discs.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia as well as anterior vertical hyperplasia.
Slight Class II end-on occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal AP dimension is 11 mm).
TMJ pain. 
Myofascial pain. 
Daytime somnolence.
Crowding in the lower anterior arch.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2.5 mm. 
Narrow transverse width of the maxillary and mandibular dental arches. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and 
                        cuspid roots distally in case interdental osteotomies are required.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 			about 2.5 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
	c.	Try to expand transverse width of the arches orthodontically. 
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise 			rotation with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment chin 5-6 mm.
	d.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen or buttock).
	e.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 