STACEY YOUNG									08/03/2006

Stacey is 26 years old, referred by Dr. Eugene King.  Her current treating orthodontist is 
Dr. Wesley Shankland, II, 158 Commerce Park Drive, Westerville, Ohio 43008.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Severe jaw pain. 
Jaw exhausts easily when eating.
Severe neck, shoulder and upper back pain. 
Major difficulties eating and chewing. 
Difficulties opening her mouth and is unable to get necessary dental treatment.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: 
Allegra D b.i.d.
Prevacid 30 mg b.i.d.
Levbid b.i.d.
Toprol XL 25 mg daily. 
Synthroid 0.075 mg 
Duricef 500 mg daily.
Duragesic patch 50 mcg q.48h.
Actiq 400 mcg p.r.n. 
Kariva BCP.
  Trazodone 50 mg p.r.n. 
  Promethazine 25 mg p.r.n. 
  Citrucel 500 mg b.i.d.
  Percocet 5/500 p.r.n. 
  Vicodin ES 7.5/750 p.r.n. 

PREVIOUS SURGERIES: 
Surgery on her right pinky finger in 1994 for severed tendons and ligaments.
Tonsils and adenoidectomy in 1998.
Wisdom teeth in 1997. 

Stacey has some problems with earaches, right side worse than the left but no tinnitus.  She gets frequent bouts of vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her right knee, fingers and wrists but they are not nearly as significant as the jaw joints.  

MEDICAL CONDITIONS: 
Irritable bowel syndrome.
Hypothyroidism.
Mitral valve prolapse.
Fibromyalgia.
Anemia.
Possible chronic fatigue syndrome.
TMJ jaw problems. 

STACEY YOUNG				08/03/2006				Page 2

In frontal view, Stacy has fairly good left to right facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is 5 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline.  Nasal tip is just slightly off to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline is on the facial midline.  Chin seems to be deviated a little bit towards the right side perhaps 1 to 2 mm.  Right eye is a little bit higher than the left by probably 2 mm.  In profile view, maxilla appears to be retruded by about 3 to 4 mm and the chin is retruded by probably about 10 mm.  Chin-neckline is a little bit short and chin-neck angle is moderately well defined.  She has a little bit of ptosis of the nasal tip.  Intraorally, Stacey has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  A little bit of crowding and malalignment in the bicuspid area and the central incisors.  She has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship but does have the crossbite on the right side and a crossbite in the second bicuspid area on the left side.  She has about a 1 mm overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look good and uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all look relatively normal.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated significantly off towards the left side.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The muscles are somewhat narrow.  She has some constricture of the luminal valves.  She is predominately a mouth breather day and night.  Stacey states that she has some mild snoring and has severe daytime somnolence.  She, however, does not appear to have any sleep apnea problems.  She does have difficulty sleeping at night.  To palpation, she has severe pain over the masseter muscles, styloid areas and shoulders.  She has high moderate pain over the left TMJ, moderate pain over the right TMJ and SCMs.  She has some milder tenderness over the temporalis muscles.  On opening, the joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  Incisal opening is only about 25 mm.  She does open fairly symmetrically.  Excursive movements are 6 mm to the right and 10 mm to the left.  Stacey does report that she has been running a low grade fever for about the last three months.  She has had increased swelling the last three months or so of her feet and the hands.  Her sed rate also has been elevated and her sed rate did get up to about 62 and now has come back down to about 40.  Her ANA titer taken 06/15/2006 was negative.  On 06/19/2006, her sed rate was 62.  Last check on 07/07/2006, it had dropped back down to 3.  She is anemic with a hemoglobin of 11.1, hematocrit 33.2.  On more recent sed rate she is back up to 40.  She went to see two rheumatologists and they both diagnosed her with fibromyalgia.  

OTHER SYSTEMS:  She has problems with wrists, fingers and knees.  She has an occasional urinary tract infection and nocturia times one.  She has had no miscarriages and no children.  No endometriosis or ovarian cyst or fibrocystic breast disease.  She gets some burning, itching and dryness of her eyes with allergies.  She gets frequent sinus problems.  She used to smoke 1-1/2 packs per day for about 7 to 8 years but stopped about 7 years go.  She has had problems with earaches, tinnitus and vertigo.  She gets frequent colds and viruses.  She gets recurrent sore throats and has some hoarseness that she thinks may be related to her medicines that tend to dry her out.  She has had pneumonia times three.  She has problems with nausea, irritable bowel syndrome with what she gets some abdominal pain and cramping.  She has problems with diarrhea and constipation that alternate.  Those problems are now fairly stabilized with the medications she is currently on.  I am not aware of exposure to Chlamydia.  She does have chronic fatigue and has been running a fever for the last three months and she does have thyroid problems.  She has mitral valve prolapse.  She has not had any exposure to birds or cats and has had some dogs but there are basically indoor dogs.  
STACEY YOUNG 				08/02/2006				Page 3

No exposure to hoofed animals and no implants.  She developed irritable bowel syndrome when she was about age 9 years.  She began drinking alcohol at the age of 9 and then went through rehabilitation at the age of 18.  This may have exacerbated the IBS.  She did have a rheumatoid factor run in June of 2006 and it was within normal range.  She has significant problems with esophageal ulcers.  She was told it was caused by bacteria and yeast.  She was treated with Diflucan and this caused her ulcers to clear.  Back in 2005 she was tested for H. pylori and she was negative.  Her C-reactive protein at that time was elevated. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with closed lock.
Bilateral TMJ inflammatory process (rule out reactive arthritis versus connective tissue autoimmune disease versus bacterial/viral infection.)
Vertical maxillary excess.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Class I malocclusion.
Crossbite on the right side and involving the left mandibular second bicuspid. 
Severe TMJ pain. 
Severe myofascial pain.
  Headaches. 
  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
  Deviated nasal septum.
  Hypertrophied turbinates.
  Nasal airway obstruction. 
  Chronic clenching. 
  Irritable bowel syndrome.
  Fibromyalgia. 
  Mitral valve prolapse.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Laboratory tests.
Chlamydia serology (trachomatis, psittaci, pneumoniae.)
Mycoplasma serology to include genitalium, fermentans.
C-reactive protein.
IgA, IgE, IgG, IgM.
Immunodeficiency panel to include absolute lymphocytes, total B cells, total T cells, CD4, CD8 and Ia positive cells.
Restorative dental work perhaps under general anesthesia to salvage all of her teeth.
Medications.
Klonopin to control bruxism. 
Consider anti-inflammatory medications (i.e., Mobic, Celebrex, Relafen, etc.)
Consider antibiotics (Levaquin, Zithromax, Cleocin, etc.)

STACEY YOUNG 				08/03/2006				Page 4

Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
CT scan TMJ Concepts protocol.
Surgical option #1.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to advance the mandible forward.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly and advance it as well as expand it.  
Nasal septoplasty. 
Nasal turbinectomies.  
Surgical treatment option #2.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly, advance it and expand it.  
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts to place around the prostheses (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral mandibular coronoidectomies. 