ANDY YU										01/06/2006

Andy is 22 years old and is referred by Dr. George Adams, Plano, TX.   Andy's original orthodontist was Dr. Doug Crosby.  He has had some previous eye surgery to remove an ulcer but other than that he has had no other surgeries and is in good health with no major medical problems.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Lower jaw is in front of the upper jaw.
Teeth do not fit together very well.
Back teeth in the upper jaw are erupting in too far.
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints.
Difficulties breathing through the nose.
Predominately a mouth breather. 

Andy has no problems with earaches, vertigo or hearing loss and is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  He does get occasional tinnitus.  He gets occasional problems with his knees and his left ankle has been bothering him since he injured it last May.  He has no known allergies except to dust.  No headaches, no TMJ pain, no pain around the head and neck area.  He rates his jaw function at 1, diet at 0 and disability at 0.  

In frontal view, Andy has good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Andy has a little bit of deficiency in the subnasale and a little fullness in the upper lip and lower lip.  Chin may be just slightly AP deficient but probably not too significantly.  Chin neckline and chin neck angle are well defined.  Intraorally, Andy has all of his lower teeth back through his second molars present.  He is actually missing two lower central incisors.  He has significant transverse deficiency in the lower arch.  He is missing the lower lateral incisors bilaterally.  In the upper arch he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  Both the second molars are hypererupted by probably down below the first molars.  He has a Class II occlusal tendency.  He has an anterior crossbite.  The lower first bicuspids are used as the cuspids and these are fairly close to being Class I.  If the cuspids are used as cuspids then these have full, almost a super Class III relationship.  He has about a 1 mm reverse deep bite relationship. The uvula and soft palate appear relatively normal.  Faucial pillars appear moderately constricted.  Tonsils are present.  The septum may be deviated a little bit off to the left side but not too significantly.  The left turbinate appears large and appears to be almost touching against the septum.  Right turbinate does not appear quite as large in front but may be larger posteriorly.  He has some constriction of the luminal valves intranasally.  He is not aware of snoring.  He has daytime somnolence, however, but is not aware of sleep apnea problems.  He says he tosses and turns a lot at night.  It takes him about an hour to get to sleep at night.  He tries to sleep about 6 to 8 hours a night.  It is interesting by history Andy states that he had a Class II jaw relationship and then wore some elastics for awhile and the lower jaw started to grow and it came out in front of the upper jaw but he was kept on elastics for awhile even after that.  Andy is not aware of having any additional growth of his jaws during the past 7 years. 

ANDY YU					01/06/2006				Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and likely the lower, probably the lateral incisors but could the central incisors that are missing.  There is hypereruption of the maxillary second molars.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Left nasal airway appears more blocked than the right side.  Condylar head and necks are extremely long.  

Waters view shows that the left nasal airway appears to be obliterated.  The right side may have some obstruction but not as significant.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle appears large.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  Not much joint space present.  The styloid processes are somewhat prominent.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a joint that has a little bit more space.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  Condyle is relatively large.  Condylar head and necks are elongated.  The styloid process is also noted.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles with the right side being even greater than the left side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Andy has a Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship.  Some overangulation of the maxillary incisors.  The lower incisors appear to be in pretty good angulation.  Oropharyngeal airway is very good.  Except the base of the nose where he has some adenoid tissue still present and it almost touches against the posterior aspects of the turbinates.  The turbinates are quite large in a vertical dimension and the inferior turbinates are fairly large as well and he has some clicks in his jaw joints as he opens and closes.  This could be indicative of the disc being out of place.  To palpation, he has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Incisal opening is about 68 mm.  Excursive movement is about 7 mm in each direction.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ disc dislocation.
Bilateral arrested condylar hyperplasia.
Mandibular prognathism.
Maxillary transverse hyperplasia. 
Class III cuspid relationship.
Missing two mandibular incisors.  
Transverse maxillary excess in a Class I occlusion by probably 6 to 8 mm. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Hypertrophied nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue. 
Nasal airway obstruction.  
Mouth breather. 
ANDY YU					01/06/2006				Page 3


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT  

Treatment Option 1
Surgery stage 1.
Insert distraction osteogenesis device.
Anterior mandibular vertical osteotomy between the central incisors. 
Distraction osteogenesis following a 7 to 10 day latent.  Expand approximately 8 mm.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up spaces between upper lateral incisors and cuspids to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Open up spacing probably between the two central incisors and cuspids to equal the size of the lateral incisors.
Surgery stage 2.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible posteriorly.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to correct transverse discrepancies and upright the incisors. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.  
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy. 
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin AP and shorten vertically.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

Treatment Option 2.
      1.   Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up spaces between upper lateral incisors and cuspids to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Using Damon appliances and technology, expand the lower arch and open up spacing 10 to 12 mm between the lower central incisors and the cuspids.  
Surgery stage II. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible posteriorly.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to correct transverse discrepancies and upright the incisors. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.  
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy. 
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin AP and shorten vertically.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Placement of osteointegrated implants into the lower anterior arch.
Restorative dentistry to place crowns in the lateral incisor spaces. 