TIFFANY ZANCHA			Telephone Conversation 			01-06-04

TIFFANY AND HER MOTHER, CAROL:  Tiffany’s TMJ problems began about three or four years ago when she was in the eighth grade, and there is no known etiology for the onset of her symptoms. She is now a junior in high school. She had some soreness and achiness occasionally back at that time. In her freshman year, though, she began developing locking and increased symptoms and problems. She has worn a splint since January of 2002 but still continues to have her problems. She has had physical therapy, albeit one treatment, however, this made no improvement for her at all and made things worse and was discontinued. She currently takes the following medications:

Allegra
An inhaler
Zithromax (for recent sinus flareup)
Tylenol
Nitinol (?)

The primary concerns she has are as follows:

Headaches 
Severe TMJ pain
Pain through her jaws
Difficulty eating and chewing
Difficulty singing

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo but does have some hearing loss due to childhood recurrent ear problems. Other joints that bother her include her ankles, feet, and toes, but she has been tap dancing for 12 years. She says she has bad sinuses. She is aware of nocturnal clenching and bruxism. She gets headaches about two times a week that she rates at a level of 5 that occur in the frontal and temporal areas predominantly. She rates her TMJ pain on an average at about 6, but it can escalate to a 9. Her average daily pain is a level of 6. She rates her jaw function at 7, diet at 5, and disability at 3. She has opening clicking and popping in both joints and also closing clicks as well. She does occasionally get a closed lock problem. As she does self-palpation, she rates pain in her masseter muscles at a level of 5 and TMJs at a level of 3. She apparently has a lot of environmental allergies such as mold, dust, feathers, etc. She is 5’6” in height and weighs 210 lb. 

MRIs were not a very good quality, and the mother is aware of this. In my evaluation, I felt that the discs were dislocated. The fact that they click and pop is an indication that they are dislocated, and the fact that she has a periodic closed lock situation also supports this. The radiologist has misread the MRI, as he states:

“No evidence of dislocation of the temporomandibular joint meniscus.”
“Normal relationship of the temporomandibular joint.”

This is a complete misinterpretation of the MRIs in this patient. 

Based on the information at hand, which includes my telephone conversation, the basic diagnoses for Tiffany would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with reductions
Mandibular hyperplasia
Severe TMJ pain
Headaches
Myofascial pain
TIFFANY ZANCHA				01-06-04				Page 2

Recommended treatment would be as follows: 

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch 

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
Bilateral mandibular sagittal split osteotomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 


