XAVIER BAILLERES ZAMBRANO						10/22/2007

Xavier is 15 years old.  His orthodontist is Dr. Rogelio Zambrano, Ave. San Pedro, 211 Nte, Colonia Del Valle, San Pedro Garza Garcia, N.L. 66220.  Xavier has had previous orthodontics from 2004 through 2006.  It has been about a year and a half since he has had orthodontic appliances on.  He has had no TMJ issues, no headache, no earaches, no tinnitus or vertigo.  He does have some minor anemia problems.  His primary concerns are in reference to bite relationship. 

In frontal view, Xavier has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  The left eye may be just a little bit higher than the right by about 2 to 3 mm.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm.  Nasal tip is just slightly to the right maybe 1 to 2 mm.  Maxillary is about 1 mm off to the left side.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right side.  Chin is fairly well aligned with the facial midline.  In profile view, he has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks and nose.  Chin appears to be retruded by maybe 4 or 5 mm.  Intraorally, Xavier has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has a little bit of spacing around his lower anterior teeth.  He has good attached gingiva present.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side and closer to a Class I cuspid relationship on the left side.  In the lower arch, the right cuspid is 1 or 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch, the left cuspid is about 1 or 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  He has an anterior deep bite of about 6 mm.  Oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal.  Intranasally, the septum looks very straight and turbinates appear just mildly enlarged.  His mother does report he has some mild snoring at times.  She observes him breathing with his mouth open when he is sleeping.  He has mild to moderate daytime somnolence but no sleep apnea symptoms.  His occlusion is probably 1 to 2 mm Class II on the left side and 4 to 5 mm Class II on the right side.  TMJs function smoothly.  No myofascial pain around the head and neck area.  Incisal opening is 62 mm.  Excursive movement is about 9 mm in each direction.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxing day or night.  Dental model analysis shows that he has Class II end-on on the left side about 2 mm and on the right side by probably about 4 or 5 mm.  He has an anterior deep bite of about 5 to 6 mm and lower incisors are occluding at the cemental enamel junction on the lingual side of the upper incisors.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows he has four developing unerupted third molars.  The rest of the teeth are present.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with good morphology and with good joint spaces.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Superior and posterior joints spaces are pretty well balanced.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  Translation is good in both joints. 

XAVIER BAILLERES ZAMBRANO 	    10/22/2007				Page 2

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has some slight anterior vertical excess and some AP mandibular deficiency.  He has some adenoid tissue in the nasopharyngeal area.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 to 7 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue in one area is only about 2 to 3 mm.  On the model analysis there is an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch of about 2.5 to 3 mm.  In the upper arch there is a reverse curve of Spee of at least 1 mm.  There is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.  

Xavier has previously had a tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy.  However, there is still adenoid tissue remaining high and anterior in the nasopharynx that may be contributory some to his nasal airway obstruction.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion on the right side (5 mm) and left side (2 mm.)
Anterior deep bite of 5 to 6 mm. 
Mandibular arch asymmetry with the right cuspid 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.
Upper arch asymmetry with the left cuspid 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.
Orbital dystopia with the left eye 2 to 3 mm higher compared to the right side. 
Accentuated curve of Spee in lower arch and slight reverse curve of Spee in upper arch. 
 Mildly high occlusal plane angle.
 Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 Residual adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx.
 Moderately hypertrophied turbinates.
 Nasal airway obstruction. 
 Predominately a mouth breather.
 Impacted third molars x4.
 Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 3 to 5 mm (normal dimension 11 mm.)

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up spacing around the upper lateral incisors and central incisors to equal a total of about 2.5 mm of space to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Use Class III elastics on the left side of the arch.  Slightly distalize the mandibular cuspid and advance the maxillary left cuspid.  Use Class II elastics on the right side to advance the mandibular right cuspid forward slightly and retract the maxillary right cuspid.







XAVIER BAILLERES ZAMBRANO	   10/22/2007				Page 3


Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move anterior maxilla up about 2 mm and down graft the posterior maxilla about 2 mm to level the occlusal plane.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction about 8 mm.
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy.
Possible partial turbinectomies.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to buildup the central and lateral incisors to eliminate the spacing. 
