BETHANY YOUNG									6/20/05

Bethany is 33 years old, referred by Dr. Paul J. Walters, New Orleans, LA.  She currently has asthma.  She has a past history of stomach ulcers and had surgery in 1995 for that.  Some medications do irritate her.  She has had an unfavorable reaction to penicillin.  Bethany's problems began in September of 1999 when she was involved in an industrial accident where she was hit in the jaw.  In September of 2000, Dr. Paul Walters did bilateral arthroscopies in the TMJs.  She has also had some cortisone injections as well.  In September of 2002, she had a dermal graft placed in the left TMJ and an arthroscopy performed again on the right side.  She has had extensive splint therapy and wore a splint beginning in 2000 for 2 years and then again in August of 2003, she received another splint and has worn that since that time.  She currently gets physical therapy 3 times per week abut she has received physical therapy on and off over the last 5 years.  She currently takes the following medications.

Ativan q.h.s.
Flexeril, although she has a rash that she gets with it and she is weaning herself off of it.
Vicodin 10, three 1/2 tablets per day.
Hydrocodone.
Mepergan Fortis 1 to 2 tabs per months.
Imitrex p.r.n. 
Darvocet p.r.n. 
Librium 5 mg p.r.n. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Chronic facial pain.
Limited jaw function. 
Severe headaches that are almost constant. 
Difficulties eating and chewing.

She gets earaches fairly frequently and tinnitus daily.  She has no problems with vertigo or hearing loss.  The only other joints that bother her are C4, C5, and C6.  Except for the penicillin and anesthetic agents she has no other known allergies.  She does not like to wear her pierced earrings as they cause problems for her no matter the quality.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing of her teeth.  She gets daily headaches at a level of about 7 and occur predominantly in the temporal posterior head and on the top of the head.  Her last headache lasted 8 days.  Her headaches can easily escalate to a 10.  She has constant TMJ pain at about a level of 8 but can escalate to 10.  Her average daily pain is at a level of 8 and that is on the medications.  Her jaw function is at 7, diet at 6, disability at 7.  

In frontal view, Bethany has good facial symmetry and balance.  Maxillary dental midline is a little bit off to the left side maybe 2 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is a little bit closer to facial midline and maybe just a mm off to the left.  Chin is off to the left maybe 1 to 2 mm.  Upper lip length is 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relation is 0.  On profile view, she has fairly good balance of cheek and nose.  Chin maybe slightly AP deficient by maybe about 4 to 5 mm.   Chin-neckline is fairly well formed but a little fullness in the submental area.  Chin-neck angle is not well defined.  
BETHANY YOUNG					6/20/05			Page 2


Intraorally, Bethany has all of her lower teeth from the second molar on the right side through the first molar on the left side.  She appears to be missing second and third molars on the left side and probably third molar on the right side.  There is some very mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Attached gingiva is relatively thin around the lower anterior teeth but probably adequate.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm.  Intranasally, there is a little deviation in the nasal septum.  Right turbinate is larger than the left one and there seems to be a little bit more of a compromised airway in the right side today compared to the left side.  To palpation, she has moderate tenderness over the posterior neck and shoulder areas and mild tenderness over TMJs and temporalis areas.  Maximal incisal opening is about 30 mm but only about 22 without significant discomfort.  Excursive movements about 3 mm in each direction.  She does have crepitation in both joints being greater on the left side than the right side.  On opening, the mandible does shift to the right side about 2 to 3 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and mandibular left second molar.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Condyles appear a little bit arthritic.  

Waters view shows that she has deviation of the bony nasal septum off towards the right side at the superior aspect of the septum.  Right turbinate appears quite large.  Sinuses appear clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little flat on the anterior aspect with a little bit of sclerosis on top.  Joint space actually does not look too back.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ closed tomogram shows a condyle that is more arthritic.  There is anterior beaking present.  Significantly decreased joint space is present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints being greater on the right side as compared to the left side. 

Cephalometric radiograph shows that she is postured forward when this was taken and shows she has a slight posterior open bite, but clinically she has a good Class I occlusion.  Oropharyngeal airway appears adequate though slightly narrowed compared to the normal range.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis (left side worse than right).
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
Masticatory dysfunction.



BRITTANY YOUNG					6/20/05			Page 3


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
CT scan TMJ Concepts protocol. 

Presurgical orthodontics.
Apply bonded appliances to the maxillary arch.
Apply bonded appliances to the mandibular arch.

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, debridement and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen or buttock).

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I gave Bethany a prescription for Ultram 50 dispensing 30 tablets 1 tablet q.4-6h. p.r.n. pain, refill x 3.