LISA DAWN ZAJICEK								09-10-04

Lisa is 37 years old and referred by Dr. Robert Grimes, 4217 85th St., Lubbock, TX   79424(?).

Patient History

Lisa has had previous surgery that included deviated nasal septum repair and nasal repair for fracture sustained in an MVA that occurred on 05/05/03. She has previously had her tonsils and adenoids removed. She has had laparoscopy performed and a tubal ligation. She has had a previous blood transfusion. She has a lot of allergy problems and is currently taking the following medications:
Singular 10 mg q.d. 
Advair 100/50, 1 puff b.i.d. 
Nasalcort 2 puffs q.d. 
Paxil 20 mg b.i.d. 
Glucosamine/chondroitin with MSN
Celebrex when necessary for severe pain problems
Multivitamins 
Calcium

Lisa was involved in a motor vehicle accident on 05/03/03. Prior to that accident she was unaware of any TMJ signs, symptoms, or problems. Apparently in the accident, an elderly gentleman ran a red light, and Lisa hit the front end of her car into the side of his car. The air bag inflated, and this is what has created the problems around the head and neck area for Lisa. Prior to that time, she was unaware of any type of symptoms in the head and neck area and TMJ area. Previous history indicates that she had orthodontic treatment from the age of 10 to 14. Since the accident, she began bite splint therapy in 06/2003, and she has had three bite splints to date. The splints have helped considerably with her headaches but have not relieved her other significant problems. She had the mandibular left third molar removed in 10/2003 as it was felt that this could possibly be a contributory factor to her pain and headache problems. Removal went relatively smoothly, but it has not improved her situation. She gets occasional earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, but has no hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her fingers, knees, and feet. She does have multiple allergies mainly to environmental factors including dander from essentially any type of animal, cedar, pollen, spinach, Brazil nuts, etc. She can wear cheap jewelry but after a few days it tends to make the areas of contact become itchy. She does have a history of clenching and bruxism at night as well as during the day. She wears the splints basically at night. Wearing the splint, however, does help significantly reduce her headache level. Currently she has headaches that occur predominantly on the left side in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area at about a level of 4. However, she can have headaches that escalate to 10. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 6, diet at 2, and disability at 4. She does complain of some numbness on the left side affecting the chin, lower lip, and a little bit of the cheek area, but this was there prior to removal of the third molar on the left side. Lisa may have some mild snoring. She has moderate tiredness during the day. She does wake up at times that she feels is more related to insomnia. 

About 20 years ago, Lisa had some trauma to her maxillary left central incisor, and it was quite loose. They had to secure it to the adjacent teeth, and the two front teeth were attached together. Apparently Dr. Grimes has informed Lisa that he feels that the maxillary left central incisor and lateral incisor are on the verge of dying and that she may need root canal treatment or other treatment to maintain those teeth.

Lisa has note that her lower jaw has become more retrusive over the years likely associated with the significant arthritis in her joints.
Patient Concerns

Constant tension and pressure around the head and neck area
Jaw aches
Neck and back pain
Headaches
Pain in the jaw joints
Difficulties eating and chewing
Chronic clenching and bruxism

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Lisa has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 to 4 mm. Lisa does have problems trying to sit still, and it causes her jaws and lips and so forth to shutter a little bit. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline.

In profile view, she has some mild AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 2 or 3 mm. Chin is probably about 5 to 6 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is slightly short, and the submental area slightly full. Upper jaw is retruded by probably about 3 to 4 mm and chin maybe by 6 to 8 mm. 

Intraorally, Lisa has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars except she is missing the mandibular right second bicuspid replaced by a three-unit bridge. Some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. Slight accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch, particularly involving the two central incisors. A little bit of stripping around the lower anterior teeth. Amount of attached gingiva is fairly narrow. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She is fairly close to having a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. A little bit of an anterior deep bite of probably about 4 mm. Slight reverse curve of occlusion is present in the upper arch. Oropharynx appears relatively clear, although she does have an unusual finding associated with the posterior faucial pillars. The one on the right side is attached up almost at the level of the uvula, and the left side is a little bit more normal position. Therefore, the right posterior pillar is much more medially positioned as compared to the left side. Appears to be a fairly large blood vessel running down through the right faucial pillar. Uvula looks relatively normal in size and dimension. Soft palate looks relatively normal in length.

Intranasally, turbinates are relatively moderate in size with the left one being maybe slightly larger than the right side. Septum may be a little bit off toward the left side. There is a good passable airway on both sides with the right side being larger than the left side. Lisa does state that she sometimes wakes up in the morning breathing through her mouth. Lisa appears to have a little bit larger nasal airway on the right side as compared to the left side where she has a little bit more constricture. 

To palpation, Lisa has some mild tenderness over the left temporalis muscle, but the other areas are pretty much free of pain to palpation. On opening, Lisa has some mild crepitation in both joints. On excursive movements, she can generate some kind of clicking kind of noise in the left TMJ. She feels that there is a catching on the right side. Maximal incisal opening is about 40 mm. Opening without significant discomfort is about 25 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 9 mm and to the left about 6 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex:  Sinuses appear clear. Left turbinate may be enlarged compared to the right side. Missing mandibular third molars and maxillary right third molar. Left third molar is impacted. Missing mandibular right second bicuspid. She has a three-unit bridge to replace that tooth. She has some crowns on the maxillary left first bicuspid/first molar. Condyles appear small and arthritic. 

Waters view shows that she has huge frontal sinuses, but all sinuses appear relatively clear. Septum may be a little bit deviated off toward the left side back in the bony area. There does appear to be passable airway bilaterally with the right side being greater than the left side. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic. Joint space appears slightly increased vertically and perhaps posteriorly. Articular eminence has sort of an unusual shape to it and is more pointed at its tip. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears quite arthritic. Appears to be decreased joint space vertically and posteriorly. Articular eminence does have a little bit of an unusual shape and is more pointed at the eminence. A long slope to the articular eminence. 

Opening view shows that the condyles have restricted translation and they come down but remain posterior to the articular eminence. Joint space in both joints appears decreased between the condyles and the articular eminences. 

Cephalometrically, her head is tipped upward somewhat. She appears to have a skeletal and occlusal Class II end-on relationship with an anterior deep bite. Oropharyngeal airway may be somewhat constricted but difficult to tell because of the head tipped up posterior. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocations with severe deformation and nonreducing
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm at the soft palate level and 7 mm at the base of the tongue (normal dimensions are 11 mm in each area)
Malformed and malpositioned right posterior faucial pillar
Headaches
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Chronic nocturnal and daytime clenching and bruxism
Occasional earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo
Accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch
Slight reverse curve of occlusion, upper arch
Anterior deep bite of 4 mm
Impacted maxillary left third molar

Recommended Treatment

Medications 
Klonopin for control of nocturnal clenching and bruxism. Consider introducing a daytime medication if necessary to control daytime bruxism if it is not managed with patient awareness and with the Klonopin at night

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Try to intrude maxillary incisors a millimeter or 2 
Align and level mandibular arch. Try to intrude the two central incisors 1 to 2 mm to level the accentuated curve of occlusion 

CT scan of TMJs and jaws to facilitate manufacturing of the TMJ Concepts prostheses

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction, condylectomy, debridement, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction with rigid fixation and hydroxyapatite grafting
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)
Bilateral coronoidectomies 
Surgical removal of maxillary left third molar
Reconstruction of right posterior faucial pillar to improve airway

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
