MARCUS YANKEE									03/05/2008

Marcus is 23 years old and referred by Dr. Richard Ingraham, 5525 S. Staples, Corpus Christi, Texas 78411.  Marcus gets significant pain in the left TMJ that he rates at about a level of 8 and an average daily pain of 8.  He wakes up with the pain in the morning and that is when it is the worst.  He is aware of clenching his teeth at night and also does that some during the day as well.  No headaches, no earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  By history, Marcus’ current problems began in December 2007 when he woke up one morning with a pain and it has been there essentially since then.  Etiology is unknown.  He does have a history of being hit in the right side of his face about 2 years ago and the person had an Aggie ring on and apparently caused a blowout fracture on the orbital floor, but not enough problem to require surgery.  About a year ago, he does remember that he experienced some significant pain during finals on both sides of his jaws which were likely more in the masseter muscles.  

Current medications he takes include Zanaflex.  Marcus rates his TMJ pain that is only on the left side at a level of 8 and that pain averages about 8 a day.  He rates his jaw function at 5, diet at 4, disability at 2.  He has no problems with headaches currently.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Marcus has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  Maxillary dental midline may be 2 mm to the right.  Mandibular dental midline and the chin appear to be pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, he has some AP maxillary deficiency probably 4 mm.  Chin appears a little bit strong.  Chin neckline and angle are fairly well defined, although he does have some fullness in the submental area.  Intraorally, Marcus has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back to the second molars.  He is just slightly Class III on the left side by probably 2 mm, but on the right side he is probably almost 6 mm Class III.  He has an end-on incisor relationship.  The maxillary right cuspid is probably about 3 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  The lower arch appears fairly symmetric.  Transverse occlusal plane is fairly level.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Tonsils are gone.  Intranasally, the nasal septum may be deviated just a little bit off to the left side.  Left turbinate is moderately large.  The right one is relatively normal in size at least anteriorly.  To palpation, he had some mild tenderness of the masseter muscles.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  His maximal opening was 45 mm, 30 mm without discomfort.  Excursion movements are about 6 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Condylar head and necks are elongated.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Waters view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Right TMJ tomogram shows a condylar head and neck that are elongated.  Joint space looks a little bit constricted and articular eminence is moderately shallow.  Left TMJ tomogram shows a condylar head and neck that is quite elongated.  Joint space is narrow and articular eminence is relatively shallow.  On opening, there is some restricted translation of both joints.  Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Marcus has a Class II skeletal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway is excessively large.  He has an skeletal and occlusal Class III relationship.  


Basic diagnoses for Marcus would be as follows:

1.	Left TMJ articular disc posterior dislocation. 
2.	AP maxillary hypoplasia and asymmetry.
3.  	Mandibular prognathism. 
4.	Class II occlusion on right side, Class III end-on on the left side. 
5.   	Maxillary midline shifted 2 mm to the right.  
6.	End-on incisor relationship.
7.	Lingual inclination of lower incisors.  
8.	Anterior and right crossbite.  
9. 	Left TMJ pain.
10.	Nocturnal and daytime clenching. 
11.	Tooth size discrepancy with Bolton’s difference of approximately 2 mm. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

	1.  	Presurgical orthodontics.
a.  Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up about 1 mm of space around each upper lateral incisor.  Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally.
2.	Surgery.
a.  Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with artificial ligaments.
b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible backwards.  
c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and rotate it to the left onto the facial midline.  
3.  	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
4.	Bonding of maxillary lateral incisors. 
