MARTHA TREVINO ZAMBRANO							09/26/2007

Martha is 41 years old, referred by Dr. Marco Navaro from Monterey.  Martha is in good health with no major medical problems.  Martha takes no medications.  In 1987, she had surgery for her TMJs, but it was not TMJ surgery that was performed but instead she had probably bilateral ramus osteotomies to reposition the mandible.  She had her jaws wired together for five weeks.  She did okay for awhile after that surgery but then developed pain again.  It got fairly severe and in March of 2007 Dr. Navaro made a bite plate for her to wear and none of this has helped her significantly.  Martha did have orthodontics as a teenager but then she had it again beginning probably in about 1986 prior to her jaw surgery and then had the braces on for the surgery as well as for a time afterwards.  So she probably had braces on roughly from 1986 to 1988.  She did have four cuspid extractions done on her jaws.  Her jaws are quite small and constricted.   She does snore some.  She has a fair amount of moderate daytime tiredness but is not aware of having any sleep apnea problems.   

In frontal view, Martha has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm.  Maxillary midline is about 1 mm. off to the left side.  Mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The chin is about 2 to 3 mm off to the left side.  In profile view she has some problems with the nasal dorsum.  She has some AP deficiency in the maxilla by probably about 4 to 5 mm.  Chin is retruded probably 10 to 12 mm.  Chin-neckline is a little bit short although the chin-neck angle is relatively well defined.  Intraorally she is missing lower second bicuspids.  The lower arch is quite constricted.  She has large lingual tori.  In the upper arch she also is missing probably the second bicuspids.  The upper arch is also constricted and close to being a Class I cuspid relationship.  She has a deep bite of probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Posterior faucial pillars appear to be posteriorly positioned.  The tonsils appear relatively normal.  Intranasally, there is a little bit of fullness of the septum tipping off towards the left side.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  The occlusal plane maybe just slightly tipped up about ½ mm on the left side.  Intraorally, she does have bilateral lingual tori that are quite large.  She gets occasional earaches.  No tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her left shoulder and her hips.  Frequently she has problems with the muscles in her neck and shoulders.  She does clench her teeth at night but she does not think she does it during the day because it hurts too much.  With jaw function, Martha has audible crepitation in her TMJs.  Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm.  Opening without significant pain 40 mm.  Excursive movements are 8 mm in each direction but these movements are painful.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four second bicuspids.  The sinuses appear reasonably clear.  The left condyle appears quite small and arthritic.  The right condyle appears arthritic but much larger than the left side. There are some residual wires in the right ramus area.  She has root canals on the maxillary right central incisors, right lateral incisor and the first bicuspid.

Waters view shows that she has a little septal spur off the bony septum.  Turbinates appear large on the right side.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  


MARTHA ZAMBRANO			09/26/2007				Page 2

Right TMJ tomogram shows what appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact with significant arthritis.  Relatively moderate slope to the articular eminence.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows that there is some decreased joint space and the condyle appears quite arthritic.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening there is good translation of both joints. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Martha has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway is extremely constricted with only about 2 mm of airway space at the base of the tongue and maybe 3 to 4 mm at the soft palate level.  She has a mild high occlusal plane angle.  She has a relatively deep incisor relationship.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with severe degeneration of the articular disc in the presence of perforations with bone-on-bone contact.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxilla deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of less than 2 mm (normal dimension is 11 mm.)
Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars.
Anterior deep bite.
Basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.
Significantly enlarged bilateral mandibular lingual tori.
 TMJ pain.
 Headaches.
 Myofascial pain.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. 
CT scans of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.
Surgical removal of bilateral mandibular tori.
Four second bicuspid extractions. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
