KATIE ZENG										08/04/2008

Katie is 15 years old.  Referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich.  She is in good health with no major medical problems.  She takes doxycycline 100 mg q.d.  She has no TMJ problems.  She does tend to breathe through her mouth at night and also sometimes during the day.  Primary concerns that Katie has includes the following:

Teeth and jaws do not align up properly. 
Bite relationship is getting progressively worse. 

Katie has no TMJ issues and no pain issues.  She had orthodontics from 2005 to 2006.  Since that time, her bite has worsened.  
CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Katie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm.    In profile view, she has some deficiency and projection of subnasale by probably about 3 mm.  Chin neckline and chen neck angle are fairly well defined.  The chin may be slightly retruded by about 5 mm.  The lower third face is elongated.  She has to force her lips together.  Lip incompetency appears to be approximately 7 mm.  Intraorally, Katie has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars erupted.  She has some moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch.   She has decreased attached gingiva particularly around the incisors.  In the upper arch, she is missing 1st bicuspid teeth bilaterally.  Anteriorly, she has a crossbite.  She has about 0.5 mm reverse overbite.  She has almost a full Class III being a little bit greater on the left side.  Transversely, the occlusal plane appears to be lower on the left side by about 2 mm compared to the right side in the cuspid area.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal except the fascial pillars are moderately constricted due to large tonsils.  The right tonsil is the largest and moderate in size and the left one is just mildly enlarged.  Intranasally, the turbinates are enlarged bilaterally.  Katie does state that she is predominantly a mouth breather at night and also breathes a lot through her mouth during the day.  However, she is not aware of snoring, daytime somnolence, sleep apnea, and she has no reported sleep disorder.  She has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  The TMJs appear to function relatively smoothly.  Incisal opening is about 54 mm.  Excursion movements are 7 mm in each direction.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  The maxillary first bicuspids are absent.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the upper arch.  Condylar heads and necks appear somewhat elongated.  It is difficult to evaluate the sinuses.  
Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear.  Turbinates appears moderately enlarged.  The bony septum appears reasonably straight.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condylar head and neck that appears somewhat elongated.  Joint space appears somewhat thin.  Articular eminence is moderate in inclination.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly normal configuration, but somewhat elongated in the condylar head and neck area.  Joint space appears thin.  Articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Katie has a high Class III occlusal relationship, but probably Class I skeletal relationship because of a relatively high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate area measures about 6 to 7 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 9 to 10 mm in the midpart of the tongue and closer to the hyaloid measures about 7 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Katie would be as follows:    

Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia. 
Mandibular prognathism. 
Anterior maxillary vertical excess.
Anterior mandibular vertical excess.
AP microgenia. 
Class III occlusion. 
Anterior and left posterior crossbite. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
High occlusal plane angle.  
Impacted third molars x4. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.  
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.
Decreased attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch.
Missing maxillary 1st bicuspid teeth bilaterally.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2.5 mm of tooth structures to correct for the tooth size discrepancy. 
Evaluation with periodontist with consideration of gingival grafting to lower anterior arch if it is determined that the amount of attached gingiva is insufficient orthodontically. 
Evaluate growth to determine of condylar hyperplasia is in fact an active growth process.
Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies with articular disc repositioning if condylar hyperplasia is confirmed.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly anteriorly and downward posteriorly.    
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a counterclockwise direction into best occlusal fit.  
Vertical reduction AP augmentation genioplasty.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Surgical removal of four impacted third molars.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance and superiorly reposition the bony chin. 
4.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.