JUDY ZVONIK									06-25-03

Judy is 49 years old and referred by Margaret Millar, M.D., 600 Valley View Drive, Moline, IL  61265 and by Dr. Kenneth Rotskoff, 3009 N. Ballas Road, Ste. 360C, St. Louis, MO  63131.

Patient History

Judy is in good health except for her jaw problems. She is allergic to BACITRACIN and has a known allergy to NICKEL. 

Judy’s problems began in about 1987 when a crate fell on her head, and this worsened her situation. She thinks she may have had some problems even prior to that. Since that time, she has had lots of treatment including lots of physical therapy that included TENS, ultrasound, stretching, rocobado treatment (therapist David Scott), acupuncture, lots of chiropractic treatment, splint treatment x 2, biofeedback, etc. The only other surgery around the head and neck that Judy has had was a facelift in April of 1999. She also did have a septoplasty performed in 2000. She does get earaches, tinnitus, frequent bouts of vertigo, and she does feel she has loss of hearing in the left ear, although audiometric tests show that her hearing is okay. Other joints that bother her include her neck, knees, and possibly her right hip. She has a significant reaction to nickel and cannot wear any type of cheap jewelry. Earrings containing nickel cause her ears to turn red and also to weep fluid. She also has a concern that a lot of the crowns that she has on her teeth contain nickel and that this might be causing some of her symptomatology. She is not aware of having any significant nasal airway problems except at times her sinuses seem to get full and her nose seems to get stuffy.

Patient Concerns

Neck pain.
Strangulation feeling around the neck.
Stuffy left ear.
Sinus problems.
Turning of the head creates significant pain.
Teeth feel loose and on fire.
Teeth are hypersensitive.
Base of the tongue feels swollen.
Earaches.
Significant vertigo.
Hearing loss on the left side.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Muscle pains.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Judy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is at least 2 mm off to the right side. Mandibular dental midline is off to the left side about a millimeter, but the chin is pretty much on the facial midline. The dental midlines are off by almost 4 mm. 

In profile view, she has some deficiency in AP projection of the maxilla with it being deficient by probably about 3 to 4 mm. Chin is AP deficient by at least 15 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars except she is missing the left first molar and has a bridge in its position. She has crowns on most all of her posterior teeth in the upper and lower arch. She has a root canal in the mandibular right second molar. She has some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she is missing the lateral incisor on the right side but has the rest of her teeth. On the left side, it appears that she is missing the cuspid, first, second, and third molars. She has a bridge from the lateral incisor pontic and crowns on the bicuspids and a cantilever crown off the second bicuspid. All four third molars are missing. Oropharynx looks clear. The soft palate and posterior faucial pillars are positioned way anterior.

Intranasally, she has some deviation of the nasal septum particularly toward the posterior aspect. Turbinate on the left side is of moderate size. Turbinate on the right side is extremely large and could possibly be causing some airway obstruction. 

She has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side (there is a missing lateral on that side, however), and she has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side and Class II by probably 4 mm. If the upper right first bicuspid is used as a cuspid, she has a Class III occlusion. She has an anterior overbite of about 2 mm. 

To palpation, she has mild tenderness around most of the head and neck area. Maxillary incisal opening is 45 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 6 mm and to the left 10 mm. On opening, she has a glitch in the left joint at about 25 mm of opening and at about probably 15 to 20 mm of closing. Right joint seems relatively smooth.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, mandibular left first molar, maxillary left cuspid, first and second molars, and right lateral incisor. Judy states that she had a number of her teeth, particularly on the left side, that were originally restored with nickel-containing restorations. She had those teeth removed because of the significant pain that those teeth were creating. No one at that time could seem to figure out why she was having such pain in those teeth. She had the maxillary left teeth extracted sometime around 1996-1997. Sinuses appear relatively clear, although she could possibly have a little mucous retention cyst in the left sinus. Nasal airway doesn’t look too bad on the x-ray here. Left condyle appears small and appears to have undergone some degenerative changes. Right condyle appears flattened at the posterior head aspect, and the right condyle looks much larger than the left condyle. Styloid process is quite long bilaterally and come down and overlap the posterior border of the mandible. She does have a large mucous retention cyst in the right maxillary sinus. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone some significant degenerative changes. Appears sclerotic on the head. Significant anterior beaking is present. Significantly decreased vertical joint space, although the posterior joint space is not too bad. In one of the views, even the posterior joint space is decreased. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. May be a little calcification body out in front of the condylar head beneath the articular eminence. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has slightly better morphology than the opposite side. However, there are decreased superior and posterior joint spaces. Articular eminence is a little bit steeper on this side. Alignment of the osseous structures tended to indicate that there may be disc displacements here as well. 
Opening views show very good translation of both condyles. 

Waters view does show that there does appear to be a cyst on the right side. Left side is not as evident. Right turbinate is extremely large and appears to pretty much obliterate the airway on that side. Left airway looks quite good. Other sinuses are open and clear. Significant asymmetry in the upper and lower dental arches is observed. 

Cephalometric analysis shows that she has significant AP deficiency of the maxilla and posterior vertical maxillary deficiency as well as significant AP mandibular deficiency. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is very good and measures probably about 8 mm. At the base of the tongue, the airway is significantly less. There is a double shadow there so difficult to tell which is the actual base of the tongue. Tongue seems to fit fairly well within the oral cavity.

Judy has had a previous MRI of her neck, and she reports that the MRI was negative for the neck pathology. Her actual MRI reports from the exam done 05/21/02 show that she has minimal bulging of the cervical intervertebral discs at C3-C4 and C6-C7 and no other abnormalities seen. MRI of her brain showed a normal MRI, although she does have a retention cyst in the right maxillary sinus. A soft tissue scan of the neck done 08/07/01 showed that she had nonspecific minimal bilateral reactive lymphadenopathy in the posterior triangle in the spinal accessory region with no evidence of mass or abscess seen. There was no abnormality seen in the parotid gland area. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction and with severe deformation
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Class I cuspid relationship on the right side, Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side
Maxillary dental midline shifted 2 mm to the right and mandibular dental midline shifted 2 mm to the left
Missing all four third molars as well as the maxillary right lateral incisor, left cuspid, first and second molar, mandibular left first molar
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Probable allergic reaction to nickel
Earaches 
Tinnitus
Vertigo
Hearing loss

In reference to the recommended treatment, Judy has an option to keep her jaws where they are and reconstruct just the joints versus advancing both the maxilla and mandible with the total joint prostheses and maxillary osteotomies versus more complex treatment where extensive orthodontics would be done to help align and level the teeth and then to advance it with the joint reconstruction and maxillary osteotomies. 

Recommended treatment which I feel would get her the best result with the least amount of treatment would be as follows:

Testing at the Environmental Center for hypersensitivities to the material to be used in the prostheses

CT scan of TMJs and jaw joints

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, debridement, and reconstruction with mandibular advancement using TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction with bone plate stabilization and hydroxyapatite grafting
Fat grafts to bilateral TMJs (harvested from the abdomen)

Dental restorations as necessary to reconstruct the tissue

This will get her best possible result.

I did give Judy a prescription for Klonopin 0.5 mg, disp. 15 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., and she is to take it an hour before she goes to sleep. I have her one refill. 