MONICA ZMUDA								02/02/2011

Monica is 35 years old, birth date 09/04/1975.  She is referred by Kelley Flatt.  Monica is not real sure exactly when her problems began, but she remembers in her early twenties that she may have had some grinding noises in her jaw joints as they would function.  About four years ago, her mother committed suicide and this created some increased stress for Monica and that is when her pain really began.  Her treatment so far has included predominantly medications and she has had mouth guards to wear at night for the past three years and probably has had about twelve of them.  She did have a mouth splint about 4 years ago and she only wore that for a short time because it was uncomfortable for her.  She has been to see many doctors including chiropractic doctors, dentists, psychiatrists, neurologists, ophthalmologists, OB-GYN, etc.

Monica has constant headaches that she rates at a level of 8 throughout her head.  Her TMJ pain is constant at a level of 7 and her average daily pain is at 8.  She rates her jaw function and diet at 5, disability at 8.  She has constant earaches, occasional tinnitus, frequent vertigo and decreased hearing on the right side.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of severe clenching and bruxing at nighttime, but she also clenches and bruxes during the day as well.  She takes the following medications:

Zoloft 100 mg q.d.
Xanax XR 1 to 2 mg per day.
Fioricet p.r.n. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Monica has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  A little masseteric hyperplasia present with a little more prominence on the right side than the left side.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, Monica has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Monica has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch and has good attached gingiva.  There is some evidence of wear particularly on the lower incisors.  In the upper arch, Monica has all of her upper teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding in the upper anterior arch.  She has an end-on Class II occlusion and probably about 4 to 5 mm Class II.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal except for the uvula which is moderately hyperplastic.  There is just a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 to 2 mm at the most higher than the left side.  Left side of the inferior border of the mandible is a little bit longer vertically than the right side by probably a couple of millimeters.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side and the left turbinate is moderately enlarged with some decreased airway on the left side compared to the right side.  To palpation, she has severe pain over the masseter muscles, TMJs, posterior neck, high moderate pain over the retromandibular pain, moderate over the medial pterygoids, temporalis, and mild tenderness over the shoulders.  Maximal incisal opening is 36 mm and open without pain 22 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 9 mm, to the left 7 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The rest of the teeth are present.  Bony septum is relatively straight.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear and bony septum has a little deviation off towards the left side, but not too significant.  The turbinates are moderate in size with the left one being a little bit more obstructive than the right side.  The left middle turbinate is larger than the right middle turbinate.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of sclerosis on it.  The joint space actually appears as though it may be reasonable.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with a little sclerosis on it and just a slight anterior beaking.  The joint space looks fairly well balanced with a slight increased posterior joint space compared to the anterior.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There actually appears to be reasonably good vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width.  There actually appears to be reasonably good joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has skeletal and occlusal Class II jaw relationship and oropharyngeal airway appears reasonably good.  She does have her head tipped somewhat in this film.  

Monica does drink some iced tea daily and also four Sprites per day, two regular and two diet.  

Basic diagnoses for Monica would be as follows:

Bilateral myofascial pain affecting the temporalis muscles, masseter muscles, medial pterygoid muscles, lateral pterygoid muscles, posterior neck and shoulder muscles.  
Rule out TMJ pathology.
Chronic severe clenching and bruxism.
Class II end-on occlusion.


Recommended treatment would be as follows:

MRI of left and right TMJ.
Medications:  Klonopin 1 mg tablet, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s.
Consider possible TMJ surgery if MRI documentation of TMJ pathology.  