LESLIE ZOHRER								11/21/2011

Leslie is 35 years old, birth date 09/05/1976.  She is referred by Dr. David Adame, 210 W. Mahl, Edinburg, TX 78539 and Dr. Curt Mackie, 802 S. Loop 499, Suite 1, Harlingen, TX 78550.  

Leslie had orthodontic treatment from about the age of 10 to 15 years.  She is not sure exactly when her jaw joint problems began.  She may have been in high school, but she remembers in college having some clicking and popping predominantly in the right jaw joint.  The left side has never bothered her too much.  She has worn a mouth splint since 2000.  Her current situation escalated when in September 2011 she cracked her maxillary left first molar.  It got infected and they were unable to control it with antibiotics and the tooth was eventually extracted.  At the same time, a sinus graft was placed into the left maxillary sinus in order to provide adequate bone for subsequent implant placement.  Leslie has not had the implant placed as of yet.  

Leslie has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain or myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability at 1.  She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  The only other joint is her right big toe.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime but not during the day.  

She takes the following medications:

Zyrtec.
Avianne (BCP).

In frontal view, Leslie has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 1 mm.  The maxillary midline is about 2.5 to 3 mm off to the left side.  The mandibular dental midline and chin are pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 5 to 6 mm.  The chin is retruded about 20 mm.  The chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, Leslie has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch with probably about 5 mm of crowding.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars except she is missing the left first molar.  She has a slight Class II occlusion on the left side by probably 2 to 3 mm and on the right side she is Class III by probably 5 to 6 mm.  She has about a 2 mm anterior open bite.  She has about a 4 mm overjet relationship.  When Leslie occludes in centric relation, she occludes only on the second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  The columella appears moderately wide and nostrils are moderately narrow.  In the lower arch, she has relatively symmetric AP position of the cuspids.  In the upper arch, the left cuspid is about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, she has a pop in the right joint at about 40 mm and a closing pop at about 20.  The left side functions relatively smoothly.  The maximum incisal opening is 50 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 10 mm and to the left 9 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has had what appears to be an HA and bone graft done to the left maxillary sinus in preparation for a future implant to replace the missing left first molar.  She is missing the mandibular left first molar and all four third molars.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Both condyles appear arthritic.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight, but she has enlarged turbinates.  The sinuses appear relatively clear except for just a little bit of sinus membrane thickening on the left lateral nasal wall.  

Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderate in size and somewhat obstructive particularly on the left side.  The sinuses appear clear in this particular view.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that she may have not been biting all the way in centric relation at least on the left side.  There is evidence of arthritis in this joint with significant anterior beaking.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  At the lateral aspect of the joint, the condyle is quite flattened.  There is some sclerosis on the top of the condyle.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is arthritic with anterior beaking present.  There is decreased superior and posterior joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination and is fairly long in length.  The anterior head of the condyle appears a little bit more degenerated than the opposite side.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone some arthritic changes.  There appears to be loss of vertical volume.  The joint space however appears reasonably normal.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has arthritic changes associated with it.  There appears to be decreased vertical joint space in some of the views as compared to the opposite side.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  

Radiographically, the bone grafting into the maxillary sinus is evident.  It appears there were also some HA grafts put into the extraction socket position.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows there is a retruded maxilla and significantly retruded mandible.  There is a high occlusal plane angle.  The oropharyngeal airway measures about 2.5 mm at the soft palate level and also no more than 3 mm at the base of the tongue and shows that there is no significant discrepancy.  

Basic diagnoses for Leslie would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritic and articular discs anteriorly displaced without reduction on the left side and with late reduction on the right side.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class II occlusion.
Anterior open bite of 2 mm.
High occlusal plane angle.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm (normal dimension 11 mm).
Occludes only on the left second molars in centric occlusion. 
Significant crowding of the lower anterior arch.
Mild crowding in the upper anterior arch.
Slight increased curve of Spee in the upper arch.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 			removing 1 or 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower teeth 		too far forward.  
2.	Surgery Stage 1.  Consider bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament 	repair with Mitek anchors as a separate stage if done within the next couple of 	months.
3.	Surgery Stage 2.  
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors (if not separated out in a separate procedure).
	b.	Bilateral mandibular osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 				counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a 					counterclockwise direction.
	d.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
5.	Placement of osteointegrated implant to the maxillary left first molar area.  
6.	Restorative dentistry.  

We did discuss at length the possibility that the Mitek anchor technique may not work because of the amount of degenerative and dismorphological changes that have already occurred to the TMJ articular discs.  However, if they do hold up, it would eliminate the need for bilateral total joint prostheses.  Performing the Mitek anchor technique at a separate first surgery would allow us to see how the disc repositioning would hold up while the orthodontics are being done prior to the orthognathic portion of the treatment.  Another option would be to go straight to the total joint prostheses as that will give us a predictable outcome relative to the TMJ reconstruction. She understands the treatment options and will inform me as to her decision and contact me if she has further questions.