LEESA ZILEMPE									7/1/05

Leesa is 19 years old, referred by Dr. Clark who is a dentist in Marshall, TX.   Leesa is in good health with no known major medical problems.  She takes no medications and she has no known allergies.  Leesa's problems may have begun as early as the age of 7 when she remembers she was trying to chew food and got pain in her jaw area.  Otherwise, she thinks that probably around the ago of 10 it started to click and pop.  This is all of unknown etiology.  From the age of 14 to 17, she had orthodontics performed with extraction of 4 first bicuspids.  Following the orthodontics she was placed in retainers, but her bite has kept shifting and moving and has not been stable. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Bite is off.
Teeth do not fit together.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Popping in the jaw joints. 
Significant difficulties breathing through her nose.
Probably a mouth breather. 
Snoring.
Constantly tired. 

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  She has no headache problems.  She does get pain in the TMJs at a level of 6 with any significant function such has eating, chewing, yawning and sometimes even with talking.  Her pain actually increases when she is lying down.  She rates her TMJ pain on an average day at about a level of 6.  Her average pain around the head and neck area ranges about a level 4.  She rates her jaw function at 8, diet at 5, disability at 4.

On frontal view, Leesa has very good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all fairly well aligned with the facial midline.  On profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 mm.  Chin is retruded by about 20 mm.  Chin-neckline is short.  Leesa has a head postured forward neck position.  Chin-neck angle is not particularly well defined.  Lower third face appears perhaps slightly elongated.  She does have lip incompetence of about 7 mm.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars except she is missing the first bicuspids.  She has mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars except she is missing the first bicuspids.  She has an anterior open bite and she has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being probably about 3 to 4 mm Class II.  She has about a 2 mm anterior open bite.  She occludes only on her second molars and the very distal part of the first molars.  All other teeth are out of occlusion.  The uvula is a little bit enlarged but not too significant.  The soft palate is perhaps slightly elongated primarily due to posterior position of the faucial pillars.  There are actually attached posterior to the uvula, at least the posterior portion.  Intranasally, the turbinates are quite large and appear to block off most of the airway.  

LEESA ZILEMPE				7/1/05					Page 2


They appear somewhat inflamed and when she lies down they actually become more engorged.  The septum actually looks fairly straight and she probably has moderate to severe nasal airway obstruction.  The columella is relatively normal as are the luminal valves.  She rates her snoring as severe.  She has probably moderate to severe daytime somnolence.  She is not aware of having any sleep apnea problems, but it is possible that they could be present as well.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the styloid areas and a little moderate over the TMJs and moderate tenderness over the masseters, medial pterygoids and right SCM.  On opening, she has a definite almost audible click on the left side about 30 mm and a closing click at 10.  On the right side, it is difficult to identify an opening click, but she definitely had a closing click at about 10 mm.  Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm, but only about 23 mm with reasonable comfort.  Excursive movement is about 9 mm in each direction.  On excursive movement she does get a pop in the left joint at times.  Tooth size analysis demonstrates a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.  

OTHER SYSTEMS
She has no other joint problems except for the TMJ.  She has no history of urinary tract infections.  No reproductive system problems.  She has no GI problems, respiratory system problems.  She does have fatigue.  Her family just got 10 chickens that she has been around for the last couple of months, but she does not really play with them I am assuming.  I suppose they are just on the property.  She had cats in the past, but not for the past 10 years and she does not know if any them ate birds.  She has had dogs most her life and they currently have a Dachshund that eats birds and has killed 5 of their chickens already.  No other exposure to hoofed animals or medical implants. 
 
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Waters view demonstrates a deviated nasal septum in the bony area with it deviating off towards the right side, then off to the left side.  Turbinates are enlarged.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows AP deficiency of the maxilla and mandible.  There is a high occlusal plan angle.  Teeth appear to occlude only the distal of the first molars and the second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.  There is an adenoid mass of substantial size in the nasopharynx creating only about a 44 mm space between the posterior aspect of the turbinate and the adenoid tissue.  Roots look extremely short on the teeth.  Lip incompetence is present approximately 8 mm.

We reshot the lateral cephalometric radiograph and it shows that the oropharyngeal airway is about 4 mm at the soft palate level, about 1/3 of the normal dimension.  The soft palate does appear elongated.  

Left TMJ tomograms show a condyle that has undergone significant resorption and it is quite short vertically.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The head of the condyle appears to have a pseudocyst in the middle of it and it fills most of the condylar head.  Significantly decreased vertical and posterior joint space.  

LEESA ZILEMPE 				7/1/05					Page 3


Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is markedly smaller in size and normal and has lost significant volume.  There is decreased vertical and posterior joint space, but not quite as significant as the opposite side.  The trabecular pattern inside the condyle appears to have changed, but not quite as dramatically as the opposite side.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  However, it appears that only the left side was shot.

Panorex shows that the left condyle appears smaller than the right condyle.  Both appear to have lost volume.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  She has impacted mandibular third molar and maxillary right third molar and a partially erupted mandibular left third molar.  Roots are extremely short particularly on the incisor cuspids and second bicuspids in the upper arch.  Roots in the lower areas though the second bicuspids are a little bit shorter than normal.  Turbinates appear as though they fill most the nasal cavity.  The four first bicuspids are absent. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption and articular disc dislocation with clinical evidence of reduction.
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Slight posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency. 
AP macrogenia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior overbite of 2 mm. 
Occludes on the first and second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion.
Slight crowding of lower anterior arch. 
Sligh over-angulation of lower anterior teeth.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Severe snoring.
Daytime tiredness.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Masticatory dysfunction.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction,
Adenoid mass in nasopharynx contributing to partial nasal airway obstruction.
Impacted third molars x4.
High occlusal plane angle of 24 degrees (normal 8 degrees.)
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm (normal 11 mm.)
LEESA ZILEMPE				7/1/05					Page 4


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Strip the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing. 

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance forward, level the curve of occlusion and correct transverse discrepancies.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible approximately 20 mm.
Partial turbinectomies.
Removal of impacted third molars x4.
HTR implant to anterior mandible.

     3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.