ALIZA POLKES									11/02/2009

Aliza Polkes is 17 years old.  She is aware of the onset of TMJ problems at about the age of 15 when she noticed clicking in her jaw joints.  Her joints no longer click or pop.  She has no problems with headaches, but she does have TMJ pain at a level of 6 to 7 per day and myofascial pain at about a level of 6 that can escalate to 8.  She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 6, disability at 6.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, but occasionally gets vertigo.  The only other joints that bother her are her knees occasionally.  To palpation, she has pain at a level of 5 over the temporalis muscles, 6 over the masseters, 6 over the shoulders, and 7 over the TMJs.  The joints function smoothly bilaterally.  Incisal opening is 40 mm but only 23 without pain.  Excursion movements are about 4 mm in each direction.  She is predominantly a mouth breather, particularly at night when she sleeps.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, there is fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is 1 mm off to the left as is the chin.  She has lip incompetence of probably about 7 mm.  In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably 2-3 mm.  Maxilla is probably AP retruded by about probably about 6 mm.  Chin is AP deficient by about 15 mm.  Chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Aliza has an anterior open bite of about 2-3 mm.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship, being about 2 mm Class II on the right side and probably 1 mm Class II on the left side.  It appears that she has a little bit of a tendency towards transverse deficiency in the maxilla.  She has a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left cuspid being almost 2 mm higher than the right cuspid in the upper arch.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. 

Basic diagnoses for Aliza would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ AICR.
Maxillary AP,  posterior vertical, and transverse hypoplasia 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Slight Class II end-on occlusion. 
Anterior open bite of 3 mm.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. 
Headaches.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal airway obstruction.
Occluding only on the mandibular left second molar in centric relation. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction, down graft the posterior aspect and expand.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.  
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
