CLAIRE ZISA									08/11/2006

Claire is referred by Dr. Lustig in Clifton, NJ.  Phone number is 973-778-7171.  Claire states that in 1965 she got hit in the mouth with a time game bomb which is a game and fractured some of her teeth and may have hurt her jaws.  It was not until the birth of her second child in 1980 that she began developing severe headache problems.  In 1985, she had orthodontics on her lower teeth only as they were afraid to touch her upper teeth.  She has had splints in the past beginning about 10 years ago.  She has had physical therapy on and off and massage therapy.  She has had splints for the past two years though they do not seem to be helping her very much.  More recently she has had some lidocaine injections which did help her short-term.  More recently, she has had Botox injections into the muscles.  

MEDICATIONS:
Imitrex in the mornings four to five times per week.
Naprosyn. 

She gets significant problems with earaches, tinnitus and she can get severe vertigo.  She is aware of clenching her teeth at night but no does believe she does it during the day.  She usually wakes up with her severe headaches in the morning.  These occur almost daily now at a level of 10 in the frontal, temporal, posterior had and top of the head areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 5, diet at 3, disability at 7.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Pain in jaw particularly on the right side.
Ear always feels clogged on the right side.
Migraines which can wake her up three to five days per week.
Neck and shoulder pain.
Chin has become more retruded.
Always feels dazed from the ear pressure.

GOALS:
No more headaches, TMJ pain or jaw pain.
No more ears clogged.
Chin back to normal position. 

In frontal view, Claire has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relation is about 2 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline.  In profile, she has some AP deficiency of the maxilla of probably 3 to 4 mm.  Chin is retruded about 15 to 18 mm.  Chin-neckline is extremely short and chin-neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, she is missing mandibular right first molar but has her second and third molars.  The second molar is shifted forward so the size of the pontic replacing the first molar is the size of the bicuspid.  On the left side she has all of her teeth but missing the wisdom tooth.  Likewise, the wisdom teeth are missing in the upper arch but the rest of the teeth are all present.  She has some mild crowding of lower anterior arch and accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch.  She has a Class II cuspid relationship.  She has an overjet of about 3 mm.  Probable significant tooth size discrepancy is present.  

CLAIRE ZISA 				08/11/2006				Page 2


She has a crossbite tendency on the right side.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.  Intraorally, the oropharynx appears clear.  The uvula is moderately enlarged.  Soft palate seems to be mildly elongated but not too significant.  Faucial pillars appear relatively normal.  Claire always feels as though she has a stuffed up nose.  Intranasally, there is some deviation in the nasal septum going from side-to-side.  At the bottom, there appears to be spurring out on both sides.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  To palpation she has severe pain over the TMJs and high moderate pain over the styloids, SCMs, posterior neck, right medial pterygoid area and mild to moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters, shoulders and left medial pterygoid area.  Maximal incisal opening is 34 mm.  Opening without significant pain 23 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 5 mm, to the left 8 mm. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular right first molar and third molar.  Mandibular right first molar is missing and replaced by a bicuspid size pontic.  The second molar is tilted significantly lingually.  Missing all four third molars.  She is also missing maxillary left lateral incisor replaced by a bridge.  There are crown units that extend all the way from the right maxillary cuspid to the left second molar.  The in the lower arch there is 3-unit bridge replacing the submandibular right first molar.  On the left side she has crowns on at least two to three teeth.  Columellas appear arthritic with the right side appearing worse than the left side.  She has root canals on the maxillary right lateral incisor, mandibular left second bicuspid and mandibular right second bicuspid. 

Waters view shows that she has hyperplastic turbinates.  The bony septum appears relatively straight.  The sinuses appear a little bit hazy but not too significant.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows that she has severe arthritic changes in the joints with significant loss of condylar volume.  Decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.  Articular eminence is relatively flat.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is arthritic but not nearly as severe as the right side.  Significantly decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.  Difficult to identify specific fossa outline.  On opening, there is restricted translation of both jaw joints.  

Lateral cephalometric x-ray shows that Claire has a retruded mandible and chin.  High occlusal plane angle is present.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm.  At the base of the tongue, the airway measures 3 to 4 mm.  There is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of at least 5 mm.  There is significant crowding in the lower arch.  Crossbite tendency on the right side which will need to be addressed. 




CLAIRE ZISA				08/11/2006				Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with dislocation and probable non-salvageability. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia. 
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Missing mandibular right first molar, maxillary left lateral incisor both replaced with bridges.
Extremely small maxillary incisors.
  Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 5 to 6 mm.  
  Significant crowding in the lower anterior teeth. 
  Over-angulation of lower anterior teeth.
  Severe TMJ pain. 
  Severe headaches. 
  Myofascial pain. 
  Masticatory dysfunction. 
  Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.
  Hypertrophied turbinates. 
  Nasal septal deviation and spurring.
  Nasal airway obstruction.
  Crossbite on the right side. 
  Nocturnal clenching.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications.
a.  Klonopin 1 mg tablet one tablet q.h.s. to control nocturnal clenching and bruxism.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Separate all the crowns in the upper arch but keep the left lateral incisor pontic attached to the left central incisor.  Open up spaces at least 1 mm around each of the anterior maxillary teeth to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy and make more normal size crowns.  Expand the upper arch somewhat particularly in the cuspid, first bicuspid area on the right side. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 3 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the tooth size problem and keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward. 
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)




CLAIR ZISA					08/11/2006				Page 4


Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and expand.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.) 
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Augmentation genioplasty.
Nasal septoplasty.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to reconstruct crowns and bridges. 
