NICHOLAS ZEMAN									07/23/2007

Nicholas is 22 years old.  He is currently being treated orthodontically by Dr. John Katsis, 130 N. Bloomingdale Rd., Bloomingdale, IL 60108.  Nick takes albuterol but no other medications.  He has problems with sinuses and he has been diagnosed with having asthma.  Nick has some difficulties breathing through his nose and breathes through his mouth predominately when he is sleeping.  He does snore some and the severity depends upon his level of congestion at the time.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Lower jaw is in front of the upper jaw.
Slight pain once in a great while predominately in the chin area.
Difficulties eating and chewing. 
Difficulties breathing through the nose.

Nick has no problems with TMJ pain, headaches or myofascial pain problems.  He rates his jaw function at 0, diet at 0, and disability at 2.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  
In frontal view Nick has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 6 mm.  Maxillary midline appears to be about 1 mm off to the right.  Mandibular dental midline appears to be about 2 mm off to the left.  Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are both fairly well aligned to each other so the chin also is about 2 mm off to the left.  With his lips relaxed, Nick shows about 4 mm of lower teeth.  Lip incompetence is about 14 mm.  In profile view, he has about 5 mm of infraorbital deficiency.  Maxilla is AP deficient by probably 6 mm.  He is AP deficient by probably 10 to 12 mm.  Chin-neckline is short although chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Nick has had lower first bicuspids extracted and lower teeth retracted posteriorly.  He appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  Teeth may be in a little bit of an inclination.  Teeth otherwise appears fairly well aligned and leveled.  Right cuspid may be 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch, Nick is also missing the first bicuspids.  Nick is almost a full Class III cuspid relationship on the right side, Class III end-on on the left side.  There is probably a 4 mm Class III on the left and probably 7 mm on the right.  There is an anterior and left posterior crossbite.  He has a 0 overbite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  He has huge tonsils that fill up a good part of the oropharynx but he gives no history of problems relative to recurrent tonsillitis.  The columella is a little bit wide.  The luminal valves are somewhat constricted.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged and appear to be contributory to some nasal airway obstruction.  Transversely, the maxilla appears fairly level.  As Nick shifts his mandible a little bit to the right side about 2 mm, it does improve the symmetry of the arches.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of maxillary third molars and lower third molars are erupted into position.  The right cuspid root tip is tipped mesially.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Articular eminence is quite shallow.  Joint space appears relatively normal.  





NICHOLAS ZEMAN				07/23/2007				Page 2

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Relatively shallow articular eminence.  Joint space looks adequate.  On opening there is good translation of both condyles.  

Waters view shows significant deviation of the nasal septum and turbinates appear quite large and appear to be obliterating most of the nasal airway.  The left sinus appears opacified while the right one remains open.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Nick has AP maxillary deficiency, anterior vertical maxillary excess, AP microgenia, high occlusal plane angle and a Class II occlusion.  Tonsils can be seen on the radiographs and appear quite prominent.  Oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Bilateral infraorbital hypoplasia.  
Rule out bilateral condylar hyperplasia.
Class III occlusion,
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.
Supernumerary tooth in the maxillary right alveolus in about the bicuspid first molar area.
Missing all 4 first bicuspids and maxillary third molars.
 Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Nasal septal spur. 
 Nasal airway obstruction. 
 Hypertrophied tonsils.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Tip right lateral incisor root mesially and cuspid root distally to make room for interdental osteotomies (similar to the root positioning on the left side.)
Continue to align and level the mandibular arch.
Surgery. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 6 mm and expand it approximately 8 mm.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible upward and forward in a counterclockwise direction.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Nasoseptoplasty.
Bilateral tonsillectomy (by Dr. Lawrence Weprin.)
Bilateral infraorbital augmentation with medpor implants.  
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
