LESLIE ZENT									01-17-03

Leslie is 30 years old and referred by Dr. Michael Downie.

Patient History

She has Crohn’s disease, TMJ problems, and depression. Previous surgery included wisdom teeth removal and ear tubes. Her Crohn’s condition is currently in remission. She does have some chronic sinus problems. She has some allergies, particularly to IODINE and ANTIHISTAMINES. She is aware of having arthritis in her jaw joints and also perhaps her left knee. 

Leslie has significant problems with earaches with the left side being slightly worse than the right side. She has bilateral tinnitus but no vertigo or hearing loss. She gets headaches in the temporal and posterior head area on a daily basis at about a level of 4, but they can escalate up to 10. She rates her TMJ pain which is fairly constant at a level of 6, overall pain at 5, jaw function at 8, diet at 7, and disability at 6.

Leslie is not exactly sure when her jaw problems began. She became aware of having the problems in about September of 1989 when she had her wisdom teeth removed. This seemed to create the onset of her jaw joint problems. Her mother thinks that she had jaw problems earlier than that and, in fact, had braces when she was in the fifth grade. Her ortho was from ages from 9 to 11. She has had treatment in the past including multiple attempts at physical therapy, ultrasound, splint therapy x 2, and acupuncture. Some of those treatment modalities would help her temporarily, but nothing obviously was a permanent fix for her. She apparently has significant problems with nocturnal clenching and bruxism. She is also aware of clenching her teeth during the day. 

Other joints that bother Leslie include the following:  Questionable about her neck and back, but she does have problems with her knees, right foot, and ankles. She is not aware of having any problems with jewelry.

Leslie’s father had a jaw malalignment problem as well and had his condition surgically corrected. Leslie has not had any surgery done to her jaws. Her jaw problem is worse than her dad’s. 

Leslie doesn’t think that her condition is getting any worse but is not really sure about that. 

Current Medications

Remicade infusions (for Crohn’s)
Azathioprine 50 mg (for Crohn’s)
Nexium 40 mg 
Depakote 250 mg
Effexor XR 150 mg q.d.
Tylenol #3
Nasonex
Vicodin p.r.n. 

Clinical Examination

Leslie has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is 0. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Nasal tip is a little bit off to the left side a couple of millimeters. Mandibular dental midline is about 4 mm off to the left. Chin is probably about 7 mm off to the left.

In profile view, Leslie has some deficiency in maxillary projection probably about 3 or 4 mm. Chin is probably about 10 or 15 mm deficient. Chin-neckline is short. Submental area is quite full.

Intraorally, Leslie is missing the lower first bicuspids, probably removed for previous orthodontics. There is some very mild crowding, lower anterior arch. She seems to have good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. She has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars present. 

In the upper arch, she is missing first bicuspids as well. Has some transverse narrowness in the upper arch. She has a Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and basically a slight Class II on the left side and a left posterior crossbite. In the maxilla, the right cuspid may be just about a millimeter lower than the left cuspid, and the oropharynx looks relatively healthy, except she has huge tonsils with the left one being larger than the right one. Apparently they are asymptomatic and not causing any problems. She recently had them evaluated by a throat specialist, who felt that they were fine.

Intranasally, she has a deviated nasal septum off toward the left side. Turbinates are moderately large with the right one being larger than the left one. However, the left one basically touches against the nasal septum causing I believe nasal airway obstruction. She has a very wide columella base and very narrow nostrils. Opening up the right naris enabled her to breathe much easier through the right side of her nose. Opening up the left side did not improve the airway very much most likely due to the position of the turbinate and septum on that left side. She basically has an end-on incisor relationship with the right incisors in an anterior crossbite with the left incisors.

To palpation, she has high moderate to severe pain to palpation over the left TMJ, right SCM, moderate pain over the left masseter, right TMJ, right styloid area, right shoulder, and milder discomfort over the temporalis, medial pterygoids, right masseter, left styloid, left SCM, and left shoulder areas. On opening, she has severe audible, painful crepitation in both TMJs. Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm, but she could only open to about 5 mm without pain problems. Excursive movements, although very painful, were 10 mm in each direction.


Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex demonstrates the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. Sinuses look reasonably good. Nasal airway seems to show that the left turbinate is large, the right one is large, but there seems to be some airway there. Left TMJ condyle demonstrates severe osteoarthritic changes with a large anterior beak or osteophyte present. Right TMJ shows a condyle with some bony changes but has a very long head and neck which could be compatible with a unilateral right condylar hyperplasia. Lots of restorations particularly in the lower posterior teeth. 

Waters view shows what appears to be a fluid level perhaps in the right sinus area. Other sinuses appear relatively clear. Nasal airway appears to be blocked quite a bit with the turbinates. Bony nasal septum appears to be fairly well aligned, although the deviation seen intranasally could be due to the cartilage. The significant facial asymmetry is noted. Some curvature in the neck.

Left TMJ tomogram shows severe arthritis affecting the mandibular condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Slightly increased joint space posteriorly but decreased joint space anteriorly.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has better morphology than the other side but appears to be pointed or peaked superiorly with some flattening of the posterior head of the condyle. Joint space appears to be decreased superiorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

On opening, has good translation of the right condyle, but the left condyle shows some limitation with the condyle not clearing the inferior aspect of the articular eminence. The significant bony changes on the left condyle are seen. There is a distinct difference in condylar length with the left side being about 15 or 16 mm in length and the right side being 25 to 26 mm in length. 

Cephalometrically, Leslie appears to have some retrusion of the maxilla and mandible both. She has a high occlusal plane angulation. Vertical difference in position of the mandible vertically at the inferior border and also at the occlusal plane. Tonsils are quite large. Oropharyngeal airway is good perhaps in part due to the fact that the tonsils hold the tongue forward. The tongue fills most of the oral cavity.

Tooth-size analysis demonstrates a Bolton’s difference of 2.5 mm, and articulating the models shows that there is an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch, and there is a transverse deficiency of the maxilla.

When Leslie was in seventh grade, she got hit in the face with a door that probably fractured her nose including her septum as well as caused a large laceration down the center of her forehead that required about 18 sutures. She also had lacerations in her upper lip and her eyelids. 



Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocations with severe degenerative changes and nonsalvageable discs
Deviate mandibular prognathism off to the left side
AP maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary deficiency
Slight AP maxillary deficiency
Anterior and left posterior crossbites
Class III occlusion on the right side and closer to a Class I occlusion on the left side
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of approximately 2 to 2.5 mm
Mild crowding in the upper and lower anterior arch
Missing maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids secondary to previous extractions for orthodontic purposes
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction
Wide columella base creating narrow nostrils
Nasal airway obstruction

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure. Be sure to include the second molars in the arch wire particularly to improve alignment of the maxillary second molars

CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol) to facilitate construction of custom-made total joint prostheses

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it, decrease the occlusal plane, and level the occlusal plane utilizing bone plates and hydroxyapatite grafting for stability
Partial inferior turbinectomies
Fat grafts to bilateral TMJs (harvested from abdomen)
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy with bone screw stabilization
Reconstruct columella base

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion