THOMAS MCDERMOTT								10/15/2008

Thomas is 62 years old, referred by Dr. Tom Walsh, Key Largo, Florida.  Tom is in good health.  He weighs 230 pounds and is 5 feet 11 inches tall.  His primary concerns are as follows:

Sleep apnea.
Airway shrinking. 
Shortness of breath.
Overweight.
Cholesterol level. 

Tom feels as though he gets out of breath very easily and cannot exercise very well any more.  Tom’s blood pressure is relatively normal.  He has apparently no TMJ issues.  He has had a sleep study showing that he has severe sleep apnea and currently uses a CPAP machine.  He was diagnosed with sleep apnea about 3 years ago, although his condition has been present for a lot longer.  He has severe snoring to the point that his wife sleeps in a different room.  He has significant difficulties breathing through his nose particularly at night and is predominantly a mouth breather at night.  Interestingly, he does not have much daytime somnolence.  He does have a mild sleep disorder at night though. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Tom has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 28 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is -5 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline; however, the maxillary midline is shifted off to the left side about 2 mm.  Chin is on the facial midline.  In profile view, Tom has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably a good 6 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded by probably close to 18 mm.  Chin neckline is extremely short, and the chin angle is not defined.   There is significant fullness in the submental and neck area.  Tom does have a head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, Tom has all of his lower teeth back through the third molars.  He has got crowns on most of the posterior teeth on the right side as well as on the left side from the secondary bicuspids posteriorly.  In upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the third molars.  He basically has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with about a 1 mm open bite.  Tom has a tooth size discrepancy that is superior to the diastame between the septal incisors.  He has a vertical overbite of about 1 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy, however, the uvula is hyperplastic and the soft palate is moderately elongated.  Fascial pillars and tonsils appear normal.  Intranasally, the septum has some deviation in it.  Turbinates anterior are moderately enlarged, but may be significantly larger posterior.  To palpation, Tom has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints function smoothly.  Incisal opening is 48 mm.  Excursion movements are 10 mm in each direction.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except he is missing the third molars on the left side, but has them on the right side.  He has root canals in the maxillary left cuspid, right lateral incisor, mandibular left second bicuspid, and right second molar.  Most of the posterior teeth have crowns.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  It is difficult to evaluate the condyles.  The right side of the mandible appears slightly longer vertically than the left side.  
Waters view shows that the bony septum is fairly straight, but there is some deviation in the cartilaginous portion.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  Sinuses appear clear.  
Right TMJ tomogram was a little hard to read, but it appears that there is reasonable joint space and the condylar morphology appears relatively normal.  
The left joint is a little bit more difficult to read and we need to review the I-CAT evaluation to better determine condylar morphology.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is a vertical discrepancy in the inferior border of the mandible, although the occlusal plane appears reasonably level.  The oropharyngeal airway measures about 3.5 mm at the soft palate level and less than 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  There is a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1 to 2 mm higher than the right side.  The inferior border of the mandible in the right side is definitely lower than on the left side.  Tom states that particularly when he is driving that he will find that when he postures his jaw such that he has contact point over on the right side of his jaw unless the teeth are apart.  However, he can go into a well-balance bite when put into a centric relation and evaluated with occlusal paper.

Basic diagnoses for Tom would be as follows:    

AP maxillary hypoplasia.  
Vertical maxillary hypoplasia.  
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Class I occlusion.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Severe sleep apnea.
High occlusal plane angle. 
Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3.4 mm.
Maxillary diastema between the central incisors.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Hypertrophied soft palate and uvula.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Close the anterior diastema but open 1 mm of space between each maxillary lateral incisor and cuspid to equal 1 mm.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure and retract to help correct for the significant tooth size discrepancy.  May need to use bands on the molars since there are crowns present on almost all of the posterior teeth unless brackets can be adequately bonded to the crowns.
Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible approximately 15 mm in counterclockwise rotation. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 6 mm at the incisal edge and down graft it 3 mm posteriorly to decrease the occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty with lateral inversion flaps.
3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
4.   Restorative dentistry to build up the lateral incisors and central incisors, if necessary. 