MARY BETH MOORE								10/15/2008

Mary Beth is 66 years old, referred by Dr. Jeffrey Rocakacy, 591 Horsebarn Road, Suite 100, Rogers, Arkansas 72758.  Mary Beth does smoke one pack of cigarettes per day.  She has smoked for 51 years.  Primary concerns that Mary Beth has includes the following:

Constant severe pain in the right side of the face that is there constantly.
Clicking, popping, and grinding in the jaw joints.
Difficulties eating. 
Difficulties talking. 
Difficulties sleeping, particularly on the right side. 

She takes the following medications;

Cardizem 240 mg q.d.
Lipitor 40 mg q.d.
Boniva 1 time per month.
Mobic 7.5 mg b.i.d. 

She sometimes has tachycardia and she has mild myocardial bridging.  She had a mild heart attack in 1998.  She does have some difficulties breathing through her nose and breathes predominantly through her mouth.  She has moderate snoring, but is not aware of sleep apnea problems.  

Mary Beth’s problems began in the end of November 2007 with the gradual onset of unknown etiology of increased pain in the right side of the face and jaw area.  It continued to get worse until in January 2008 she began seeking help to fix the problem.  To date, she has had no treatment.  One doctor thought it might be a salivary gland stone and another one thought that it was an impacted third molar.  Dr. Rocakacy was the first to identify that it was a joint problem and referred Mary Beth here.  

She gets no headaches, but rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 6 and this is predominantly on the right side.  She rates her jaw function at 8, diet at 8, disability at 5.  She has constant tenderness, but no earaches or vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her left knee, right elbow, upper spine, and fingers.  The fingers, however, only swell and they are not painful.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Mary Beth has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 30 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -4 mm.  The maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are fairly well aligned as in the chin.  The nasal tip is just slightly off to the right side about 2 mm.  In profile view, Mary Beth appears to have some AP maxillary deficiency and some AP mandibular deficiency probably 10 to 15 mm.  There is probably a B deficient maxilla probably by 6 mm.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has significant crowding of the lower anterior arch.  She has adequate attached gingiva.  In upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class I cuspid relationship.  She has about a 3-mm deep bite.   She has some moderate crowding in the upper arch and the upper incisors at the mesial aspect are rotated posteriorly.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  She has some constricture of the fascial pillars, but otherwise everything looks fairly normal.  She has hypertrophied inferior turbinates and partial nasal airway obstruction.  She has some mild constricture of the luminal valves.  She does have moderate snoring, but no daytime somnolence.  She is not aware of sleep apnea and has no sleep disorder.  She does breathe through her mouth at nighttime.  To palpation, Mary Beth has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Left joint functions smoothly, however, the right side has audible severe crepitus present.  Maximal incisal opening about 33 mm.  She can get up to about 30 mm without significant pain.  Excursion movement to the right 8 mm and to the left 7 mm.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of impacted third molars in the upper arch and the mandibular left lower arch.  She has some increased calcification around the apex area of the mandibular left first molar.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The right condyle appears quite flattened with some heterotopic bone extensions anteriorly and posteriorly. 
Waters view shows that the turbinates appear enlarged.  Bony septum appears reasonably straight.  Sinuses look clear.  
Right TMJ tomogram was a little difficult, but it appears that there are some significant degenerative changes within the joint and probably bone-on-bone contact.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some anterior beaking.  There is a decreased vertical joint space and the articular eminence is relatively shallow.  This joint likewise may have a displaced articular disc.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both joints. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class I jaw relationship.  However, she has a severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension at the soft palate level of only 3 mm and at the base of the tongue at no more than 4 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Mary Beth would be as follows:    

Right TMJ severe arthritis with articular disc dislocation and severe degeneration and perforation.  
Right TMJ severe pain. 
Possible left TMJ pathology, but cannot confirm without MRI, but left joint is asymptomatic. 
AP maxillary hypoplasia.  
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle. 
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 to 4 mm (normal dimension is 11 mm).
Sleep apnea symptoms. 

I discussed with Mary Beth and her husband Jimmy in reference to the TMJ and airway issues as well as the jaw malalignment factor.  However, at this point in time, they are only interested in 
the right TMJ issue as it is creating severe pain and significantly interfering with their abilities to carry on normal life activities.  Therefore, the recommended treatment would be as follows:

CT scan of jaws and jaw joints 
Surgery.
Right TMJ reconstruction with total joint prosthesis.
Right TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).
Application and removal of arch bars.  