B152
B152 is 24 years old. Referred by Dr. XXXX who gave them my name. The correspondence we will do will be to Dr. XXXX.
By history, B152's joint problems began when somewhere between the ages of 11 to 13. He did have orthodontics beginning around 10 or 11 and continued through the age of 17. Relative to his joint issues, he was some aware of some popping in his joints back then of unknown etiology. B152 has no problems with headaches, but rates his average daily TMJ pain at about a level of 5 with average daily overall pain at 5, jaw function at 4, diet at 4, and disability at 5. He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo nor hearing loss. The only other joints that really bother him are his knees. He is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also during the day. He does not take any medications.

In frontal view, B152 has fairly good facial symmetry. The left side may be just slightly longer than the right side by 2 to 3 mm. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 4 mm. The maxillary dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the maxillary midline, although the chin is about 3 mm to the right. B152 is missing the lower central incisor. He appears to be missing the left central. He has a significant transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being at least 3 mm higher than the left side in both arches. In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably 2 to 3 mm. The maxilla is probably 5 to 6 mm AP deficient. The chin is retruded about 15 mm. The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined. He does have some prominence of the nasal dorsum. Intraorally, he is missing the mandibular left central incisor. He has some slight asymmetry in the lower arch with the left cuspid being probably about 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid. The upper arch likewise may be 1 mm posterior with the cuspid on the left side compared to the right side. Intraorally, he is missing the rest of his teeth back through the second molars, but he has a retained primary E on the mandibular left side that may be ankylosed and is submerged compared to the other teeth. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has a Class I cuspid molar relationship on the right side and slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side and a Class II molar relationship. He has a 5 to 6 mm deep bite anteriorly. Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy. Tonsils have previously been removed. Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderately enlarged. The septum appears to be deviated a little bit off towards the right side. The columella is wide at its base. The nostrils may be somewhat constricted. To palpation, B152 has no tenderness around the head and neck area. On opening, the right joint seems fairly smooth. On the left side, he has an open click of 5 to 10 mm and closing click of probably 5 mm. The maximal incisal opening is 47 mm, opening without significant discomfort 40 mm. The excursion movements are 10 mm in each direction. With excursion movements, he had audible popping in both the left and right TMJs.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and a retained E in the mandibular left quadrant. The permanent second bicuspid is not present. The turbinates look enlarged within the nasal cavity. The sinuses look relatively clear. It is difficult to evaluate the joints in this view. He does have a more prominent gonial notch on the right side compared to the left side.

Coronal view shows he has enlarged turbinates that appear to block most of the nasal airway. The sinus look relatively clear and healthy.
Axial view shows that the sinuses appear clear. He has a little deviation of the nasal septum anteriorly with a bulge out towards the right side. The turbinates appear enlarged and appear to block most of the airway.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of sclerosis on the top and a little bit of anterior beaking present. The articular eminence is moderately shallow. There is decreased superior and posterior joint space and increased anterior joint space.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little sclerosis on top. The condyle is significantly positioned posterior in the fossa with decreased posterior and superior joint space and significantly increased anterior joint space. The articular eminence is relatively shallow.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There is definite decreased joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. The condyle is actually postured out laterally in the fossa with an increased medial joint space. There is decreased vertical joint space, particularly at the lateral rim of the fossa. There is almost like a small osteophytic development extending out almost beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 3 mm or so.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows there is a definite vertical discrepancy at the occlusal plane level with the left side being almost 5 mm lower than the right side in the bicuspid and first molar area. The inferior border of the mandible appears to only have about a 2 mm vertical difference. The maxilla and mandible appear to be retruded. The oropharyngeal airway space may only be about 3.5 mm at the soft palate level and 5 mm at the base of the tongue. It appears that there was some movement during the x-ray relative to the soft tissues.

The orthodontist we are going to use for B152 is Dr. XXXX.
Basic diagnoses for B152 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation being worse on the right side as compared to the left side with early reduction of the disc on the left side and nonreducing on the right side.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia as well as transverse asymmetry with the left side 3 mm lower than the right side. Mandibular AP hypoplasia with vertical asymmetry in the dental alveolus with the left side being 3 mm lower than the right side. Class I occlusion on the right side, Class II end-on occlusion on the left side.
Anterior deep bite.
High occlusal plane angle.
Ankylosed mandibular left primary E without a successor. Hypertrophied turbinates creating nasal airway obstruction.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm (normal dimension 11 mm).
TMJ pain.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 5 mm (secondary to missing mandibular left central incisor).

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Extract mandibular left primary E. b.	Place turbos on maxillary central incisors, mandibular right first and second molars, and at least one of the bicuspids to open the bite. Consider using TADs on the left side of the maxilla to vertically stabilize those teeth so that they are not extruded and to consider possible slight intrusion of those teeth 1 to 2 mm. Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. c.	Vertically extrude and align the left mandibular cuspid, bicuspid, and first molar. Close the extraction space about 2 mm by losing posterior anchorage and having the molars move forward. Make the space equal to the size of the second bicuspid on the opposite side of the arch. Consider placing a turbo on the mandibular left second molar to provide some vertical stability on that side. Tip lower incisors forward opening up 1 mm of space around each of the anterior 5 teeth to compensate for the tooth size discrepancy. These teeth can later be bonded or veneers or crowns placed.
2. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward approximately 14 mm and level it transversely. c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward approximately 6 mm at the incisal edge as well as level it transversely and correct any transverse discrepancies that may be present. d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. e.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the chin forward about 4 mm.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
4. Restorative dentistry to place a dental implant in the left mandibular second bicuspid area with placement of bonding, veneers, or crowns on the lower incisors to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.

The vertical asymmetry affecting the left maxillary and mandibular dental alveolus is the result of the ankylosed mandibular left primary second molar. Apparently, it was attempted to extrude that tooth out vertically into the arch, but instead because it was ankylosed, it intruded the adjacent teeth and allowed the maxillary teeth to be pulled downwards as well creating the vertical asymmetry on the left side.

B152 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. The disc appears to be medially and anteriorly displaced.
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. The disc appears to be medially and anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some mild arthritic changes. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced sitting beneath the articular eminence. The articular eminence is relatively shallow.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some mild arthritic changes too. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced. The articular eminence is moderately shallow.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated with late reduction on opening.

