DANIEL MCVEIGH									11/06/2008

Daniel is 40 years old.  His primary concerns are snoring and daytime tiredness.  The onset of snoring was about 2 to 3 years ago.  Last year, Daniel had a nasal septoplasty performed by Dr. Jennifer Jordan.  This provided no significant improvement.  He did have a sleep study done within the past year that showed he had mild sleep apnea problems, but Dan states that he essentially did not sleep all night long.  Dan has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  No other joints bother him.  He does think that he does have some clenching or bruxism at night time.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Dan has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  The maxillary midline is just slightly off to the left about 1 mm.  The mandibular dental midline and chin actually appear pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Dan appears to have some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 to 5 mm.  The chin appears to be retruded by about 15 to 18 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, Dan has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has got good attached gingiva.  He has mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  He has got lingual tori bilaterally that fill up a pretty significant volume.  In the upper arch, Dan has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has a fairly good sized diastema on the right side between the cuspid and first bicuspid.  He has a Class I molar relationship on the right side, but Class II end-on cuspid relationship.  On the left side, he is basically a Class I.  Dan has an anterior deep bite of about 4 to 5 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal except the uvula is hyperplastic.  The posterior facial pillars are positioned a little bit posterior.  Intranasally, it appears that Dan has had partial turbinectomies, but posteriorly there may be still be some remaining.  The septum looks reasonably straight.  There also could be some mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction posteriorly, but anteriorly it looks open.  Dan has a slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being about 1 to 2 mm lower than right side in the cuspid area.  Maximal incisal opening is 46 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 6 mm, to the left 8 mm.
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  He has a crown on the maxillary right first molar.  The sinuses look clear.  The condyles look relatively normal.  
Waters view shows that the nasal airway looks actually fairly good.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Septum appears straight.  Sinuses appear clear.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology and actually there is fairly good joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep. 
Left TMJ tomogram is a little bit harder to read, but it appears that there is good joint space and the condyles look like they have reasonably good morphology.  
Lateral cephalogram shows that Dan has a retruded mandible and maxilla.  He has a high occlusal plane angle.  There is a significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of only about 3 to 4 mm.  At the base of the tongue, the airway dimension is about 5 to 6 mm.  

Open tomograms show that there is good translation of the condyles. 
Basic diagnoses for Dan would be as follows:    

AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Mandibular hypoplasia.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 11 mm).
Hypertrophied uvula.
High occlusal plane angle.
Crowding in the lower anterior arch.
Bilateral lingual tori. 
Rule out TMJ pathology. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

MRI of left and right TMJs.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Close up diastema between the maxillary right cuspid and first bicuspid.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward.  Try to expand the molars and bicuspids slightly.
Sleep study. 
Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction forward 12 to 15 mm. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward in a counterclockwise direction approximately 5 mm. 
Uvulectomy. 
Removal of bilateral mandibular lingual tori. 
Possible TMJ surgery if MRI identifies TMJ pathology.
5.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

