LISA MUSIAL									10/24/2009

Address:  180 Heritage Circle W.,  Left Bridge, Alberta, Canada T1K7K5

Lisa is 31 years old.  Based on her questionnaires, she states that she has had an over/under bite since childhood.  The jaw issue was first noticed when she went to an orthodontist in 1996 and 1997.  

Lisa takes the following medications:

Wellbutrin XL 150 mg q.d.
Cipralex 10 mg q.d.

Her primary concerns are as follows:

Teeth do not touch.
Keeps her mouth open most of the time because of her severe malocclusion.
This increases mouth breathing. 
Jaws get tired and achy.
Narrow airway in the back of her throat.
Concerns that her jaw joints are worsening.
Not happy with her appearance.

Lisa rates her TMJ pain at a level of 3 and headaches at a level of 3 that she gets predominantly in the temple areas and behind the eyes.  Her average daily pain is at a level of 1.  She rates her jaw function at 1, diet at 1, disability at 0.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  She is under treatment for depression and has been on medications for 8 years.

She has moderate difficulty breathing through her nose and breathes through her nose a lot when she sleeps.  She has snoring and daytime somnolence.  She has had a sleep study, but the results were not back when she filled out her forms.  She apparently does not have any over sleep apnea symptoms.  

Cone beam radiographs were taken of her jaws.  The TMJ joints were cut off and not included in the radiographs.  We were unable to open the photographs and x-rays that were sent via disc.  We were able to open the Planmeca imaging.   Therefore, based on the questionnaires and the somewhat limited imaging of the Planmeca, Lisa’s diagnoses likely include the following:

Probable TMJ pathology that may include disc dislocations and possibly condylar resorption.
Mandibular hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP, posterior vertical and transverse hypoplasia.
Class II occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
Anterior open bite.
Hypertrophied nasal turbinates. 
Partial nasal airway obstruction.
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.

Treatment plan would likely consist of the following:

MRI of left and right TMJs to determine present pathology, diagnoses, and aid in treatment recommendations.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to help prevent from flaring them any further forward.  Be sure to include the second molars in the orthodontics.   
Surgery (depending on MRI assessment). 
Consider bilateral TMJ reconstruction with mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
Consider bilateral Mitek anchors if the discs are salvageable. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies if Mitek anchors are used in the joints 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

This treatment plan should get Lisa the best possible treatment outcome.  The unknown is the status and pathological process that may be present in the TMJs.  An MRI is definitely indicated for evaluation.  
