MIRIAM MITCHELL								04/20/2009

Miriam is 18 years old, referred by Dr. Robert Norris, San Antonio, TX.  Miriam is in good health with no major medical problems.  The history is that Miriam began with orthodontic treatment when she was about 10 years of age and has been in braces for 8 years.  She recently switched to Dr. Norris, and he has taken off the old appliances and put on new ones.  Primary concerns that Miriam has are as follows:

Teeth do not meet after 8 years of braces. 
Predominantly a mouth breather.
Difficulties getting the lips together. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 8 mm.  The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is also close to being on the facial midline.  The chin is shifted off to the left side probably about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline may be about 1 mm off towards the left as is the mandibular dental midline about 1 mm.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded by about 5-6 mm.  Chin is retruded about 15-18 mm.  The chin neckline is extremely short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  Miriam has a lip incompetence of about 10 mm.  Intraorally, Miriam has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  The second molars are actually tipped lingually quite significantly.  The rest of the teeth are fairly well aligned.  She has relatively thin tissues over the roots of her teeth.  The roots of the lower incisors cuspids are very prominent.  In the upper arch, Miriam has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class I cuspid relationship by about 3-4 mm on the right side and probably 1-2 mm on the left side.  She has about a 1 mm vertical overbite.  She likewise has about a 1 mm overjet.  Maxillary incisors appear to be quite vertical.  Right cuspid appears to be about 2 mm anterior to the left cuspid in the lower arch.  In upper arch, the right cuspid is about 2 mm anterior to the left cuspid.  The right maxillary cuspid and the mandibular cuspid are about 2 mm lower vertically than the left side.  When smiling, Miriam displays about 5 mm of gingiva.  The oropharyngeal areas look normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderate in size.  The septum anteriorly is deviated off to the right side and the right nostril area.  She probably has moderate nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, Miriam has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Maximum opening is 55 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 10 mm, to the left 9 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  I-CAT: Panorex shows the presence of four developed, but unerupted third molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Condyles appear a little bit small and it appears as though they have lost volume.  It appears there is a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyles.  
Coronal view shows the presence of hypertrophied turbinates.  The septum appears deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  She has a mucous retention cyst in the maxillary left sinus.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat small in size and looks as though it has lost some volume.  There is some anterior beaking present and a little sclerosis on the top of the condyle.  Joint space appears decreased vertically.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow. 
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears smaller in size than normal.  There is some anterior beaking present.  There appears to be a more normal vertical joint space perhaps on this side, but there is decreased anterior joint space.  Articular eminence is larger on this side than the opposite. 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit shorter vertically than normal.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  There is a little osteophyte extending off the lateral pole of the condyle. 
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost some vertical volume.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Miriam has a retruded maxilla and mandible., but has vertical overgrowth of the maxilla.  Oropharyngeal airway appears quite constricted with an oropharyngeal airway of only about 4 mm at the base of the tongue and about 7 mm at the soft palate level.  She has a high occlusal plane angle, but appears to have fairly close to a Class I occlusal relationship.  She has significant lip incompetence and appears to have perhaps elongation of the vertical height of the anterior mandible.  Miriam has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 4 mm.  In frontal view, Miriam may have a little bit more fullness in the right side of the face by 2-3 mm as compared to the left side.  

Basic diagnoses for Miriam would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR).
Maxillary anterior vertical hyperplasia, but AP maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Class I end-on occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal 11 mm).
Sleep apnea symptoms including daytime somnolence and occasional apneic episodes. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Impacted third molars x4.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 4 mm.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

SURGICAL TREATMENT OPTION 1 (TMJ articular discs salvageable):
MRI of left and right TMJ 
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up 1 mm of space between the upper laterals and cuspids to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy.  Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy.    
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Maxillary osteotomies to advance her maxilla superiorly about 6 mm with a counterclockwise rotation.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin. 
Surgical removal of 4 impacted third molars. 
Bilateral partial turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors. 

SURGICAL TREATMENT OPTION 2 (TMJ articular discs are non-salvageable):
MRI of left and right TMJ 
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up 1 mm of space between the upper laterals and cuspids to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy.  Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy.  
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advance with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior maxilla upwards 6 mm and forward 6 mm.  
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts. 
Bilateral coronoidotomies. 
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin. 
Bilateral partial turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors. 