CAROL MCLAUGHLIN								04/13/2009

Carol is 62 years old, referred by Dr. Scott McLean, P.O. Box 2198, Ketchum, Idaho 83340.  The only previous surgeries that Carol has had are C sections x3 in 1975, 1980, and 1983.  She also has had arthroscopy of her right knee in 2004.  Carol also had breast implants placed in 1973.  One them ruptured in 1990 and created an immunological response.  She subsequently has had the implants replaced with saline.  

Carol takes the following medications:

Synthroid 0.1 mg q.d.
Premarin 0.325.
Prometrium 100 mg.
Wellbutrin 200 mg q.d.

Carol has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing at night time or during the day.  She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 6, average daily pain at 6, and headaches at a level of 7 that occur predominantly on the left side in the temple area, top of the head, and in the frontal area behind the left eye.  She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 4, and disability at 4.  To date, she has had no previous treatment for her TMJ situation.  Primary concerns that Carol has include the following:

Lower jaw has fallen down and backward changing facial structures. 
Speech is impeded. 
Difficulties eating and chewing. 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Carol has good facial symmetry to the middle and upper third face.  There is some asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -2 mm.  The maxillary dental midline is shifted off to the right side probably 1-2 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm off to the right and chin is about 6 mm off to the right.  In profile, Carol has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 2-3 mm.  The chin is retruded about 10 mm.  Chin neckline is short.  Intraorally, Carol has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has severe wearing on the buccal surfaces of the cuspids and bicuspids particularly.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side and slight Class II on the left side.  She has a tendency towards a buccal crossbite on the left side.  She has an overjet of about 3 mm.  Carol hits predominantly when she is talking on her molar teeth on the left side.  Clinically, it appears as though she is hitting predominantly on the right side when she is in maximum intercuspation.  There appears to be a tendency to have an open bite on the left side, particularly in the cuspid-bicuspid area.  She has about 1.5 mm vertical over bite.  To palpation, Carol has moderate pain over the TMJ area, left retromolar area, and mild tenderness over the temporalis, masseters, and shoulder area.  She has significant crepitation in both joints.  Maximal opening is 43 mm and about 35 mm without significant pain.  Excursion movement to the right is 6 mm, to the left 9 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal, except the fascial pillars are moderately constricted.  Intranasally, the septum has some deviation in it, but turbinates are relatively normal to mild in size.  By history and observation, she does not appear to have any significant nasal airway obstruction. 

I-CAT EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular third molars, but the presence of the maxillary third molars with the right one erupted in and the left one impacted.  The rest of the teeth are present.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The nasal septum in the bony area at least looks reasonably straight.  Left condyle appears arthritic and sclerotic.  Right TMJ shows that there is a spindly condylar head and neck present with sclerosis in the condylar head with significant loss of condylar volume.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows that turbinates are large.  There is deviation of the bony septum with a little bit of a spur coming off the septum towards the right side.  Sinuses appear clear.  
Axial view shows that the inferior turbinates are moderately enlarged, although the sinuses are relatively clear.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows significant arthritic changes in the joints with significantly decreased vertical joint space and some osteophytic kind of projections coming off the top of the condyle.  It appears that there is bone-on-bone contact.  The articular eminence is quite flat and appears to be reasonably sharp at the inferior aspect of it.  
Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condylar head and neck that are quite spindly in shape.  There is loss of condylar volume and decreased vertical joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep. 
Left TMJ coronal view of the TMJs shows significant degenerative changes with some sclerotic areas and some areas of what appears to be erosion.  There is significantly decreased joint space and in some areas it appears that there is bone-on-bone contact.  
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost significant volume and there is decreased superior joint space.  The condyle is quite narrow mediolaterally as well as vertically.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Carol has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  She has got two different occlusal plane levels.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm at the soft palate level and about 7 mm at the base of the tongue. 

Basic diagnoses for Carol would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis (significantly worse on the right side than the left side). 
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia with asymmetry. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and asymmetry. 
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being higher than the left side. 
Class I end-on occlusion being worse on the right side than the left side. 
Buccal crossbite tendency on the left side. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Sleep apnea symptoms including apneic episodes with awakening and inability to catch her breath. 
Significant cervical abrasions predominantly on the cuspids and bicuspids bilaterally being worse in the mandibular arch. 
Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Consider sleep apnea study. 
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction to correct the vertical asymmetry.  
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen or buttock). 
Bilateral coronoidotomies with bone screw stabilization.
Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars. 
Restorative dentistry to build up and repair the dental cervical lesions. 
