JOHN MWAURA									11/14/2008

John is 33 years old.  Referred by Dr. George Q. Adams, 2845 Parkwood Blvd., #100, Plano, TX.  John is in good health.  He does have some allergy prescriptions that he takes at times.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -4 or -5 mm.  In profile view, he has fairly good facial balance, but may have a component of bimaxillary protrusion.  Intraorally, he has all of his lower teeth back through the third molars, but the third molars are partially impacted.  He has some slight malrotations in the lower incisors.  The attached gingiva is fairly thin in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, he appears to have all of his teeth back through the second molars present.  He has a basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the left side and a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side.  He has an end-on incisor relationship.  The upper incisors appear over angulated.  Upper lateral incisors appear small in size.  To palpation, John has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, the right joint functions smoothly, but on the left side he has a click consistently at about 30 to 35 mm of opening and at closing the click is somewhere around 25 mm. 
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of impacted maxillary third molars and mandibular third molars that are at least partially impacted.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  Condyles look relatively normal.  There is an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.  
Waters view shows that he has large turbinates.  He has what appears to be a large septal spur coming off the left side of his nose.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  
Right TMJ  appears to have reasonably good morphology and appears to have good joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Left TMJ is somewhat difficult to identify, but it looks reasonably normal.  There could possibly be some decreased joint space.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that John has a bimaxillary protrusion element to his occlusion.  Oropharyngeal airway space is slightly constricted at about 8 to 9 mm at the soft palate level and about 7 to 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  He does appear to have Bimaxillary protrusion.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy.  The uvula may be moderately elongated.  The soft palate look reasonably normal as did the fascial pillars which could be just slightly constricted.  Tonsils are close to being normal or just slightly enlarged.  

John does have some crenations on the lateral borders of his tongue almost all the way around.  Intranasally, he has moderately size turbinates, but John reports that he breathes through his nose predominantly when he sleeps.  He does state that he has some mild snoring and some mild daytime tiredness.  

Basic diagnoses for John would be as follows:    

Left TMJ articular disc dislocation. 
Anterior maxillary protrusion.
Anterior mandibular protrusion.
End-on incisor occlusion.
Class I cuspid on the left, slight Class III cuspid on the right. 
Maxillary vertical hypoplasia. 
Bimaxillary protrusion.
Impacted third molars x4.
Macroglossia. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.
Extract the maxillary first bicuspids.
Align and level the maxillary arch.  Close extraction space.  Decrease angulation of the maxillary incisors.  Can lose a little posterior anchorage, but no more than 2 mm.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2.5 to 3 mm of tooth structure and retract to decrease the over angulation of the lower incisors.
Surgery.
 Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward, down graft it, and correct any transverse discrepancies.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to counterclockwise rotate the mandible and set it posteriorly.  
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4. 
Reduction glossectomy.
3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
4.   Restorative dentistry if the patient desires veneers on his anterior teeth. 

Alternate treatment to manage the occlusion non-surgically:

Presurgical orthodontics. 
Extract maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids. 
Align and level the upper arch.  Close the extraction space, but open space around the upper lateral incisors to equal 1.5 mm around each tooth to correct for the tooth size discrepancy. 
Align and level mandibular arch and close the extraction spaces.  Loss some posterior anchorage.
Surgery.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Mandibular left sagittal split osteotomy.
Consider reduction glossectomy. 
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4. 
 3.   Post surgical orthodontics to finish and retain.
 3.   Restorative dentistry to include possible veneers to build up the sizes of the maxillary 4 incisors, particularly the laterals. 


