STEPHANIE MILLER								09/14/2009

Stephanie is 36 years old and referred by Dr. Brody Hildebrand, 8411 Preston Road, Suite 850, Dallas, TX 75225.  

Stephanie gets headaches on the average 3 times a week at about a level of 5, but at least once a week the headaches escalate to a 9 to 10 where she becomes totally debilitated.  She oftentimes when she gets her headaches will wake up with them in the morning.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 4, diet at 2, disability at 4, but 10 when she gets her severe headaches.  

The onset of her problems she believes began about 6 or 7 years ago when she began getting headaches.  At age 31, after the headaches began, she was struck on the lower jaw with a softball.  The softball injury knocked out 3 upper and 3 lower teeth and split her lip open.  They were able to save the teeth and put them back into position.  

The only treatment she has had to date includes orthodontics when began in April 2009 plus medications for her headaches. 

She gets earaches frequently, tinnitus frequently, and occasional vertigo.  She has some hearing loss in the left ear.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime. 

She takes the following medications:

Zomig 10-mg tablets, 4-5 times per month. 
Astelin.
Benadryl 25 mg 3 times per week. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Stephanie has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5-4 mm.  The maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the left.  The chin appears to be fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably 2-3 mm.  The upper lip and maxilla are probably about 6 mm AP deficient and the chin is probably 10-12 mm AP deficient.  The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined, but there is some submental fullness.  Intraorally, Stephanie is missing lower first bicuspids and upper first bicuspids.  She is pretty much Class I cuspid bilaterally and has about a 1 mm vertical overbite.  She may be just slight Class II on the left side by 1-2 mm.  She has had her wisdom teeth removed.  The soft palate and fascial pillars all look pretty much normal.  Uvula is extremely elongated.  I cannot really identify any tonsils.  Intranasally, turbinates may be moderately enlarged.  The septum looks relatively straight.  She has a wide columella and nostrils are very narrow.  Holding the nostrils open significantly improved her abilities to breathe through her nose.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the masseter muscles, right styloid area, and shoulders and high moderate to low severe pain to palpation over the left TMJ and left styloid area.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly, although she could detect some fine crepitus in her joints.  Maximal incisal opening is 47 mm, and she could get to about 35 mm without significant pain and or discomfort.  Excursion movement to the right 9 mm, to the left 8 mm.  Stephanie did have previous orthodontics when she was 11 for 2 years and included the extraction of 4 bicuspids.  This was done by Dr. Pat Brady.  She does have a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1-2 mm higher than the left side.  The midline might about 2 mm higher than the left side.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Condyles look a little bit arthritic.  
Coronal view shows that the inferior turbinates are quite large.  Sinuses appear clear.    
Axial view shows that sinuses are clear and the turbinates are fairly large.    
Left TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that has fairly good morphology and mediolateral width.  There is significantly decreased vertical joint space.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm.  
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good shape.  Lateral pole is significantly lower than the medial pole.  There is decreased vertical and lateral joint space.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 4 mm on this side.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some sclerosis on the head of it.  It is somewhat flattened with some anterior beaking.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  Articular eminence is moderate in shape .   
Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show there are a little bit more degenerative changes in this joint with greater amount of sclerosis and anterior beaking as well as flattening of the condylar head as compared to the opposite side.  Articular eminence is slightly more shallow than the opposite side.  There is decreased vertical joint space.    
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Stephanie has a retruded maxilla and mandible with a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway, however, looks reasonably good with an AP dimension of about 6 mm to the soft palate and 9 mm to the base of the tongue.  Stephanie has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Stephanie would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs anteriorly and medially displaced with questionable reduction. 
Maxillary and mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class I occlusion on the right, slight Class II end-on occlusion on the left. 
High occlusal plane angle. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied uvula. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Wide columella and narrow nostrils. 
Predominantly a mouth breather. 
Snoring and daytime somnolence. 


Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Make sure lateral incisor roots are tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally in case interdental osteotomies are necessary. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.  
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. 
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Uvulectomy.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
