IRENE MCMURTREY								04/01/2009

Irene will be 72 in 3 days.  I originally treated Irene back on March 23, 1985, with the following procedures:

Right mandibular body osteotomy.
Bilateral sagittal split osteotomies of the ramus to advance it. 
LeForte I maxillary osteotomies in 3 pieces.
ASIF bone fixation and Chappy bone plate fixation.

Since then, she has done fairly well.  Irene’s current symptoms began in about October 2008 when she began noticing significant grinding noises in her joints and some pain and discomfort.  

Clinical examination today shows that she is having no headaches and does not really have significant TMJ pain except at times upon function.  She rates her jaw function, diet at 4, disability at 3.  Incisal opening is 35 mm.  Excursion movements are about 5 mm in each direction.  Gleason action maintained itself fairly well with a good Class I with about 2 mm anterior open bite.  On jaw function, she has almost an audible crepitation in both joints.  To palpation, however, she is fortunate and does not have significant myofascial pain problems.  She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her finger joints with two fingers on each hand being primary problem areas.  The only medication she takes is thyroid medication and vitamins.  Another medicine she takes is called fisherman’s friend which is a throat lozenge that helps prevent cough.  The active ingredient is menthol 10 mg.  Intraorally, Irene is missing the lower maxillary first bicuspids.  She has one lower incisor that the root was removed on it and it is bonded her lower right central incisor and lateral incisor.  Oropharyngeal tissues look good and healthy.  Upper lip length is 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  Facial balance looks fairly good.  In profile, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably 4 to 6 mm and mandibular deficiency probably about 12 to 15 mm.  Chin neckline is a little bit short.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis
TMJ pain. 
Masticatory dysfunction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with total joint prostheses. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Application and removal of arch bars. 

This is the best option Irene has to correct her severe TMJ arthritis.  This should allow her to regain normal jaw function as she is significantly limited in her dietary aspect right now, and she has to say pretty much on a relatively soft diet.  She also has the pain factors that would be significantly improved as well.  We did discuss the surgery, and she is anxious to proceed on with treatment and get well. 