CAROL MONTEMAYOR								10/08/2008


Carol gets daily headaches at a level of 6 in the right temporal and posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 3, diet at 1, disability at 8.  She gets earaches in the right side, but only since the root canal therapy.  She gets some tinnitus but no vertigo.  She has been to see numerous doctors, all of whom have been unable to find anything wrong with her.  Previous surgeries that she has had include in 1993 right pelvic cyst removal, in 1999 C-section, and in 2007 partial hysterectomy (uterus only).  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Carol has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is probably about -1 to 2.  The maxillary, mandible, and chin midline are fairly well aligned to the facial midline. The nasal tip is just slightly off to the right side about 2 mm.  In profile, Carol has some AP maxillary deficiency.  Chin is a little bit strong compared to the lower lip.  Profile appears as though she has likely had four bicuspids extracted.  Upper lip supralabrale is actually posterior to subnasale.  She is 5 mm AP deficient in the maxilla.  Chin may be just slightly AP deficient, but not too significant.  Chin neckline is actually fair long.  Intraorally, Carol does have all of her lower teeth in the lower arch present.  She has a number of crowns, and, on the right side, they extend from first bicuspid through first molar, and, on the left side, they extend from the second bicuspid through the first molar.  She has moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she actually does have all of her teeth present.  She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  She has about a zero overbite relationship.  She has real small upper lateral incisors particularly on the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal.  Turbinates actually look fairly large, but she has a wide nasal structure and has no complaints of difficulties breathing through her nose.  Initially, after the accident, Carol had an anterior open bite, but she has worked her jaws, probably with clenching and bruxism, and has begun to get her teeth together which means she has probably impacted the molar teeth somewhat.  She feels that the angles of her mandible are not nearly as prominent now as they as used to be.  This is likely due to intrusion of the posterior teeth.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.  To palpation, she has some moderate discomfort over the right masseter, left medial pterygoid, right TMJ, right SCM, and bilateral styloid areas and posterior neck areas.  Maximal incisal opening is 38 mm.  Excursion movements are 7 mm to the right, 6 mm to the left.  On opening, she has audible crepitation in both joints, but she feels it greater on the right side than the left side.  Caroll has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2.5 mm.
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She is missing the mandibular right second bicuspid and apparently this tooth never developed.  She used to have a primary tooth up there until it came loose and then a bridge was placed.  She has a root canal in mandibular right second molar, mandibular left second bicuspid, and maxillary left first molar.  She has evidence of previous subcondylar fractures and with displacement of both heads which accounts for the abnormal morphology of the condylar heads as seen on the MRI.  Buccal height of the remaining condyle and condylar neck on the left side is significantly less than it is on the right side.  
Waters view shows that the turbinates are fairly good size, but it appears she may have an adequate airway.  Sinuses look clear.  She has no frontal sinuses.
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is extremely wide compatible with the previous fracture.  The main portion of the functional condyle is occluding on the articular eminence and is out of the fossa.  Vertical height of the ramus is probably somewhat foreshortened. 
Right TMJ tomogram likewise shows what is probably a subcondylar fracture with part of the condyle displaced anteriorly.  She functions beneath the articular eminence with the condyle out and forward from the fossa area.  The fossa is moderately steep.  With the displaced segment of the condyle forward, the condyle is quite wide and larger than the opposite side.  On opening, there is some translation, but not real significant.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she is basically skeletal Class I, although the maxilla does appear somewhat retruded.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  The base of the soft palate is probably closer to about 8 or 9 mm.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:    

Previous bilateral subcondylar fractures with displacement of the condyles. 
Residual deformity with the condyles functioning on the articular eminence.
Class I occlusion.
AP maxillary hypoplasia.  
AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
Occluding end-on on the central incisors. 
Significant crowding of the lower anterior arch. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2.5 mm
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up 1 mm of space around each of the upper lateral incisors.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary.    
Align and level mandibular arch.  
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and down graft it posteriorly. 
Bilateral coronoidotomies.
4.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
5.   Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors. 

