REBECCA NEEL									11/14/2008

Rebecca is 15 years old.  Referred by Dr. Ronald Phillips, 3315 64th Street, Lubbock, TX 79413.  Rebecca’s primary concerns are as follows:

Pain predominantly in the left side. 
Pop in the left jaw joint.
Headaches.
Neck pain.
Jaw catches on the left side. 

She would like to have pain relief and eliminate the jaw dysfunctional problems. 

Rebecca problems began about 18 months ago when she was 13 years old.  She has had previous orthodontics at the age of 9 for some preliminary work in the upper jaw and then full braces from the age of 12 to 14.  Her braces were removed in April 2006.  It was within a few months after that the left jaw joint issues began.  Treatment she has received to date includes the following:

A lower soft splint. 
Lower retainer.
An upper splint. 
A hard lower splint.
Previous medications that provided no improvement and include Naproxen 500 mg b.i.d. and meprobamate 400 mg.
Massage therapy.
Heat.

Rebecca gets left-sided earaches, occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her wrists and her knees.  Her knees are giving her such a problem that she has had to stop playing sports.  She has seasonal allergies and mild asthma.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time, but also during the day.  She gets frequent headaches that occur every day and sometimes they will occur two to three times during the day at a level of 5, predominantly in the temple areas.  The headaches are pretty much equal on both sides.  She gets pain in the left TMJ area at about a level of 6, average daily pain is at 5.  She rates her jaw function at 1, diet at 3, disability at 1.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Rebecca has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are pretty much aligned on the facial midline.  There may be just a slight elongation in the right side of the face maybe about 3 mm or so.  In profile view, she has some fairly good facial balance AP wise and vertically.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship and about a 2 mm vertical overbite.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated just slightly off to the left side, but not too significant.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged and a little bit inflamed. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the left TMJ and milder pain over the left temporalis, left retromandibular area, and right TMJ.  The right joint functions relatively smoothly on opening.  In the left joint, she had a pop as she came out over the articular eminence, but I do not believe that that was disc related.  Rebecca says at times, particularly if she has been clenching a lot at night or during the day, as she opens there will be a loud pop that can be heard across the room.  It appears that she has an inconsistent displacement of the articular disc.  Maximal incisal opening is 58 mm, but only about 37 mm without discomfort.  Excursion movement to the right 7 mm, to the left 8 mm.   
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer on the lower anterior arch.  It is difficult to evaluate sinuses and condyles.  
Waters view shows that the septum is reasonably straight, but the turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the right side.  Sinuses, however, appear relatively clear.    
Left TMJ tomogram is a little hard to interpret.  It appears there may be a decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.    
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology and good joint space.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a slight skeletal Class III relationship with dental compensations to place her into a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good.  

Basic diagnoses for Rebecca would be as follows:    

Left TMJ articular disc dislocation with reactive destructive lesion at the posterior aspect of the condylar head.
Left-sided mandibular hyperplasia. 
Left-sided TMJ pain. 
Headaches.
History of clenching and bruxism.
Impacted third molars x4. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

 Medication:  Klonopin 1-mg tablet q.h.s.
Placement of maxillary and mandibular orthodontic appliances.
Surgery.
Left TMJ removal of destructive lesion and reposition the articular disc with Mitek anchor. 
Left mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy to maintain good occlusal relationship.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I gave Rebecca a prescription for Klonopin 1-mg tablets, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet 1 hour prior to bedtime.  I told her if that is too strong that she should take half a tablet, and, if that is too strong, to take a quarter tablet.  She is to call me in one week to let me know how she is doing.  

