CRAIG OGLESBY									02/27/2009

Craig is 23 years old, referred by Dr. Moody Alexander in Arlington.  Primary concerns Craig has are as follows: 

Difficulties breathing through the nose. 
Teeth and jaws are malaligned. 
Some difficulties chewing foods. 
Some digestion problems related to inability to chew foods properly.
Snoring. 
Moderate to severe daytime tiredness. 

Craig has no problems with TMJ pain, headaches, or myofascial pain.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  No other joints bother him.  Craig is aware of having some snoring problems, moderate to severe daytime tiredness, but no sleep apnea and no sleep disorder.  He is apparently a mouth breather at nighttime and also during the day.  He takes no medications.  

Craig had orthodontics when he was 7 to 8 years of age and then from the age of 10 to 12.   According to his mother, Craig has always had jaw malalignment issues similar to what it is now, although it has gotten somewhat worse.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Craig has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 24 mm, and tooth lip relationship is zero.  The maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are all pretty much aligned with each other as is the chin.  In profile view, Craig has fairly good facial balance.  Lower jaw is slightly strong and upper jaw is just slightly weak by perhaps 3 to 4 mm.  Lower jaw, chin neckline, and chin neck angle are in fairly good balance.  Intraorally, Craig has all his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has got crowns on the left second bicuspid and first second molars.  He has root canals I believe in all four posterior teeth on that side.  The cuspids are slightly elevated compared to the rest of the teeth and the four incisors are somewhat depressed compared to the cuspids.  He has good attached gingiva.  The lower incisors appear to be in slightly more inclination.  In the upper arch, he already has his appliances on up there.  He has all of his teeth back through the second molars and has appliances on all of the teeth back through the second molars.  The upper arch is fairly well aligned.  Craig has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally, being probably about 4 mm Class III.  He has anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites.  He has a reverse overbite of about 0.5 mm.  He has probably got about a 5 mm reverse overjet.  Uvula is extremely long and may be partly responsible for the snoring.  The soft palate may be mild to moderately elongated, but not too significant.  Fascial pillars and tonsils appear relatively normal.  Intranasally, turbinates appear enlarged.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  No myofascial pain problems around the head and neck area. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  I-CAT coronal view shows that there are hypertrophied turbinates.  Septum appears reasonably straight.  He is missing all four third molars.  There is some movement in the imaging.  Condyles seem in reasonably good shape.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has got a Class III skeletal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway looks good.  

Basic diagnoses for Craig would be as follows:    

Mandibular prognathism. 
Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia.
Class III end-on occlusion. 
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbite.
Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm.
Slight reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch.
Excessively wide maxillary incisors labial lingually.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Hypertrophied uvula. 
Low occlusal plane angle of 4 degrees (normal 8 degrees).

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up at least 1 mm of space between the upper laterals and cuspids to help correct for the tooth size problem.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to either depress the cuspids slightly and/or elevate the incisors slightly to help level the lower arch.  
Surgery. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the posterior aspect superiorly to increase occlusal plane angle, expand, and advance it about 4 to 5 mm.    
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a clockwise direction.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Uvulectomy.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
