HANNA NELSON									09/29/2008

Hanna is 20 years old and a junior at SMU.  She and her family live in Vail, Colorado.  She is referred by Dr. Al Bishop, Edwards, CO, phone number (970) 926-2666.  Primary concerns that Hanna has are:

Her teeth and jaws do not fit together properly. 
Her back teeth have never touched together.
Only her incisors touch.
Occasionally popping in probably the right joint.  As she opens or yawns, the lower jaw seems to go towards the left side.  

Hanna initiated orthodontic treatment with Dr. Bishop in June 2008.  Hanna has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain.  She has no other joints that bother her.  No earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Hanna has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 1 mm.  The maxillary midline may be just slightly off towards the left side about 1 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is probably about 2 to 3 mm off to the left side.  Chin likewise is off to the left side about 3 to 4 mm.  Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other.  In profile view, the maxilla appears deficient by probably 4 to 5 mm.  Progonion looks in fairly good AP balance, although it does appear a little bit strong compared to the projection of the lower lip.  She has a nice length of the chin neck angle, and the chin neck angle itself is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Hanna has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has turbos on the mandibular first molars.  She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.  She likely has some anklyosis of the teeth that has kept that from erupting normally.  There is some mild spacing between the lower cuspids and laterals and cuspids and first bicuspids.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by probably about 3 mm.  On the left side, she is maybe just Class III by 1 mm or so.  She occludes only on her central incisors and has an open bite all the way back posteriorly occluding 4 to 5 mm on each side.  In the lower arch, the right cuspid appears to be about 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  The upper arch appears more symmetric.  The left side of the mandible appears slightly vertically longer than the right side by maybe about 3 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy.  Fascial pillars may be mild to moderately constricted.  Intranasally, she has moderately enlarged turbinates.  The septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  She has some mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction.  She has wide columella and narrow nostrils.  Luminal valves look reasonably normal.  Hanna believes that she breathes through her mouth at night when she sleeps, but not so much during the day.  She has a tendency towards a cross bite on the left posterior side and also anteriorly.  To palpation, Hanna has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function smoothly.  Maximum incisal opening is 45 mm.  Excursion movements are about 5 mm in each direction.  Hanna has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm.  Transversely, the maxillary occlusal plane appears fairly level, but the lower arch appears to be down lower on the left side around 2 mm in the cuspid and molar area.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  All the rest of the teeth are present, however.  There are turbos on the mandibular first molars.  Sinuses appear reasonably clear.  Condyles appear relatively normal.  Roots in lower first molars appear somewhat sclerotic.  
Waters view shows that the bony septum is fairly straight, but the turbinates appear quite large.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The left side of the mandible is just slightly lower than the right side.  The maxillary midline looks pretty much on the facial midline, but the mandibular dental midline is a bit off to the left side as is the chin.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows that a condyle that appears to have fairly good morphology and joint space looks fairly well balance.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is slightly postured forward in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderate in steepness.  Joint space looks relatively normal except the posterior space is slightly increased.  On opening, there is better translation of the right condyle than the left condyle with the right condyle coming out almost anterior to the articular eminence, whereas the left condyle remains beneath the eminence.     
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a very low occlusal plane angle in the mandible.  In the maxilla, it appears a little bit more normal.  The maxilla appears somewhat AP deficient as does the mandibular dentition, but the chin is strong relative to the lower incisors.  Oropharyngeal airway appears decreased in dimension.  To percussion, it is difficult to tell, but most of the teeth sound pretty good, but could not really test the first molars because of the turbos in position directly over the top of them.  

Basic diagnoses for Hanna would be as follows:    

AP maxillary deficiency. 
Possible slight transverse maxillary deficiency. 
Mandibular asymmetry with the mandible shifted about 3 to 4 mm to the left side. 
Bilateral posterior superior open bites of 4 mm. 
Occludes only on the central incisors with an end-on relationship. 
Slight Class III occlusal relationship being worse on the right side than the left side. 
Lower arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. 
Possible ankylosed mandibular first molars. 
Depressed bilateral mandibular occlusal plane levels.
Accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Partial nasal airway obstruction. 
Wide columella and narrow nostrils. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Open 1 mm of space between the upper lateral incisors and cuspids to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy. 
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Continue to open up space on the right side between the cuspid and first bicuspid to advance the cuspid forward 1 to 2 more mm on that side.  Keep bicuspid root tipped mesially and first bicuspid root tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomy.  Consider using a step in the arch wire to align the 6 anterior teeth at an elevated plane level and step down to the posterior occlusion and align the bicuspids and molars at a lower level.
Remove mandibular molar turbos right before surgery. 
Surgery.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward 4 to 5 mm. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomy to advance the incisor forward, but clockwise rotate the mandible upwards posteriorly to close the open bite.  
Mandibular right body ostectomy to remove the spacing and level the occlusal plane on that side.  
Left body osteotomy between the cuspid and first bicuspid to level the occlusal plane. 
Bilateral nasal partial turbinectomies.
Columella reconstruction.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

During her appointment with me, as I was talking about the surgery and the potential risks and complications, she had a syncope episode and actually passed out in the office.  Her pulse and airway remained stable without any alterations.  She slowly came around and felt a little nauseated.  She leaned over and placed her head on her legs and within about 2 to 3 minutes total time felt normal again.  We dispensed with discussing any further aspects of the complications.  She will have her mother call and I can discuss these factors with her.  


