SHARON NORLING									09/28/2009

Sharon is 66 years old and referred by Dr. Bill Hang.  She has had a number of previous surgeries but none associated with the TMJ.  Sharon is in good health with no major medical problems.  Sharon takes the following medications:

Dyazide 3 times per week.
Estradiol 0.5 mg q.d.
Synthroid 75 mcg q.d.
Trazodone 25 mg q.h.s. p.r.n. 

Primary concerns that Sharon has includes the following:

Snoring.
Sleep apnea. 
Daytime sleepiness.

She has no TMJ symptoms or apparent problems.  She is aware of possibly clenching and bruxing some at nighttime, but she has been told that she has that but she is not particularly aware of that herself.  Previous treatment includes orthodontics as a teenager.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Sharon has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  There is some slight extra fullness maybe on the right side as compared to the left side in the angle area.  Upper lip length measures about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 1.  The maxillary midline is on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental and chin midline are all fairly well aligned with each other, but about 2 mm to the right the maxillary midline.  In profile view, Sharon is probably a good 6-8 mm AP deficient in the maxilla.  Chin appears to be 10-12 mm AP deficient.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well defined.  She does have some prominence of the labial mental fold.  Upper lip supralabrale is about at least 3-4 mm posterior to subnasale.  Intraorally, Sharon has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  The mandibular right incisors are hyper-erupted.  She has an accentuated curve of Spee.  All the teeth on the mandibular right side appear to be elevated compared to the teeth on the left side.  In the upper arch, Sharon has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She is missing what appears to be the maxillary left central and lateral incisors replaced by a bridge.  She has an anterior deep bite of about probably a good 7 mm.  She is very close to being Class I on the left side but Class II end-on on the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Nasal airway looks reasonably good, although there is some slight deviation of the septum but not too significant.  TMJs seem to function reasonably smoothly, although there are some noises that are present.  Incisal opening is 42 mm counting the 7-mm vertical overbite.  Right lateral movement is about 9 mm and left lateral movement 10 mm.  She has no myofascial pain to palpation.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars but the rest of the teeth are all present.  She has crowns on the molars in all 4 quadrants and root canals on a number of teeth as well.  Turbinates appear enlarged.  Sinuses appear clear.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints. 
Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates appear quite large.  
Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear and turbinates appear quite large with the left side being slightly larger than the right side.  
Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show condyles that have a little bit of a hockey stick shape to them; however, there does appear to be good joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with a little bit of anterior beaking.  Joint space looks reasonably good.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  Vertical joint space looks almost excessive. 
Left TMJ coronal view because of the angulation is a little bit difficult to interpret.  There does appear to be decreased joint space.     
Right TMJ coronal tomogram shows decreased joint space, but the rest of the joint spacing is pretty good.  Condyle appears a little flat across the top.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Sharon has AP maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 3 mm and at the base of tongue measures 4 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Sharon would be as follows:    

Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Sleep apnea. 
Class II end-on cuspid on the right side and Class I cuspid on the left side. 
Anterior deep bite of 7 mm. 
Accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch. 
Crowding of the lower anterior arch. 
Mandibular arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. 
Snoring. 
Daytime somnolence. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Missing maxillary left central and lateral incisors replaced by a bridge. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider using turbos in the molars to open the bite to help level off the mid buccal units in the lower arch by extrusion of the bicuspids and minimal intrusion of the anterior teeth.  Try to correct the lower arch asymmetry by shifting the right cuspid forward about 1mm and/or retract the left cuspid.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure.  

Surgery. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a clockwise direction.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance it approximately 6-8 mm at the incisal edge. 
Partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry as necessary to complete the occlusal result. 
