KATHLEEN NODELAND								09/09/2008

Kathleen is 67 years old.  Found my name in an article.  Her TMJ problems began at about the age of 30 that she believes may have been started by clenching.  She was in a motor vehicle accident about 2-1/2 years ago and this exacerbated her problems.  She did have TMJ surgery in 1981 for what she termed as TMJ joint replacement.  She did not know what was done, but apparently maybe just one side was done.  In 1983, she had what she states was a TMJ joint replacement on the other side.  Primary concerns are as follows:

Severe headaches. 
TMJ pain. 
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Snoring. 
Daytime tiredness.

Kathleen takes the following medications:

Topamax 400 mg to prevent migraines. 
Cymbalta 60 mg q.d.
Lyrica 50 mg q.d. to prevent migraines. 
Crestor 10 mg q.d.
Alprazolam 2 to 3 mg for sleep.
Celebrex 200 mg q.d.
Polyethylene glycol powder ½ capful q.d.
Propoxyphene 65 mg p.r.n. neck or migraine pain.
Zegerid 20 mg (for acid reflux).
Flexeril p.r.n. neck and muscle pain. 

She states she has no problems with vertigo or vomiting, but does have some slight dizziness.  She states she has been diagnosed with an inner ear disability with difficulties with auditory perception and processing (language processing and speech disability).  The only other joints that bother her are her ankles.  She has light sensitivity and dystonia.  

She had a fall in 2003 and a fall prior to that in 1997 that started her headaches.  She states that she posttraumatic stress syndrome as a result of her husband being shot through the neck.  She states she is getting towards the end of menopause. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  Upper lip length is 23 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is -1 to -2 mm.  The midline is fairly well aligned.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1 to 2 mm higher than the right side.  In the profile, the maxilla is deficient by about 4 mm and the chin is deficient by 8 to 10 mm.  Her jowls are fairly prominent.  Occlusally, she has a Class II end-on occlusal relationship being approximately 5 mm Class II.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  She does have all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  Intranasally, she has a septal spur off the right side of the nose, but does not seem to have any significant nasal airway obstruction.  She has moderate snoring and moderate daytime somnolence, but she does not believe she has sleep apnea syndrome. To palpation, she has no real significant pain except for some mild tenderness over the TMJs.  Incisal opening is 40 mm, but 30 mm without significant pain.  Excursion movement to the right 8 mm, to the left 6 mm.  On opening, she has a click in the right joint at about 35 mm of opening. 
Kathy rates her headaches at a level of 10 throughout her entire head area bilaterally.  She rates her TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 4, diet at 5, disability at 0.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The rest of the teeth are present.  She has crowns on the maxillary first molars and mandibular right first molar.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  She presents with arthritis in both joints with the right side being significantly more severe than the left side.  
Waters view shows that turbinates are moderately enlarged.  It is difficult to evaluate the maxillary sinuses because of the angle of the x-ray.  The nasal septum appears reasonably straight with perhaps a spur off to the left side.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is somewhat arthritic, and there appears to be decreased vertical and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears much more arthritic and flattened.  There appears to be actually an increased joint space vertically between the condyle and the height of the fossa, but up anteriorly where there appears to be some beaking there is decreased joint space.  Articular eminence is somewhat elongated.  The top of the condyle in one view appears somewhat sclerotic.  On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Kathy has a AP maxillary deficiency as well as vertical maxillary deficiency.  The mandible is also AP deficient.  Her airway looks adequate at the base of the tongue, but at the soft palate it appears that the AP dimension is only about 5 to 6 mm (normal 11 mm).  

Based on clinical, radiographic, and dental model analyses, Kathy’s diagnoses are as follows:
 
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis. 
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Severe headaches and pain. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Severe AP mandibular hypoplasia.  
AP maxillary hypoplasia.  
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Sleep apnea symptoms.
Large nasal septal spur.
Class II occlusion.
High occlusal plane angulation.



Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.   
Align and level mandibular arch.  
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction..
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). 
Bilateral mandibular coronoidotomies. 
Nasal septoplasty. 
Placement of arch bars (if  patient elects not to have orthodontics performed).
4.   Postsurgical orthodontics to finish and retain if the patient elects to have orthodontic treatment performed.

 
