GLEN PERKINS									11/20/2009

Glen is 58 years old.  Glen is a self referral.  Primary concern that Glen has is sleep apnea.  He has had sleep studies done and would desaturate down to 63% oxygen saturation.  He has been on a CPAP for the past 2 years and this keeps his oxygen levels up to a fairly good level; however, he has difficulties tolerating the device and that limits what he can do in his activities and where he can go.  Glen’s primary concerns involve sleep apnea.  He has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain.  He rates jaw function, diet, and disability at 0.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  The other joints that bother him include his shoulders and his knees where he has bilateral total joint prostheses.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  He used to snore, but since being on the CPAP that goes away.  He has mild daytime somnolence and has probably moderate to severe sleep apnea.  He is a mouth breather at night time and also during the day.  He has been on the CPAP machine for 2 years.  Glen did lose about 38 pounds of weight while he was on the CPAP.  He has gained about 15 of it back, but was noting a significant appreciable difference.  He still functions on about 8-10 level on the CPAP. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Glen has fairly good facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 28 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is zero.  The maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is also on the midline as is the chin.  In profile view, Glen’s upper lip supralabrale is probably a good 4 mm posterior to subnasale.  Upper lip is 6-8 mm AP deficient.  Chin is 15-18 mm retruded.  Chin neckline and angle are not defined.  Intraorally, Glen has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has some moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch.  He has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  He has got a slight open bite of about 1 mm on the left side and 0 on the right side.  Transversely, the maxilla is level.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side anteriorly.  Turbinates are difficult to evaluate clinically, although in the front they look relatively normal.  Glen has bilateral clicking in the TMJs.  To palpation, Glen has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, he has clicks in both right and left TMJs occurring a little bit earlier in the right side than the left side.  

He takes the following medications:

Avelide 150 mg for blood pressure.
Lipitor.
Flonase.
Propecia.
Niaspan.
Celebrex.
Aspirin 81 mg.




Basic diagnoses for Glen would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reductions; arthritis worse on the left side than the right side. 
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Class I occlusion.
Slightly anterior open bite.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal dimension 11 mm).
Severe sleep apnea.
The patient has a history of cardiac arrhythmia (code 427.90) secondary to sleep apnea.   

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

MRI of left and right TMJ. 
Surgery. 
Maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward about 6-8 mm at the incisal edge, down graft it 5 mm posteriorly. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance it forward in a counterclockwise direction approximately 14 mm. 