CHRISTY OSBORNE								02/02/2009

Christy is 23 years old, referred by Dr. George Adams.  Christy had orthodontic treatment beginning about the age of 6 and lasting for 5 years, and she finished when she was about 12 years of age.  Orthodontics was performed by Dr. John Witte, a pedodontist, in Arlington.  In 2006, she had her wisdom teeth removed.  Except for retainers and adjustments of them, she has had no other treatment to the jaws.  

Christy has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability all at zero.  She takes no medications.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, nor hearing loss.  The only joint that bothers her is her left knee which is a congenital problem.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  Primary concerns are as follows:

Lower jaw is retruded. 
Teeth do not fit together very well. 
External nasal deformity.
Straining in order to get the lips to come together. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Christy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4.5 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline and may be just slightly to the right about 1 mm.  The mandibular dental midline and chin are a little bit closer to being on the facial midline.  The nasal tip is deviated off to the right side about 3 mm.  In profile view, the maxilla is retruded about 2 to 3 mm.  The chin is retruded about 18 mm.  The chin neckline is shorter and chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  The lower third face appears somewhat elongated.  She has a lip incompetence of about 7 to 8 mm.  Intraorally, Christy has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  There is mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva, although a little bit thin around the central incisors.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has an end-on Class II occlusion, being about almost 4 mm Class II on the left side and probably about 3 mm Class II on the right side.  She has about 1.5 mm of vertical overbite.  She has an overjet of about 2 mm.  Transversely, she has about 1 mm of vertical difference in the cuspid area with the right cuspid being about 1 mm lower than the left one.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy and normal.  Nasal septum anteriorly is shifted off towards the right side and actually extends lateral to the columella.  The right nostril is a little bit more constricted than the left one.  She does have deformity of the nasal bones.  She has a moderate hump in the nasal dorsum and the profile.  She has an obtuse nasolabial angle, but appears to have good horizontal and vertical projection of the nasal tip.  On front view, she has lateral bumps on the side of the nasal bones at the inferior aspect.  The nose does shift off towards the right side at the end of the nasal bones and even a little bit further with the cartilage dorsum and then the tip shifts back towards the left side.  Upper lip philtral column is also at its base deviated off to the right side with the nose and part of the tubercle is fairly well aligned with the facial midline.  She has not tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  Maximal incisal opening is 45 mm.  Excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.  Joints seems to function smoothly.  Dental model analysis shows a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 1.5 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EXAMINATION:  I-CAT:  Coronal view shows that the bony septum is deviated off towards the left side with a relatively large spur that may be blocking the airway.  Anteriorly, the septum is deviated off towards the right side.  Sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged, particularly the left one appears quite large.  

Panorex shows she is missing the 4 third molars.  Roots on the lower central incisors may be a little bit short.  No other significant pathology noted.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good shape.  It appears a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly, but not too significant.  There is adequate joint space vertically.  Condyle gets a little flat towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is some anterior beaking on the head of condyle towards the medial side of the joint.  The joint space appears decreased vertically.  The left inferior turbinate appears quite large.  The sinuses do appear clear in both sides.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  There appears to be good joint space and perhaps is slightly better balanced than the opposite side, although not too much different.  There is a little flattening on the anterior head, particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Right TMJ sagittal view seems to have a little bit better shape and slightly better joint space than the opposite side.  The joint space could be narrow as well.  

Left TMJ coronal views show that joint space appears a little bit narrow.  Condyle otherwise has reasonably good shape and has fairly good mediolateral width.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have a decreased lateral joint space as the lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 3 mm.  

Lateral cephalogram shows that she has a skeletal Class II relationship and a high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway looks constricted with an airway dimension of only about 4 mm at the soft palate level and 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  She has lip incompetence and anterior vertical maxillary excess.  

In the coronal view, it appears that the left nasal airway is significantly blocked off because of the significant shifting of the septum towards the left side back in the bony area and a large septal spur off to the left side.  Plus the turbinate on the left side is quite large.  

Axial view shows that the septum is deviated significantly off towards the left side, and there is a septal spur that extends off almost against the lateral nasal wall on the left.  The nasal cartilage anteriorly appears to be deviated off towards the right side.  Sinuses appear clear.  Christy’s mother does report that she hears Christy snore some at night.  

Basic diagnoses for Christy would be as follows:    

Rule out TMJ pathology.
Anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia, posterior vertical hypoplasia, and slight AP hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal 11 mm).
Nasal septal deviation with bone spurring creating significant blockage of the left side of the nose.
Left nasal inferior turbinate hyperplasia. 
Left-sided nasal airway obstruction.
External nasal deformity. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of at least 1.5 mm.
Over-angulation of lower incisors. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

MRI of left and right TMJs. 
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.   Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy and retract.  
 Surgery. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior maxillary superiorly, posterior aspect inferiorly. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Nasal septoplasty.
Left inferior turbinectomy. 
Consider bilateral TMJ surgery, if indicated from MRI evaluation.  
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.