CECELIA ALESSANDRA ORTUSTE						10/20/2008

Alessandra is 23 years old and states that many surgeons and orthodontists have referred her here.  Her orthodontist is Dr. Travis Q. Talbot, DDS, MS, 2364 W. 12600 S., Suite 2-C, Riverton, UT 84065.  Alessandra apparently had a malocclusion that was treated with double maxillary jaw surgery on December 18, 2007.  She presents today with the following concerns:

Her lower jaw is in a bad position due to the previous surgery.
She has an under bite. 
She has a cross bite.
She has an anterior open bite.
Upper and lower teeth do not meet and makes eating difficult. 

She desires to have her jaws positioned properly so that they will be in the right place and function normally.  On December 18, 2007, the following procedures were performed by Dr. David J. Smoot, DDS:

LeForte I maxillary osteotomies with rotation of the maxilla to the right and placement of rigid fixation.
Bilateral mandibular sagittal split osteotomies with the mandible being rotated to the left and rigid fixation placed.
Mandibular anterior osteotomy of the chin with removal of 3 mm of bone in the chin.

Postsurgery, she was wired for 6 weeks.  However, on January 20, 2008, the chin apparently had healed in an asymmetric position and a genioplasty was re-performed on her. The chin was done once again in May 2008 by a plastic surgeon, Dr. Steven Warnock.  She had a chin augmentation on May 28, 2008, a Medpor implant was fitted to the chin area and secured with two screws.  Prior to the surgeries done in the states here, Alessandra has surgery done in Bolivia where she grew up and where they operated just on the lower jaw.  She had two teeth extracted on the right mandibular posterior quadrant including the second bicuspid and first molar for an unknown reason.  In the upper jaw, she is missing a bicuspid on the maxillary left side and that must have been during her surgery in Bolivia.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Alessandra still exhibits some significant facial asymmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is probably about 2 mm.  The nasal tip is of towards the right side probably about a good 4 mm.  The maxillary midline is actually fairly close to being on the facial midline and maybe just about 1 mm to the right of the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is 6 mm to the right of the facial midline.  The chin is probably about 6 to 7 mm to the right of the facial midline.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side.  Maxilla appears to be retruded about 3 mm.  The lower third face appears a little elongated yet.  Chin neckline looks relatively normal and chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  It feels as though she has a Medpor implant that is extended back along the body of the mandible bilaterally.  Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular right, second bicuspid, first molar.  She has the rest of the back through the second molars.  The mandibular right cuspid is probably a good 3 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  The upper arch is a little bit less asymmetric with the right cuspid being maybe just 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side and a Class III cuspid relationship on the left side.  She has an end-on incisor relationship and bilateral posterior cross bites.  She has a zero vertical overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues and anatomy look pretty much normal.  Intranasally, as best I can see, everything looked relatively acceptable.  The nasal tip is deviated off to the right side probably 5 mm.  Alessandra has no pain to palpation throughout the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Incisal opening is only 33 mm and excursion movements are 5 mm in each direction.  Alessandra has paresthesias to her lower lip and chin area bilaterally and also she has paresthesias to the right side of her tongue.  
.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows four bone plates in the maxilla with appears to be 18 screws.  In the mandible, there are four extremely long screws on the left ramus with a stainless steel wire there also.  In the right ramus, there are three screws with one being exceptionally long and a large loop of stainless steel wire present.  There is a bone plate in the chin area with five screws in it.  It appears that there may have been some type of subcondylar complication that may have occurred as the proximal segment of the ramus appears quite short and appears to be rotated upwards and forwards at its inferior base.  There appears to be a periapical lesion at the base of the mandibular left second bicuspid.  Missing mandibular right second bicuspid, first molar, mandibular left first bicuspid, and all four third molars.  The left mandibular condyle appears significantly larger than the right side.  There was evidence of anterior beaking and more of a mushroom shape morphology to this condyle as compared to the right side.  On the right side, it appears that there is a pseudocyst on the head of the condyle.  She has an extremely short roots on the maxillary incisors. 
Waters view shows that there is significant deviation in the nasal septum.  Turbinates appear enlarged particularly on the right side.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.   
Right mandibular tomogram shows three bone screws and stainless steel wire in the mandible.  I do not know if there was a vertical oblique osteotomy performed perhaps on this side that was cut quite short perhaps, allowing the proximal segment to rotate upwards and forwards, although the condyle does appear to be seated in the fossa, although at an angle compared to its normal position.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows the presence of these four extremely long bone screws.  There is a defect at the inferior border probably based just on the type of osteotomy that they did.  The condylar head and neck on this side may be longer than the opposite side, but difficult to tell on this image.  On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has got a high occlusal plane angle.  She has an end-on incisor relationship.  She may have a skeletal Class II relationship only because of the high occlusal plane angle.  Vertical height of the mandible appears elongated.  Oropharyngeal airway appears narrow at the base of the tongue where it measures about 4 mm.  At the soft palate level, it measures about 5 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Alessandra would be as follows:    

Previous orthognathic surgery on the mandible in 2002 with malpositioning and malunion of the right mandibular subcondylar osteotomy.
Previous double jaw orthognathic surgery on December 18, 2007, with resultant malocclusion.
Possible left TMJ osteochondroma. 
Maxillary AP hypoplasia.  
Maxillary asymmetry with it rotated off towards to the right side.  
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
Mandibular hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side, Class III cuspid relationship on the left side.
End-on incisor relationship. 
Anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites.
Previously placed bone plates x5, bone screws x31, and stainless steel wires x2.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side. 
Decrease oropharyngeal airway. 
Nasal asymmetry with the nasal tip being shifted 4 to 5 mm to right of the facial midline. 
Asymmetry in the chin with the chin shifted 2 to 3 mm to the left of the mandibular dental midline.
Paresthesias to lower lip and chin bilaterally and to the right tongue.
Transverse alveolar deficiency in the right mandibular posterior arch.
Right mandibular alveolar atrophy.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

MRI of left and right TMJs or CT scan, if too much interference related to previous metallic implants and the current orthodontic appliances. 
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch holding the dental spaces in the mandibular right quadrant.
Surgery. 
Left TMJ condylectomy and disc repositioning if TMJ pathology confirmed. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to transversely level the maxilla, advance it slightly, and expand it approximately 8 mm.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back to the left onto the facial midline.
Internal rhinoplasty to shift the nose towards the left side.  
Possible genioplasty to improve symmetry of the chin. 
Removal of previously placed hardware (bone plates x5, screws x31, stainless steel wires x2).
Bone graft (harvest from the mandible) to right mandibular posterior alveolar ridge area to aid in subsequent implant placement.
4.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
5.   Restorative dentistry.
a.  Placement of implants in the mandibular right quadrant to replace the second bicuspid and first molar. 
b.  Crowns on the dental implants. 



