ROBIN OPUSZENSKI								02/11/2009

Robin is 47 years old.  I originally saw Robin in May 2001.  Since that time, her symptoms have remained basically the same including the presence of headaches at level of 6, TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 2, diet at 2, disability at 4.  Her jaw function is actually better than it was back in 2001.  She currently takes Ambien 1 mg at bedtime and Lexapro 20 mg.  When I saw Robin in 2001, I had recommended a sleep study which she did get.  She has actually had two sleep studies, but she has had difficulties trying to get the reports since they were done a number of years ago.  She began CPAP treatment in 2001.  She, however, has significant difficulties wearing the device and rarely uses it now.  She started using the TAP Thornton positioner in July 2008.  She has already noted some significant changes in her tooth alignment.  She has no other joints problems.  She gets occasional earaches, severe tinnitus, but no vertigo.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time and also during the day.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Robin has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much aligned to the facial midline.  In profile, Robin has an AP deficiency of the maxilla of probably 5 to 6 mm and AP deficiency in the chin of 20 mm.  She has essentially no demonstrable chin neckline.  Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids.  She has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch, she is also missing first bicuspids.  She has transverse narrowness in the arches.  She is basically a Class I molar relationship.  She has a slight Class II tendency on the left side by about 2 mm.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  Oropharyngeal areas look relatively normal.  Clinically, the nasal airway looks reasonably good and turbinates appear just to be moderate in size.  At least anteriorly, it appears there is an airway passage that should be adequate.  Transversely, the maxilla is fairly level.  Robin was diagnosed with fibromyalgia in 2003.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over most of the head and neck area and may be a little bit more intense over the TMJ joints and posterior neck.  On opening, she has a click in the right joint about 25 mm of opening and 20 mm of closure and on the left side about 35 mm of opening and 30 mm of closure.  Maximum incisal opening is 45 mm, but only about 18 mm without discomfort.  Excursion movement to the right was 6 mm, to the left 5 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  There is a root canal in the maxillary right first molar.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Condyles appear a little bit arthritic, but not too bad.  Nasal septum appears reasonably straight.  
Coronal view shows just a small mucocele on the floor of the sinus on the left side.  Turbinates are moderate in size with the right one being larger than the left one.  
Axial view shows that the right turbinate is moderately large, but the sinuses are clear and the septum appears reasonably straight.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows condyle that has moderately good anatomy with some flattening on the posterior head and a little bit of anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology, except there is a little bit of anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The joint space actually does not look too bad.  Lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.   
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears just slightly more arthritic than the left side.  The joint space may be a little bit decreased, but not too much different than the left side.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Robin has her head tilted up some, but still has significant decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of probably less than 3 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue where it may only be 2 mm.  She has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  She has an AP deficiency of both the maxilla and mandible.  

Basic diagnoses for Robin would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. 
AP maxillary hypoplasia and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion, a little bit worse on the left side as compared to the right side. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
High occlusal plane angle.
Mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.
Severe snoring. 
Severe sleep apnea.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 11 mm).
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
Severe tinnitus. 
Submental and submandibular lipomatosis.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure.  Consider removing the facing around the mandibular left central incisor to better align that tooth into the arch.  
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and decrease the occlusal plane angulation.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Bilateral reduction turbinectomies. 
Removal of submental and submandibular lipomatosis. 
 Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.