MARGARET OWENS								05/04/2009

Margaret is 57 years old.  She has had TMJ problems at least from the age of 37 or possibly earlier.  At 37 is when she first began developing pain in the right ear and TMJ area.  She had orthodontics for 18 months from the age of 37 to 39.  She has had numerous splints over the past 13 years.  She has had extensive dental work, a lot of it performed by Dr. Galaros in Houston, Texas.  She unfortunately has had many of her posterior teeth removed in the maxilla and also in the right mandible.  These were taken out because of pain factors.  She gets earaches, right side much greater than the left side, no tinnitus, but does get occasional vertigo.  Almost all of her other joints are problematic for her.  She has been diagnoses with Epstein-Barr infection and still has the virus present.  She is very much aware of clenching and bruxism at night time and also during the day time.  She rates her headaches at a level of 4 on the right side and 2 on the left side and the headaches daily at a level of 4 on the right side and 2 on the left side predominantly in the frontal and temporal areas.  She rates her TMJ pain in the right joint at a level of 7 and on the left side at 5.  Average daily pain is at 8.  Jaw function is at 4, diet at 3, disability at 7.  She was diagnosed with fibromyalgia approximately 12 years ago. 

She takes the following medications:

Atenolol 25 mg q.d.
Klonopin 0.5 to 1 mg q.h.s. 
Armour thyroid 30 mg 2 times per day. 
Natural progesterone 1 tablet at night. 
Testosterone shot 1 time per month.
Estrogen patch (Vivelle) 0.025 two times per week.
MSM 1000 mg q.d.
Super Green Food q.d.
Krill oil 500 mg 2 times per day.
Digestive enzymes 2 at each meal.
Zinc 50 mg 1 per day. 
Vitamin D 5000 mg q.d.
Cordyceps CS-400 mg 8 per day.
B12 shots.
Folamin tablets 1 per day. 
 Vitamin C.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Margaret has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Maxillary and mandibular midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  Chin may be just slightly to the left side a couple of millimeters.  In profile, Margaret has fairly good facial balance.  In the mandibular right quadrant and maxillary left and right quadrant, she is missing all bicuspids and molar teeth.  On the mandibular left side, she is missing only the third molar, but has crowns on the first and second bicuspid and first and second molars.  She is basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has relatively an anterior deep bite. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderate in size, but she states she has no significant problems breathing through her nose.  She does have some mild snoring and moderate daytime somnolence, but is not aware of any sleep apnea issues.  Since taking the Klonopin, she sleeps fairly well at night.  She is not aware of mouth breathing.  To palpation, she has very high moderate pain over the right TMJ, right SCM, right posterior neck, and bilateral shoulders.  She has moderate pain over the masseter, right medial pterygoid, left SCM, left posterior neck, and moderate tenderness over the left TMJ, left masseter, left medial pterygoid and the retromandibular areas.  Maximal incisal opening is about 45 mm, opening without significant pain to 35 mm.  Excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction, but were painful, particularly on excursion towards the right side. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence in bilateral maxilla and right mandibular of all bicuspids and molars.  On the left side, just the third molar is missing.  There are crowns on the second bicuspid and first and second molar.  Turbinates appear fairly large.  Sinuses appear clear.  Both joints appear arthritic with sclerosis on the head.  Both have a hockey stick shape to them.  
Coronal view shows the sinuses are clear and turbinates are fairly large.  
Axial view shows that turbinates are moderately large, but sinuses are clear. 
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic.  There is some sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with decreased posterior and superior joint space, but with an increased anterior joint space where the articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be a little osteophyte sticking out from the articular eminence.  The head of the condyle is somewhat sclerotic.  There appears to be some peaking of the condyles in a couple of the views, particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint.
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little more arthritic than the opposite side.  There is peaking of the condyle and anterior beaking of the condyle.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  There is decreased posterior joint space and an increased anterior joint space through most of the joint. 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  There is an extension of the lateral pole out laterally.  Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.   
Right condyle appears to have fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased superior joint space.  There is a little osteophytic kind of extrusion off the lateral pole of the condyle.  Lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows an AP dimension between the soft palate and posterior pharyngeal wall of about 7 mm and in the base of the tongue posterior pharyngeal wall of 8-9 mm.  There is a slight increased occlusal plane level in the remaining lower arch.  Margaret has basically a Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship. 

There is some question as the possibility of having an allergic reaction to certain metals.  She has had previous titanium implants to the maxilla and mandible.  In the mandible, she tolerated it for several years before the implant was removed from the right side.  She apparently had 1 or 2 implants in the maxillary left side that caused problems and had to be removed.  She has had numerous teeth extracted because of pain, but there was no definitive pathology noted with the teeth or with the bone.  It is possible that the pain could have been referred pain from the TMJ area.  It may be helpful in preparation for any potential surgery for Margaret to go through hypersensitivity testing to determine if she is allergic to the metals in the TMJ joint devices.  

Basic diagnoses for Margaret would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations. 
Missing mandibular right first and second bicuspids, first, second, and third molars, and missing maxillary bilateral first and second bicuspids and first, second, and third molars.  
Class II cuspid molar relationship.
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
Pain in the teeth and jaws. 
History of Epstein-Barr infection.  
Fibromyalgia.
Rule out hypersensitivity to implant and prosthetic materials. 
Polyarthritis with most all other joints affected.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Hypersensitivity testing at Environmental Center in Dallas. 
Hypersensitivity testing through Rush Memorial Hospital Laboratory in Chicago. 
Consider titanium alloy and chromium cobalt allow implants to forearm.  
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints. 
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts. 
Prosthetic reconstruction of the dental arches with consideration for placement of implants and restorative prosthetics versus partial dentures.

Margaret reports that about 30 years ago she had a parrot for about 18 months.  Some time after that, she had problems with getting lumps on her head.  She has also had frequent urinary tract infections.  She also gets pain in her lower right side.  It is possible that a Chlamydia bacteria (psittaci and trachomatis) could also be a causative factor in her situation.  