JOAN PACE										06/29 /2009

Joan is 12 years old.  Referred by Dr. Mike Morris, 201 Enterprise Avenue, League City, TX 77573.  Joan’s orthodontists are Larry Radney, DDS MSD, and Dr. Meredith Scott, DDS MSD, 17201 Glenmount Park Drive, Webster, TX 77598, telephone number is 281-486-5081.

Primary concerns that Joan has are as follows:

Predominantly a mouth breather with poor oral posture. 
Nasal speech quality and a lisp.
Poor tongue placement. 
Gummy smile.
Headaches. 
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints. 

Joan has apparently been diagnosed with ADD and takes Vyvanse 40 mg q.d. when in school.  She currently is not taking the medication.  She has had a previous tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy along with a turbinate ablation, all performed in 2005.  

Joan gets headaches maybe twice a month in the right frontal temporal area at about a level of 7 and these have occurred just within the past 2 years.  In her information sheet, it was labeled as the left side, but she is assured that it is the right side.  She rates her TMJ pain at 2, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 2, diet at 0, disability at 0.  She has no earaches, vertigo, or hearing loss, but occasional tinnitus.  No other joints bother her.  She does clench and brux at night.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Joan has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about almost 18 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 6 mm.  The nasal tip is probably a couple of millimeters to the right side.  The maxillary dental midline is about 1 mm to the right side.  The mandibular dental midline is probably about 3 mm off to the right side and the chin is probably about 5 to 6 mm off towards the right side.  As she shifts her chin towards the left side about 4 mm or so, it improves her facial balance.  In profile view, she has fairly good facial balance.  She does have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe 2-3 mm.  The chin may be just slightly AP deficient.  The chin neckline and chin neck angle are fairly well defined.  She does have a slight head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, Joan has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars and some of them are just now erupting in, particularly the right bicuspids.  She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch and she has a lingual inclination of the lower incisors.  In the upper arch, the maxillary right cuspid and left cuspid are not in currently.  She has some bands on the upper first molars.  There is an anterior deep bite of probably at least 6-7 mm.  She has slightly Class III on the right side with a tendency towards a posterior crossbite.  On the left side, she is a little bit Class III as well.  The Class III relationship is only 1-2 mm.  She may have a bifid uvula.  The soft palate appears a little bit short in length and seems to function and elevate appropriately.  The fascial pillars look okay and the tonsils are gone.  Intranasally, the turbinates are huge and appear to be blocking the nasal airway significantly.  The septum appears reasonably straight as best I can see, but I could see only the very anterior part of it.  It appears to be just a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1 mm lower than the right side.  To palpation, she has some moderate pain over the temporalis muscles and milder tenderness over the masseters and minimal tenderness over the TMJs and retromandibular area.  Joints seems to function relatively smoothly today.  Maximal incisal opening is about 4-6 mm, counting her deep overbite.  Excursion movements are about 7 mm in each direction. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of  four impacted third  Maxillary second molars appear not to be erupted in all the way yet and the cuspids have not erupted in.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates appear quite large.  Septum appears reasonably straight.  
Coronal view shows that the inferior turbinates are huge and block most of the nasal airway, but the sinuses are clear.  The turbinates particularly on the right side is fairly large as well.
Axial view shows that the turbinates almost totally obliterate the nasal airway, although the sinuses appear clear.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows condyle with reasonably good morphology.  It appears there is a little bit of anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be decrease joint space superiorly and posteriorly at the lateral aspect of the joint.
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a joint that appears to have larger joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  
Left TMJ coronal tomograms shows that there is a decreased lateral joint space where there appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact.  There is decreased vertical joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the fossa that could indicate perhaps medial displacement of the articular disc.   
Right TMJ coronal view tomograms show there is decreased lateral joint space.  The joint space appears a little bit better balanced except for the most lateral aspect of the joint.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency, but the mandible may be fairly strong.  Tonsils and adenoids appear to be gone.  Soft palate appears somewhat short in length.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm at the base of the tongue and almost 7 mm at the soft palate level.  She does have a reversed curve of Spee in the upper arch.  Turbinates extend posterior beyond the hard palate. 

Basic diagnoses for Joan would be as follows:    

Anterior and vertical maxillary excess. 
Slight mandibular prognathism. 
Slight Class III end-on occlusion. 
Facial asymmetry with the maxillary dental midline shifted 1 mm to the right and mandibular dental midline shifted 2-3 mm to the right and chin shifted 4-5 mm to the right and nasal tip deviated 2 mm to the right.
Anterior deep bite of 6-7 mm.
Unerupted maxillary left and right cuspids and partial eruption of mandibular left bicuspids as well as the maxillary second molars. 
Bilateral TMJ medial displacement of the articular discs.
Mild TMJ pain. 
Headaches that occur at a high moderate level, but only 2 times per month. 
Myofascial pain affecting predominantly the temporalis and the masseter muscles.
History of clenching and bruxism. 
Bilateral hypertrophied inferior turbinates causing significant nasal airway obstruction.
Impacted third molars x4. 
Predominantly a mouth breather.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Consider bilateral turbinectomies to try to reestablish a functional nasal airway. 
Monitor facial growth and development for the next 2 years to determine if any abnormal growth is occurring. 
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisors roots slightly mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary. 
Align and level mandibular arch.    
Surgery. 
Maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly, correct the asymmetry, and correct any transverse discrepancy that may be present. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back on the facial midline and advance it slightly. 
Removal of 4 impacted third molars.
Consider any intranasal surgery necessary to correct any residual obstruction. 
Possible TMJ surgery to reposition the articular discs and to remove the growth centers if asymmetric growth as a result of condylar hyperplasia is present in order to stop the aberrant mandibular growth.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
