SUSAN O’REILLY									08/24/2009

Susan is 43 years old.  Referred by Dr. Melicia K. Tjoa, 4061 Bellaire Blvd., Suite C, Houston, TX 77025, and also John P. Freeman, MD, DDS, Christus St. Catherine Medical Plaza, 705 S. Fry Road, Suite 200, Katy, TX 77450.

To the best of Susan’s recollection, her problems began in about 1982 when her jaw would start to click and pop and sometimes lock.  In 1982, she saw Dr. Kevin McBride, who did bilateral disc repositioning procedures.  The right side apparently did okay, but the left side became displaced again, and, in 1984, the left side was done again and this time a Proplast Teflon interpositional implant placed.  She then saw Dr. Jack Kent in about 1986, and he removed the PTIPI and placed a temporal fascia graft.  She continued to have severe pain.  In 1988, she then came back to Dallas to see Dr. Bob Walker who debrided the left joint and did a right joint exploration.  In 1990, Dr. Walker went back in and debrided the left joint once again.  In 2001, she saw Dr. Doug Sinn who placed a left Walter Lorenz total joint prosthesis.  Her pain and swelling has continued since that time.  She has been suffering pain and problems since then.  She is currently seeing a pain doctor.  She currently takes the following medications:

Lyrica 75 mg 3 times per day. 
Celebrex 200 mg q.d.
OxyContin 40-mg tablets, 1 to 2 tablets twice a day. 
Baclofen 10 mg t.i.d.
Axert 12.5 mg p.r.n. 
Amrix 15 mg q.d. as a muscle relaxant.

She gets headaches frequently at a level of 5 predominantly in the left temporal and posterior head area.  Five to six times a week she gets rather severe migraines that escalate to a level of 8 to 9.  Her average daily pain is around 7.  She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 5, disability at 8.  She gets no earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo and has no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother include her neck and her upper back area.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  She does smoke half a pack of cigarettes per day.  

Susan recently has undergone some dental implants and some dental reconstruction and this was completed about 2 weeks ago. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Susan has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The facial midlines and dental midlines are all pretty much aligned, although the nasal tip may be just slightly off to the right side.  In profile view, Susan has fairly good facial symmetry and balance.  Intraorally, she has had lower restorative work done with replacing teeth back through the second bicuspids.  The molars are missing.  In the upper arch, she has had some extensive work done on the left side and second molar on the right side.  Bite is fairly close to being Class I cuspid.  In trying to place her into centric relation, she has significant pain in the left cheek area and the midlines do not line up.  The mandibular dental midline appears about 1 mm off towards the left side.  She does have some appreciable swelling in the left cheek area over by the malar eminence and likely detachment of the masseter muscle.  She also has a little bit of swelling back more towards the ear along the zygomatic arch.  Intranasally, the left turbinate appears a little large right now.  She says at times she hears squeaking noises in the left jaw joint.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that Susan is missing all of her permanent teeth.  She has 5 implants in the mandibular arch to replace the lower teeth back to the second bicuspids.  In the upper arch, she has 6 implants with 5 of them loaded to replace all the teeth from the second molar on the right side around to the first molar on the left side.  There is an implant in the second molar area, but there has been no crown placed on that tooth yet.  Right TMJ appears a little bit arthritic.  The left joint has a Walter Lorenz total joint prosthesis in place with 6 screws holding the mandibular component and 4 screws holding the maxillary component.  
Axial view shows that the turbinates do not appear too large in size.  There is a small spur off the right side of the septum.  
Coronal view shows that the turbinates are not too enlarged and the airway is reasonably good.  The nasal septum is deviated off towards the right side slightly.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows the presence of a Walter Lorenz total joint prosthesis.  There may be some reactive heterotopic bone around the prosthesis.  
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little bit arthritic with some flattening of the posterior head.  There appears to be significantly decreased joint space between the condyle and the articular eminence.  The condyle appears to be postured slightly forward in the fossa. 
Left TMJ coronal view shows the mandibular component present and also the upper component can be seen.  It appears somewhat thin.  There could be some heterotopic bone growing down around the inside of the fossa component.  
Right TMJ coronal view shows that in some areas there appears to be reasonably good joint space around the condyle.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she probably has reasonably good facial balance and airway looks reasonably good.  

Incisal opening is 30 mm, but only 23 mm without severe pain.  Excursion movements are only about 1 mm in each direction.  To palpation, she has severe pain over the left masseter; high moderate pain over the left TMJ, left posterior neck pain; moderate pain over the styloid areas, right TMJ, and right masseter area. 

Basic diagnoses for Susan would be as follows:    

Right TMJ failed Walter Lorenz total joint prosthesis. 
Heterotopic bone formation around the left TMJ prosthesis. 
Foreign body giant cell reaction around the left TMJ prosthesis.
Right TMJ arthritis and disc dislocation. 
Severe TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
Masticatory dysfunction. 
Recommended treatment would be as follows:

MRI of right TMJ to evaluate degree of arthritis and articular disc position. 
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. 
Removal of left TMJ failed Walter Lorenz total joint prosthesis.
Extensive debridement of left TMJ including removal of heterotopic bone, foreign body giant cell reaction, and fibrosis.
Bilateral TMJ versus left TMJ (depending on MRI evaluation) reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Fat grafts to TMJs (harvest from the abdomen).
Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars. 
Any dental reconstruction that may be necessary to finalize the occlusion.
