LISA PROULX									08/25/2009

Lisa was actually referred by Dr. Al Bishop.  Lisa is in good health with no major medical problems.  She takes the following medications:

Thyroid medications 30 mcg per day. 
Bio-identical hormones.
Allegra-D occasionally. 
Vitamin D. 
Fish oil.

Lisa is not aware of when her facial asymmetry began and the etiology is also unknown to her.  Her primary concerns at this time include the following:

Facial asymmetry.
Click in the right TMJ area. 
Bite and jaws are not aligned properly.

She has no problems with headaches.  She gets some mild discomfort in her TMJ joint at about a level of 2.  On an average day, she does have any significant pain around the head and neck area.  she rates her jaw function, diet, and disability at zero.  She does get some bilateral earaches, but she is a flight attendant and this could be contributory.  She gets some tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing of her teeth. 
 
CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Lisa has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Lower third face demonstrates some asymmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 0 on the left and 1 on the right.  The maxillary midline is just a little bit off to the left about 1 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the left.  Chin is probably a good 6 mm off to the left .  In profile view, Lisa may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency with the maxilla being retruded maybe 3 to 4 mm.  She has a C-shaped curve in the upper lip.  The mandible may be just slightly deficient also about 4 to 5 mm.  As she postures her mandible forward about 5 mm or so, it seems to improve her facial profile.  Intraorally, Lisa has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars present.  She has some significant on the left side between the cuspid and first bicuspid of 2 mm and some space between the rest of her anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship on the right side and also on the left side, but she does have a crossbite on the left side extending from the cuspid through the second molar.  She has about almost a 3 mm anterior deep bite relationship.  The lower mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm to the right of the chin midline taking into account the transverse cant in the occlusion.  The cant in the occlusion shows that the left cuspid is 2 mm higher than the right cuspid in the upper arch and in the lower arch probably a 3 mm difference.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy with the uvula just mildly elongated, but other tissues look to be normal in structure.  Nasal airway looks fairly patent, although there is some deviation in the septum.  Turbinates at least anteriorly look relatively normal in size.  Lisa clinically appears to not have any significant nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the masseter muscle, but no other tenderness around the head and neck area.  The right side of the mandible in the frontal view appears to be a good 6-8 mm lower than the left side.  As Lisa shifts her mandible towards the left side about 3-4 mm, it improves her overall facial symmetry, although the angle on the right side of the mandible appears a little bit stronger in that position.  When she bites in her centric relation, she is more prominent in the anterior part of the mandible on the left side and not quite as prominent back in the angle area.  As Lisa opens her jaw, the mandible shifts about 5 mm to the right side.  Maximal opening is 67 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 12 mm, to the left 7 mm.   

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular first molars with them being replaced with 3 inter-bridges on all each side.  All four third molars are absent.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  She has a significantly enlarged condyle in the right joint.  
Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates appear fairly enlarged and seemed to block a good portion of the airway.  
Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear, but inferior turbinates appear quite large.  The vertical discrepancy at the inferior border of the mandible is noted with the right side being lower than left side. 
Left TMJ sagittal view shows condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Articular eminence is moderate in inclination.  There appears to be adequate joint space.  
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is significantly enlarged with some significant anterior beaking.  The fossa is a little bit longer and a little bit more shallow than the opposite side.  Joint space actually looks reasonably good, except it is decreased posteriorly and perhaps at the anterior aspect as well.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The joint space looks a little bit narrow at the lateral aspect of the joint.  Lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.   
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is enlarged vertically and maybe laterally.  There appears to be an extension out lateral almost beyond the lateral rim of the fossa.  The joint space looks pretty good, but out laterally the joint space appears significantly decreased.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she may have had her head slightly tilted when this was taken.  The infraorbital rim seem to align, but orbit is in a different vertical position.  Oropharyngeal airway looks fairly good.  Lisa has a slight AP maxillary and mandibular hyperplasia. 

When Lisa was in high school, she was involved in a head-on accident and had a concussion.  She does not remember if she had any trauma to her jaws at that time.  When Lisa closes her jaws, she feels that the left side may hit before the right side. 

Basic diagnoses for Lisa would be as follows:    

Right TMJ osteochondroma. 
Left TMJ mild arthritis and minimally displaced articular disc. 
Mandible deviated to the left 6 mm and AP hypoplasia as well as transverse hypoplasia. 
Maxillary right vertical hyperplasia.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm lower than the left side. 
Class I cuspid relationship.
Bilateral hypertrophied turbinates with partial nasal airway obstruction. 
Bilateral infraorbital hypoplasia. 
Lower arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. 
Spacing between the lower anterior teeth, particularly the left cuspid and first bicuspid and there is gap of about 2.5 mm. 
Left central and lateral incisor are each at least 0.5 mm smaller in size than the right side.
Left posterior crossbite.
Increased curve of Wilson on the mandibular posterior arch.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Bone scan to determine activity of osteochondroma in the right TMJ. 
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch with the following adjustments:  
Place bonding on the lower left central and left lateral incisor to fill in the 0.5 mm gap between those teeth and the cuspid which will equalize their medial distal diameter to the teeth in the right ach. 
Retract left cuspid 1 mm and advance right cuspid 1 mm to achieve transverse arch symmetry at the cuspid level.  Consider advancing the posterior teeth to close residual gaps as this will improve the overall arch symmetry and keep from retracting the lower incisors too far.  May need to use TADs to accomplish that. These fees are current and subject to change without notice.  This letter is not considered a contract but an estimate of charges.  The diagnosis and treatment codes are also subject to change over the course of treatment and/or surgery.

Shift mandibular dental midline 1 mm to the left of its current position so that it will align better with the chin. 
Surgery. 
Right TMJ low condylectomy with articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor, if the osteochondroma in the right joint is found to be active. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back onto the facial midline and transversely level occlusal plane and advancement.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level it transversely, advance it about 4 mm, and expand transversely. 
Bilateral partial nasal turbinectomies to improve the airway. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Surgery Stage 2:  Bilateral infraorbital osteotomies to advance and superiorly reposition in the infraorbital rims.  
