EMILY PRUITT									06/19/2009

Emily is 20 years old.  Referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich.  To the best of Emily’s knowledge, her joint problems began when she was about 15 years old at about the time she started her orthodontic treatment.  Up to that point in time, she had a good bite relationship with her front teeth overlapping more normally.  Since that time, she has developed an open bite and retrusion of her lower jaw.  Her primary concerns are:

Open bite.
Jaw pain. 

She has no problems with headaches.  Periodically, particularly when chewing, she will develop TMJ pain at about a level of 6 and at that time her average daily pain would be at about 6.  That pain is not always present however.  She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 2, disability at 0.  The only medication she takes is Nuvaring.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  The only other joints that bother her are her fingers.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night and she does some of that during day, particularly when she is under stress.  Her TMJ problems began when she was about 15 years old or about the same time that her orthodontic treatment was initiated. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Emily has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is about 1 mm to the left.  The mandibular dental midline may be 2 mm to the left.  Chin is probably about 4 to 5 mm to the left.  The mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much aligned with each other.  In profile, she has some retrusion of the maxilla by probably 2 to 3 mm.  The mandible is retruded by about 12 mm.  The chin neckline is shorter, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  The chin is retruded by about 12 mm.  Intraorally, Emily has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch, she also has all of her teeth back to the second molars.  She has a slight accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.  She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship of about 2 mm and an anterior open bite of about 2 mm.  She has a slight increased curve of Spee in both arches.  Emily has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 2 mm higher than the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, turbinates appear moderate in size.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  There does not appear to be any obvious airway obstruction, at least in the anterior part of the nose.  In placing the mandible in centric relation, it did cause some pain and discomfort on the right side of the jaw area back around the joint and masseter muscle area.  To palpation, she has some mild discomfort of the TMJs, retromandibular area, and minimal tenderness over the shoulders.  Maximal opening is 38 mm, but it was painful for her on her left side.  Opening without pain or discomfort was about 30 mm.  Excursion movement to the right was 6 mm, to the left 5 mm.  In centric relation, Emily occludes on the left second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion. 

Previous x-rays taken from June 22, 2006, shows that she had a fairly good bite relationship and good jaw alignment at that time.  She had about a 1 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Joints appeared relatively normal at that time.  An earlier x-ray from 2004 showed that she had good jaw alignment at that time.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION FROM 6/19/2009.  Panorex shows the presence of impacted wisdom teeth on the right side including the maxillary and mandibular right third molars and the absence of the left-sided third molars.  The condyles appear arthritic and it appears as though they have lost significant volume.  The articular eminences are not very prominent.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Bony septum appears straight, but turbinates appear moderately enlarged.
Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight.  Sinuses are clear.  Left turbinate is quite large and appears to obliterate a major portion of the nasal airway.  The right turbinate is a little bit smaller in size, and there is a little bit better airway present.  
Axial view just above the palatal level shows that the sinuses are clear and the left turbinate is quite large, but the right turbinate appears more normal in size.  
Left TMJ tomograms show that there has been significant loss of condylar volume.  There is some increased joint space.  The articular eminences are quite flattened, although there is still some residual eminence present.  Condyle appears to be relatively centered in the fossa.  
Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show a similar presentation with significant loss of condylar volume and narrow anteroposterior remaining head.  The articular eminence is quite resorbed.  Joint space appears a little bit increased particularly posteriorly and superoposteriorly.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows that the condyle is quite narrow mediolaterally, and there is significant loss of condylar volume.  The joint space actually look good or slightly excess.  Lateral rim of the fossa has a downward curvature of 4 mm.     
Right coronal tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit less joint space vertically compared to the opposite side, but significant loss of condylar volume and height.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Emily has some slight AP maxillary deficiency, posterior maxillary deficiency, and AP mandibular deficiency.  Her oropharyngeal airway is quite constricted with an airway dimension of only about 3 mm at the soft palate level and perhaps slightly less than 3 mm at the base of the tongue.  She does have her tongue postured inferiorly in her mouth, however. 

Basic diagnoses for Emily would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ connective tissue autoimmune disease and probable juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
Slight AP maxillary hypo and posterior vertical hypoplasia. 
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Anterior open bite. 
Occludes only on the left second molars in centric relation with all other teeth out of occlusion.
Hypertrophied turbinates with nasal airway obstruction.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway of 3.5 mm (normal 11 mm).
High mandibular occlusal plane angle. 
Impacted right maxillary and mandibular third molars.
Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Surgical removal of impacted third molars to include the maxillary and mandibular right third molars.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch in two occlusal plane levels.  Align the cuspids through first molars at one occlusal plane level.  Place a step in the arch wire to align the 4 incisors in an elevated plane level.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Place brackets on the second molars, but do not engage them in the arch wire. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Place brackets on the second molars, but do not engage them in the arch wire.  Consider slenderizing the lower anterior teeth by removing 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.    
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with mandibular advancement with TMJ Concept total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and level the transverse and AP occlusal planes.  
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Bilateral coronoidotomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
