NATALIE PEVNICK									11/21/2008

Natalie is 32 years old.  Referred by Jenna Spears.  Natalie is in fairly good health except for her jaw problems.  Her TMJ problems began in about 1996 associated with an MVA.  From 1996 to 1998, she did all kinds of treatments to try to avoid surgery.  Finally, in 1998, she had bilateral TMJ disc plication procedures done.  She continued to wear a splint almost 24 hours a day after that treatment, but was able to tolerate things pretty well.  In July 2007, she went on a rollercoaster ride and this set off her TMJ problems again.  In November 2007, the right TMJ was reoperated and the disc “reconstructed” with what I suspect was a temporal fascia graft.  In March 2008, the left TMJ disc was reconstructed, likely with a temporal fascia graft.  The surgeon told Natalie that the discs were torn and shredded and essentially nonsalvageable.  Apparently, the surgeon told Natalie “the discs were folded like a taco and shredded”.  Natalie has had splints since about 1996 and has been in them since that time.  She has had about 8 splints since then.  She has had biofeedback, hypnosis, saline and steroid injections, manipulations, and more recently she had physical therapy from July through November 2007, but with no improvement.

Natalie rates her headaches at 10 that occur throughout the head and she gets these almost daily.  She rates her TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain at 10, jaw function at 9, diet at 9, disability at 10.  Her pain gets to intense that she frequently has nausea and vomiting.  She gets frequent earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her fingers.  She has to pop her neck which is loud and can be heard easily across the room.  Natalie has been diagnosed also with celiac disease, anxiety, and depression.  She had a thyroid tumor that was removed in December 2004.  She had surgery for an ovarian cyst and endometriosis in January 2007.  She had an ovarian cyst removed in December 2003 and a gallbladder in May 2001.  Natalie did have orthodontics for about 18 months as a teenager. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Natalie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 to 5 mm.  Midlines all appear pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, Natalie has good facial balance.  In assessing the profile, her chin does appear to be back probably 6 mm or so.  The maxilla may be back a couple of millimeters.  Chin neckline may be a little bit short, although the chin neckline is reasonably well defined.  Natalie has a lip incompetence of about 4 to 5 mm.  Intraorally, Natalie has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars and upper teeth back through the second molars.  She has some minimal crowding the lower anterior arch.  She has a nice Class I cuspid-molar relationship and about a 2 mm vertical overbite.  Oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal.  The left fascial pillar is positioned a little medially.  It is difficult to evaluate the tonsils.  It is difficult because of limited opening to evaluate the oropharyngeal tissues.  Natalie does feel that her profile has changed, and her chin is more retruded now than it used to be.  Natalie has significant difficulties breathing through her nose.  The turbinates appear quite large, particularly on the right side and they appear quite boggy.  She does use a lot of Afrin to keep her nasal airway clean and opened.  Maximal incisal opening is 27 mm, but only about 19 mm without significant pain.  Excursion movement to the right 2 mm, to the left 4 mm.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the posterior neck, but high moderate to severe pain in the temporalis, masseters, retromandibular, and shoulder area.  She has severe pain to palpation in the TMJ area.  Other joints seem fairly smooth today, but Natalie says that frequently she hears crackling, grindy kind of sounds in her joints.  On opening, she does deviate to the left about 4 to 5 mm.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the four third molars.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  Joints appear arthritic.  
Waters view shows that the septum is reasonably straight, but with a little small spur off the left side.  Turbinates appear quite large, particularly in the right side and appear to obliterate the nasal airway.  Sinuses are clear.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is sclerotic on top.  Articular eminence is relatively normal in inclination.  There is slightly increased posterior joint space perhaps, but maybe slightly decreased superior joint space.  There could be some osteophytes coming off the top.  The condyle appears arthritic.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  There appears to perhaps some anterior beaking present.  The condyle appears quite arthritic.  On opening, there is minimal translation of either joint.
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that a skeletal Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 5 mm showing that it is constricted.  At the base of the tongue, it measures 8 mm.   

Natalie states that after her last surgery, she got an infection in the left jaw joint area.  She was placed on Levaquin.  It took several weeks before the infection finally went away.  No cultures or sensitivities were taken of the infection, so the type of bacteria is unknown.  

The injury specialist who is currently taking care of Natalie is Barry I. Feinberg, MD, 10435 Clayton Road, #120, St. Louis, MO 63131, telephone 314-985-3002.  

Basic diagnoses for Natalie would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis, left side worse than the right side.  
Severe headaches. 
Severe TMJ pain. 
Significant masticatory dysfunction. 
History of two previous TMJ surgeries per each joint.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts. 
Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars to control the occlusion presurgery and immediately postsurgery.  