DEAN PURCELL									05/14/2009 

Dean is 48 years old.  Referred by Hilton Goldreich, DDS, MS, 3105 Legacy Drive, Suite A,
Plano, TX 75023.  Primary concern that Dean has is with his bite.  He had no problems with TMJ issues nor headaches nor earaches or vertigo.  He does have some tinnitus he relates probably to hunting.  Dean says that occasionally he has some snoring particularly when he has an allergic kind of response, but claims no daytime somnolence, sleep apnea, nor sleep disorder.  He is predominantly a nasal breather.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Dean has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -1.  The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline appears to be shifted off towards the left side about 2 mm.  The chin also is just slightly off to the left side.  The mandibular dental midline and chin appear to be fairly well aligned.  In profile view, Dean has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  The chin appears retruded.  There is a prominent labiomental fold.  Chin neckline may be slightly short and chin neck angle is not defined.  As Dean postures his lower jaw forward, it does improve his overall profile.  As Dean bites all the way, he has severe vertical over-closure with extreme shortness in the lower third of the face and extreme accentuation of the labiomental fold.  Intraorally, Dean is missing the mandibular right second bicuspid and all first second molars, but the third molar roots are still there, but the crown is missing.  On the right side, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars present.  He has crowns on the first and second molars.  He has severe erosion and attrition of his right anterior teeth from cuspid to cuspid.  He has significant periodontal clefting around the lateral incisors and cuspids.  In the upper arch, Dean has all of his teeth back through the second molars on the left side, but on the right side he is missing all 3 molars.  He has a diastema between his left central incisors.  He has some TADs in between the maxillary lateral incisors and cuspids in the upper arch.  Dean has got probably about a 15 mm anterior deep bite.  He has a slight accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch and a reverse curve in the upper arch.  He has total buccal crossbites with only the maxillary second bicuspid occluding on the left side and essentially only the right second molar and the remaining root stumps of the third molar attaching on the right side.  All other teeth are essentially out of occlusion.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated significantly off to the right side.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged, but there appears to be adequate airway particularly on the left side.  Dean is basically Class II cuspid relationship.  When Dean opens his jaws or starts to separate, he has significantly improved vertical facial balance.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular right second bicuspid, first and second molars and retainment of the mandibular right probably third molar roots, but there is a bifurcation involvement.  In the maxillary right arch, the third molar is missing.  On the left side, the mandibular left third molar is missing, but the maxillary left all 3 molars are absent.  Turbinates appear quite large.  Nasal septum is deviated off towards the right side.  The condyles look reasonable in morphology.  He has got prominent angles of the mandible probably indicative of some masseteric hyperplasia.  In the maxillary left alveolar area, it appears there may be some root tips left in the bone. 

Coronal view shows that Dean has a moderate bilateral maxillary sinusitis occurring.  The nasal septum is deviated significantly off towards the right side.  Inferior turbinates are moderately enlarged and the lateral turbinates are enlarged, particularly on the left side.  There is a septal spur that extends off the septum in the lower area off to the right side.  
Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged, and the septum is deviated off towards to the right side and there is a septal spur that extends even further and encroaches on the right turbinate.  There is sinusitis present, being worse on the right sinus compared to the left side.  
Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Joint space is quite good vertically, although it is slightly decreased posteriorly.  Towards the medial aspect of the joint, the AP width of the fossa appears somewhat narrow compared to the size of the condyle, but with the joint space there it is assumed that the disc is in the posterior band area and is fairly thick.   
Right TMJ sagittal tomograms shows a condyle that actually appears almost excessively large for the fossa.  There is some decreased posterior joint space and the anterior joint space appears a little bit thinner than the opposite side; however, the superior joint space appears almost excessive indicative of probably a thickened posterior band of the articular disc.  
Left TMJ coronal tomogram shows a condyle that is quite wide mediolaterally.  The lateral pole of the condyle appears to be built up with some additional bone and seems to extend just equal to or just beyond the lateral rim of the fossa.  Vertical joint space looks reasonably good with decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint.  
Right TMJ coronal tomograms show a similar configuration with an extension of the lateral pole of the condyle out to almost beneath the articular eminence.  There is decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint in at least view.  Otherwise, the vertical dimension appears reasonable.  
We took lateral cephalometric radiograph in two views.  The first view is with maximum intercuspation and centric occlusion.  It shows an anterior deep bite of about 15 mm.  The lower incisors appear to occlude in the palatal tissues.  The lower incisors are in significant lingual inclination.  The maxillary incisors appear somewhat vertical in orientation.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 7 mm and at the base of the tongue about 5 mm.  There is a little bit of airway space between the tongue and the soft palate of about 2 mm.  In the slightly open view, vertical facial dimensions are much better, and he still has a vertical overbite of about 5 mm, but has an overjet of about 5-6 mm.  Oropharyngeal airway may be slightly decreased with airway of about 4 mm at the soft palate and at the base of the tongue it is about 4 mm as well.  The vertical inclination of the lower incisors is obvious.  He has a got a skeletal Class II jaw position.  Upper incisors are vertical in inclination as well.  Special x-ray taken to evaluate the suspicious area in the maxillary left tuberosity region reveals a root tip from a tooth that had a previous root canal on it and this is creating the image of concern, but is actually of no concern.  In the special view, the inferior and middle turbinates are quite large.  There is a Bolton’s tooth size discrepancy of -2 mm in part due to the loss of vertical height of the lower anterior teeth.  


Basic diagnoses for Dean would be as follows:    

AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Transverse maxillary hyperplasia. 
Class II cuspid relationship. 
Anterior deep bite of 15 mm.
Buccal crossbite tendencies.
Missing mandibular right second bicuspid, first and second molars, maxillary left first, second, and third molars. 
Retained root tips of the mandibular right third molar.
Arch asymmetry with the maxillary left cuspid being 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid and the mandibular left cuspid being 1-2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Deviated nasal septum.
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Bilateral chronic maxillary sinusitis.
Severely decrease oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal 11 mm).
Dental caries beneath the crowns of the mandibular left second bicuspid and molars as well as perhaps the maxillary left second bicuspid crown.
Severe attrition of the mandible anterior 6 teeth.
Significant periodontal clefting around the mandibular lateral incisors and cuspids.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Dental evaluation to evaluate possible presence of caries beneath existing crowns.  Extract root tips of mandibular right third molar. 
ENT consultation to try to correct and eliminate the bilateral maxillary sinusitis.  
Periodontal evaluation for consideration of gingival grafting in the lower anterior arch. 
Evaluation for dental implants.
Consider probable left maxillary sinus lift procedure to provide adequate bone for implant placement. 
Placement of 2 dental implants in the left maxilla and 3 implants in the right mandibular posterior quadrant. 
General dental preparation of temporary crowns on implants.  Consider bonding to lower anterior teeth to create more normal sized and shaped crowns. 
Consider splint therapy to open the bite adequately to allow application of the orthodontic appliances to the lower arch. 
Orthodontics.  
 Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Consider retracting the cuspid on the right side to eliminate the spacing.  
Try to advance the left bicuspids to help straighten the upper arch AP asymmetry. 
Align and level the mandibular arch. Tip lateral incisors forward.  Open some slight spacing so the crowns can be built up to represent normal sized teeth (there is a Bolton’s discrepancy of -2 mm).  
Surgery. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a clockwise direction. 
Maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior maxilla and advance incisal edges forward about 3-4 mm.  
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Nasal septoplasty. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to finalize crowns on the osteointegrated implants and any other dental issues necessary to complete treatment. 