SAMANTHA PONCE								02/10/2009

Samantha is currently 16 years old.  She was referred by Dr. Bill Hang.  She has had previous orthodontics and the lower teeth were pulled back to try get beneath the upper teeth.  I talked with the mother on February 10, 2009.  Primary concerns that Samantha has includes the following:

Headaches.
Pain down through the neck and shoulder area. 
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Difficulties breathing through her nose. 
Difficulties participating in activities including school because of her headache problems and pain problems. 

She rates her headaches at a level of 5, average daily pain at 2, TMJ pain at 0.  She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 4, disability at 4.  She is aware of clenching and grinding her teeth at night and also during the day.  She gets occasional earaches, but no tinnitus nor vertigo.  No other joints apparently bother her.  

Clinical photographs sent show that she has mandibular prognathism and perhaps some slight AP maxillary deficiency.  She has a Class III end-on occlusion with anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites.  She has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm.  She has an accentuated curve of Spee in both the upper and the lower arches.  Radiographically, she is missing all four third molars, but has the rest of her teeth.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Condylar heads and necks appear elongated.  Midline seemed to be fairly congruent.  On the lateral ceph, she is skeletal Class III with an anterior open bite and Class III molar relationship.  She has a decrease oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue.  She has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  The condyles appear to have reasonably good shape, but the joint space is extremely thin, indicating she may have displaced articular discs or the articular discs are extremely thin.  The condylar head and necks appear quite long in length.

Based on photographs and I-CAT images forwarded as well as discussion with the mother, Samantha’s diagnoses are as follows:

Probable bilateral condylar hyperplasia with possible displaced articular discs. 
AP mandibular prognathism. 
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
Class III end-on occlusion.
Anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
High occlusal plane angle.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal airway obstruction.
Anterior open bite.
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and the lower arch. 
Lingual inclination of the lower incisors. 
Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Medications:  Consider Klonopin 1 mg q.h.s. to see if this will decrease her headaches, neck and shoulder pain while she is being prepared for surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ MRI’s to rule out TMJ pathology.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral increase roots mesially and cuspid roots distally.  Place a step in the arch wire between the cuspids and the lateral incisors so that the four incisors are aligned at a higher occlusal plane level compared to the cuspids and posterior teeth.
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Continue to monitor growth and development. 
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repairs with Mitek anchors, if condylar hyperplasia and/or articular disc dislocations are identified in the TMJs.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition the mandible posteriorly at the incisor tips and rotate upwards in a counterclockwise direction to close the open bite. 
Maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla and move the posterior aspect superiorly to close the open bite and maximize the occlusal fit. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
