SHELLY PHILLIPS									01/09/2009

Shelly is 41 years old and was referred by Baylor College of Dentistry.  Shelly has had a previous intracranial aneurysm.  She had a clip placed intracranially in 1991 and then she had a coil procedure done in 2007.  She has had 2 C-sections in 1991 and 1997.  Shelly’s TMJ problems began when she was about 16 in the 1980s.  Etiology is unknown.  Treatment to date consists of a splint that she began wearing in March 2008.  This has not been successful for her, and she has difficulties wearing it because once she gets it in she has significant difficulties getting it back out again.  

She gets headaches at a level of 7 in the frontal and temporal areas and TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 7, jaw function, diet at 5, and disability at 7.  She gets frequent earaches, but occasional tinnitus and vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her right hip, shoulders, and her ankles occasionally.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime.  The only medication she currently takes is hydrocodone occasionally for headaches.  Shelly does have moderate snoring and severe daytime somnolence.  She is not aware of sleep apnea episodes.  She may have a night sleep disorder in that she has difficulties getting to sleep.  She feels that she likely breathes through her nose when she sleeps.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Shelly has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -2 mm.  The maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted to the right about 2 mm, and the chin may be just slightly shifted.  In profile view, Shelly has fairly good symmetry.  She has some AP deficiency which is not too significant.  There is a little bi-maxillary protrusion, but not too significant.  Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular right first molar, but has the rest of her teeth back through the third molars on the right side and to the second molar on the left side.  The teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.  The mandibular right second and third molars have drifted significantly forward.  The right cuspid appears to be about 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch, Shelly has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm.  She has a Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by probably at least 4 mm.  On the left side, she is basically Class I.  She has more of an end-on incisor relationship.  When she bites, just the teeth on the left side touch and may extend from the second bicuspids through the second molars.  The rest of teeth are out of occlusion.  She may have just a slight increased curve of Spee in the upper arch.  The transverse maxillary plane I believe is fairly level.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy, although the uvula is a little bit enlarged, but the soft palate and facial pillars appear relatively normal.  Tonsils are mild to moderate in size.  Intranasally, the turbinates are quite large, but the transverse width of the internal nose is large.  The septum appears reasonably straight, at least what can be seen from the front view.  The turbinates are enlarged and flared and you can actually look underneath both of them fairly easily.  Shelly has high moderate pain through the head and neck area and high moderate to low severe pain over the TMJs and retromandibular areas.  Maximal incisal opening is about 55 mm.  Excursion movement to the left about 9 mm, to the right about 7 mm, but the right side was quite painful on the right TMJ with translation to that side.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary third molars and the mandibular left third molar as well as the mandibular right first molar.  The rest of the teeth are all present.  The sinuses look reasonably clear.  Condylar head and neck appears longer on the right side than the left side, but the left condyle appears broader anteroposteriorly than the right side.    
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology and is well confined within the fossa.  There is significantly decreased vertical joint space.  The cortical bone appears to be intact.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The joint space is significantly decreased.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3-4 mm.  
Left TMJ tomograms shows a condyle with fairly good shape to it.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking present and decreased vertical joint space.  Articular eminence appears moderately shallow.
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  There is a little bit of flattening at the lateral aspect of the joint.  Articular eminence is fairly shallow.  There appears to be decreased vertical and anteroposterior joint space.  
Maxillary vertical tomogram shows that the nasal septum is moderately enlarged.  The septum deviates more towards the left side than off to the right side.  
Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight and turbinates are moderately large. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she does have bi-maxillary protrusion.  Oropharyngeal airway is constricted with an airway dimension of about 4 mm at the soft palate level and perhaps 6 at the base of the tongue.  She does have fairly significantly bi-maxillary protrusion.  

Basic diagnoses for Shelly would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction. 
Bi-maxillary protrusion. 
High occlusal plane angle.
Class I occlusion on the left, Class II end-on occlusion on the right. 
Missing mandibular right first molar, maxillary left and right third molars, and mandibular left third molar. 
Mandibular right second and third molars drifted significantly forward. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal 11 mm).
AP microgenia.  No models were available today and no MRI available.  Shelly has a clip and coil intracranially of unknown materials.  She is going to try to get records from her neurologist or neurosurgeon that followed her here in Dallas (she had her surgery done in Denver) to see if they have any record of what the materials are made of.  
Sleep apnea symptoms (snoring, daytime somnolence).
Anterior and right-sided open bite.

Recommended treatment may include the following:

MRI of left and right TMJ. 
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Open up space in the right first molar area and advance the bicuspid forward 1 to 2 mm to improve lower arch symmetry and try to upright the molars.  May need to extract the third molar to allow the second molar to be more easily uprighted to make space for a first molar. 
Surgery.  
TMJ reconstruction by one of the following methods:  
Bilateral Mitek anchors, if discs are salvageable.
Bilateral total joint prosthesis, if nonsalvageable.  
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. 
Sagittal splits or total joint prostheses to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Augmentation genioplasty. 
Fat grafts to bilateral TMJs, if the TMJ Concepts prostheses are necessary.
Bilateral coronoidotomies, if TMJ Concepts prostheses are necessary. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Osteointegrated implant and crown in mandibular right first molar area.

