B155
B155 is 34 years old. Referred by XXXX.
B155 was aware of having TMJ as early as the age of 13 to 14 years, however, it has only been in about the last 5 weeks that her condition has gotten quite severe relative to pain. Her primary concerns are as follows:

Loss of hearing. Inability to eat solid foods.
Inability to speak clearly and pronounce words.
Ringing in the ears.
Dizziness. Headaches. Sensitivity to bright lights. Severe jaw pain.

She currently takes the following medications:
Naproxen 500 mg one every other day. Hydrocodone 5-mg tablets ½ tablet every other day. Tramadol 50 mg 1-2 tablets per week.
Methylprednisolone p.r.n. Ibuprofen.
Valium p.r.n.

B155 rates her headaches at a level of 7 and they are fairly constant and they occur throughout the head area. She rates her TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 8, diet at 8, disability at 9. She gets severe earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, and she has profound hearing loss that comes and goes. Other joints that bother her include knees, back, fingers, and left wrist. She is probably a clencher at nighttime. She has essentially had no treatment. She was given a pillow-type of device to buy, however, this made her pain worse.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B155 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline and chin may be just about 1 mm off to the left. In profile, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably 5-6 mm. The chin is retruded about 18-20 mm. The chin neckline is extremely short and chin neck angle is absent. Intraorally, she has all of her teeth in both arches. She is basically Class I on the right side and slight Class II end-on on the left side by probably 2 mm. She has about a 1 to 0.5 mm overbite. Actually, the overbite is closer to zero. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch. To palpation, she has severe pain through most of the head and neck area, but moderate in the SCMs, posterior neck, and shoulder area. Maximum incisal opening voluntarily was 6 mm. Excursion movement to the right 2 mm and to the left 5 mm. Could not evaluate the uvula, soft palate, fascial pillars or tonsils as she could not open wide enough for examination. Inside the nose, turbinates are moderate in size. There is a spur off the septum to the right side, but then at the very base of the septum there is a spur off to the left side. Nostrils are moderately narrow.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Condyles appear arthritic. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged. It is difficult to evaluate the sinuses Axial view shows that turbinates are fairly large. Sinuses are clear. Coronal view shows that the inferior and the middle turbinates are quite large, although the sinuses appear clear. Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show that condyle is hypoplastic, degenerated, and arthritic. Articular eminence has a moderate steepness to it. Right TMJ condyle appears small in size and both condyles appear to have lost significant volume. Articular eminence is a little more shallow on this side compared to the opposite side. Left TMJ coronal view shows advanced arthritic changes in the condyle with severe loss of condylar volume. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. Right TMJ coronal view shows that the condyle is small in size and has lost mediolateral as well as vertical dimension. There is decreased joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a retruded maxilla and mandible. She has a severe constricture of her oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of only about 3 mm at the soft palate level and closer to 2 mm at the base of the tongue.

I suspect B155 probably had AICR as a child. She had previous orthodontics in grade school and all through high school, and then she had them on the bottom later on as an adult. B155 has significant difficulty swallowing pills and also food stuff and she tends to choke a lot. This is likely related to the severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.

Basic diagnoses for B155 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis. Mandibular severe AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Severe TMJ pain. Headaches. Severe myofascial pain. Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm (normal AP dimension is 11 mm).
Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction. Sleep apnea symptoms. Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract. CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and down grafting it posteriorly. Bilateral coronoidotomies. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Genioplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B155 MRI AGE: 34/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears extremely small. There appears to be decreased superior joint space to some degree. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. The condyle appears sclerotic.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is small in mediolateral width and appears quite sclerotic with decreased vertical joint space. The disc may be anterior and laterally displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. Articular eminence has a moderate inclination. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is quite thick at the posterior band area. On opening, there is restricted translation and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. The condyle does appear somewhat sclerotic. There appears to be a closed lock situation in this joint.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. It appears that there is some loss of condylar volume. Articular eminence is not quite as steep in this side as the opposite side. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. On opening, there is restricted translation of the condyle and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. There appears to be a closed lock situation in this joint.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs anteriorly dislocated without reduction and with closed lock.

