SANDRA POPPLETON								05/29/2009

Sandra is 49 years old.  Referred by Dr. David Psutka, 4288 Village Centre Court, Mississauga, Ontario. 

Sandra is in good health.  She does have some asthma problems that she occasionally takes Ventolin and Advair as needed.  Sandra apparently had a jaw malalignment.  She began orthodontic treatment on November 9, 2005.  She had orthognathic surgery that included a Le Forte I osteotomy for superior repositioning of the maxilla and a genioplasty in January 2007.  She is unhappy with the results.  She feels the upper jaws are moving up too far superiorly.  She has problems that she bites her cheeks and upper lip.  She began orthodontic treatment again in April 2008 and has continued in her appliances.  Sandra has essentially no TMJ problems such as pain, headaches, myofascial pain, etc.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  She has no joints that bother her.  She does feel some crepitus in the left TMJ area.  She has some numbness in her left cheek/upper lip area.  This has been present since her original surgery. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Sandra has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Some asymmetry is present in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  She shows very little vermilion.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -1 mm.  The dental midlines are pretty much on the facial midline.  However, the chin is deviated about 4-5 mm to the left.  She has some hyperfunction of the mentalis muscles.  She has very prominent labiomental crease.  There is a little lip ptosis with probably almost 5 mm of lower incisor exposed.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose.  The mandible actually looks somewhat retruded, even though the chin appears strong relative to the lower lip.  She has a prominent labiomental fold.  She has a high mandibular plane angle.  The lower two-thirds of the lower third face appear somewhat short in vertical dimensions.  The chin itself may be slightly AP deficient by 4-5 mm.  Chin neckline and chin neck angle are not defined.  Intraorally, Sandra is missing a mandibular incisor, but she has the rest of all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She is fairly close to being a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with just a slight Class III tendency on the right side which actually makes her bite fit together a little bit better.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, as far as I could see, the turbinates appear relatively normal and the septum appears reasonably straight.  There is probably some mild to moderate obstruction, but it appears it may be due to slightly wide columella, narrow nostrils, and maybe some constricture of the luminal valves.  The lower tooth extracted for orthodontic reasons was likely the mandibular left central incisor.  Sandra maintains all 4 of her wisdom teeth which are erupted.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, joints seem to function relatively smoothly except she has a little bit of glitch in the left joint.  By palpation, it seems like the disc could possibly laterally displaced.  Maximal incisal opening is 45 mm, excursion movement to the right 7 mm, to the left 8 mm. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of 4 bone plates in the maxilla.  She has 2 bone screws in the mandible.  She has orthodontic appliances back through the second molars present.  
Coronal view shows that intranasally there may be some problems with deviation of the nasal septum as well as turbinates could be possibly be causing some nasal airway blockage.  Both sinuses are full of material, but the right sinus is relatively clear with just a little of material in the floor of the sinus. 
Axial view shows that she has material collected in the anterior aspect of the left maxillary sinus, and there are a few droplets of material on the right side.  Septum appears reasonably straight.  
Left TMJ sagittal tomograms shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is increased anterior joint space.  It is possible the disc could be in a vertical orientation within this joint.  Some views show that there may be a little tendency towards anterior beaking, but nothing real significant.    
Right TMJ sagittal tomograms shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  However, the condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with increased anterior joint space. 
Left TMJ coronal tomogram shows that there appears to be decreased vertical joint space, particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  Lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  There could be possible medial displacement of the disc as well as anterior.  The noise she hears in the joint could be some crepitation because of the close proximity of the lateral aspect of the joint.
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to generate some decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint.  Her upper joint space appears slightly better on the right side as compared to the left side in the mid portion of the condyle.  Lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a relatively full upper lip.  She has a slight overjet of about 2 mm.  She has prominence of the labiomental fold.  The vertical height of the mandible appears somewhat short.  The labiomental fold appears quite strong.  She appears to have some vertical maxillary deficiency and she has lower lip ptosis.  Oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue measures about 6.5 mm and at the soft palate level measures about 10 mm.

Sandra has a twin sister Sharon who came with her.  Sharon’s upper lip length is 23 mm and upper tooth relationship is about 2.5 mm.  Sharon shows significantly more vermilion as compared to Sandra.  Sharon’s profile, at least in the chin neckline, is similar to Sandra where there is not real good definition of the chin neckline angle area.  She does demonstrate some AP deficiency in both maxilla and mandible and a high mandibular plane angle facial morphology.  

Basic diagnoses for Sandra would be as follows:    

Vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Slight AP maxillary hypoplasia. 
Slight AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
AP macrogenia.
Anterior vertical mandibular hypoplasia.
Missing mandibular left central incisor. 
Class I cuspid on the left, slight Class III cuspid on the right side.
Paresthesias to the left cheek and upper lip. 
Significantly accentuated labiomental fold.
Chin asymmetry with the chin midline being shifted about 4-5 mm to the left of the facial midline. 
Lower lip ptosis.
Dimpling of the mentalis muscle as a result of acquire hyperfunction.  
Rule out bilateral TMJ disc dislocations. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

MRI of left and right TMJ.
Maintain current alignment and level of the maxilla and maintain current alignment and level of the mandibular arch. 
Surgery.  
Maxillary osteotomies to down graft it approximately 4 mm with bone plate and bone grafting stabilization and advance forward 2 mm. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible approximately 5-6 mm. 
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to align the chin. 
Bone graft to anterior mandible to decrease the prominence of the labiomental fold. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors, if it is confirmed the discs are displaced on MRI.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
