ERIN PUGLIESE									11/26/2008

Erin is 22 years old, referred by Dr. Al Bishop, 3001 Brown Trail, Suite 101, Bedford, TX 76021.  Erin’s TMJ problems began when she was about 16 years old in 2001.  She noticed it when she was wearing elastics to try to correct her bite.  She had orthodontic expanders in third grade and had full braces from the age of 12 to 16.  She had her wisdom teeth removed in 2002.  She has a history of asthma.  Her medications include Albuterol and Loestrin 24.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  She does not have any headache problems.  She has occasional pain in her right TMJ area.  She rates this at about a level of 1.  On the average day, she really does not have any pain.  She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 5, disability at 5.  Her primary difficulties are as follows:

She cannot open mouth very side. 
When it opens, it shifts towards the right side.
Difficulties eating and chewing. 
Difficult to sing.

Erin would like to pursue singing as a career in the future, and her current situation is inhibiting that possibility.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Erin has fairly good facial symmetry in middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right and the chin is about 2 mm off to the right.  In profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably 3 mm or so.  The chin appears to be retruded about 2 mm.  The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  The lower third face appears somewhat elongated.  Intraorally, Erin has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Attached gingiva is very thin around the lower anterior teeth and roots are fairly prominent.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  In her centric relation, she is about 3 mm Class II on the right side and maybe 1 to 2 mm Class II on the left side.  She has probably about a zero to 0.5 mm of vertical overbite.  She has difficulties getting her teeth together.  With one bite where she feels reasonably comfortable, her back teeth will touch.  If she shifts to another position where she is reasonably comfortable, the back teeth do not touch and only some of the mid buccal teeth, perhaps the bicuspids and cuspids, may touch, more so on the left side than right side.  In trying to place her in a centric relation, it created significant discomfort for her on the left side more so than the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy and appear to have relatively normal architecture.  It was somewhat difficult to evaluate the oropharyngeal area.  Intranasally, the right turbinate appeared fairly large, but the left one looked relatively normal.  The septum had some deviation in it a little bit to both sides.  There does not appear to be any real significant obstruction related to the septum.  There may be some mild to moderate obstruction in the right side.  To palpation, Erin really has no pain around the head and neck area.  However, in putting some pressure on the TMJ area, this seemed to make her feel uncomfortable and made her feel as though her joints may go out of place.  The condyles are quite prominent and easily palpable.  The condyles appear to come out beyond the lateral rim of the fossas.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being about 1.5 mm higher than the left side.  Anteroposterior the maxilla appears relatively symmetric with the mandible of the right cuspid about 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  Maximal incisal opening is about 28 mm, but only about 23 mm without discomfort.  Excursion movement to the right is about 3 mm, to the left probably less than 2 mm.  As Erin opens her jaws, her mandible deviates off to the right side about 5 to 6 mm.  
Basic diagnoses for Erin would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction on the left side, but without reduction on the right side.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia. 
Class III end-on occlusion on the right side. 
Tendency towards anterior open bite. 
High occlusal plane angle. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
TMJ pain. 
Difficulties eating and chewing. 
Over angulation of lower incisors.
Mild crowding of lower anterior arch. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract. 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. 
Multiple mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly and decrease the occlusal plane angle. 
Genioplasty to advance the chin about 4 mm.
3   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

