CHRISTIAN PETOUSIS								03/16/2009

Christian is 13 years and 4 months of age.  Referred by Dr. Tom Walsh, 99696 Overseas Highway, Suite 5 & 6, Key Largo, FL 33037-2422.  Christian has had long-term problems with his ears and with airway factors.  In 1999, he had a tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy performed.  He has had 3 sets of ear tubes which has left a hole in the left eardrum.  As far as his parents are aware, Christian’s problems began when he was about 11 years old.  Christian was in the 5th grade at that time, and he also was aware of popping in his jaws.  At the age of 11 is when his parents first noticed that his jaw was become more retruded.  Christian has had 2 palatal expanders and this obviously has not corrected his problem.  He also has had 3 sets of ear tubes.  He also had a lower expander in the lower arch x1.  

Primary concerns that Christian has at this time include the following:

Cannot breathe through the nose. 
Hole in the left eardrum. 
Narrowed airway.
Chin is moving backwards.
Teeth are very crooked and over crowded.
Memory getting progressively poor. 

Christian has no significant problems with headaches nor TMJ pain nor pain around the head and neck area.  He rates his jaw function at around 2, diet at about 2, and disability maybe around 3.  He has no trouble with earaches, but gets occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  The only other joint that really bothers him is his left knee occasionally.  He is not aware of clenching and bruxism.  He does have severe snoring problems and mild daytime somnolence.  He may have some sleep apnea problems.  Although the family has not observed actual apneic episodes, they know that he struggles for air when he is sleeping.  There was a polysonography study done on 02/08/2009.  It shows that he had an apnea/hypopnea index of 4.4 during REM sleep.  While awake, his O2 saturations were at 97 and the lowest recorded saturation was 78%.  EKG showed that he had a regular sinus rhythm with periods of sinus arrhythmia, probably created by the sleep apnea.  The impression from the Sleep/Wake Disorder Center of South Florida is as follows:

Obstructive sleep apnea.
Upper airway resistance syndrome.
Nocturnal hypoxemia. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Christian has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about zero.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted just slightly to the left about 2 mm, although the chin is pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Christian has some AP maxillary deficiency of about 3 to 4 mm.  Chin is retruded by about 18-20 mm.  Chin neckline is essentially non-identifiable.  Intraorally, Christian has all of his permanent teeth back through the second molars present.  There is some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  Cuspids are blocked out of the arch on the right side.  The left side is in a little bit better position.  He has a Class II cuspid relationship and bicuspid relationship bilaterally being probably about 3 mm Class II on the left side and the right side.  Transversely, the maxilla may be just slightly elevated on the left side about 1 or 2 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Septum appears reasonably normal.  There appears to be moderate airway obstruction.  Christian appears occlude on the second bicuspids and first and second molars with the anterior teeth being out of occlusion.  He has about a 2 mm anterior open bite.  To palpation, Christian really does not have any significant pain around the head and neck area.  Incisal opening is about 40.  Excursion movements are about 5 mm in each direction. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  From the I-CAT, Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars that are developing, but unerupted.  The left sinus appears cloudy.  In the right side, it appears there may be some material in sinus.  Septum appears reasonably straight.  Right turbinate appears quite large and obliterating.  Condyles are essentially resorbed away.  Articular eminences also are resorbed.  
Coronal view shows that the left sinus is completely full of fluid and the right side has significant sinusitis with thickening of the mucous membranes.  Septum appears reasonably straight.  The right side of the nose appears to be almost completely blocked due to hypertrophied turbinate, both inferior and middle turbinates.  On the left side, the turbinate actually appears a little bit better, but the medially appears quite large.  Airway is constricted for the most part with some better airway on the left side. 
Left TMJ sagittal view shows significant loss of condylar volume with almost complete resorption of the condylar head and neck.  The articular eminence is also almost completely resorbed away.  There is increased joint space present.  The condyle is postured significantly forward in the fossa.  
Right TMJ presents with a similar appearance as the left side with significant loss of condylar head and neck volume, articular eminence, and condyle postured forward and increased joint space.  I
In the left coronal view, the condyle is quite narrow mediolaterally.  There may be some osteophytic kind of formation off the medial side of the condyle.  There appears to be increased vertical joint space.  
Right TMJ coronal view is similar to the left side with significant loss of vertical volume and transverse volume as well.  There is increased joint space.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are significantly retruded, particularly the mandible.  The turbinates extend almost beyond the hard palate.  The oropharyngeal airway is severely constricted with an airway dimension of about 2 mm at the soft palate level and at about 3 mm at the base of the tongue.  Occlusal plane level appears moderately high.  

Christian’s mother also reports that Christian is developing hypertension and several times it has been recorded as being significantly higher than normal.  He has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of about 3 mm.  There is also an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch with the incisors being probably 3 to 4 mm higher than they should be.  The lower arch shows approximately 6 to 7 mm of crowding. 

Basic diagnoses for Christian would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ juvenile rheumatoid arthritis or similar connective tissue autoimmune disease. 
Severe mandibular hypoplasia.
AP maxillary and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2.5 mm (normal 11 mm).
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Bilateral maxillary sinusitis. 
Class II end-on occlusion. 
High occlusal plane angulation.
Significant crowding of the lower anterior arch.
Mild crowding of the upper anterior arch. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm. 
Developing hypertension. 
Sleep apnea. 
Impacted third molars x4.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Consider the use of CPAP to manage airway when sleeping until surgery can be performed.
Rheumatology workup to evaluate for connective tissue autoimmune disease.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch at 2 different occlusal plane levels.  Use a continuous wire, but place a vertical step in it between the lateral incisors and cuspids to align the 4 incisors in an elevated plane level and to extrude the cuspids slightly.  Place brackets on the second molars, but do not engage the second molars in the arch wire.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 3 mm of tooth structure to correct for the significant tooth size discrepancy.  
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). 
Bilateral coronoidotomies. 
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin and advance the genial glossus and hyaloid bone forward.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.