
SHARON PERRY									10/12/2009

Sharon is 52 years old and referred by Dr. Robert Henderson, 723 N. Fielder, Suite E, Arlington, TX 76012.  Sharon had a mandibular right first molar that she had lost a crown with just basically root retention left.  On July 17, 2009, the tooth was extracted and an immediate dental implant was placed.  She had a lot of pain initially afterward and numbness to the right lower lip, chin, teeth, and gums.  On July 20, 2009, the original doctor changed out the implant and put a short implant in.  She continues to have problems with the sensitivity to the lower right lip, chin, teeth, and gums.  She currently is on Tegretol 100-mg tablets, 2 tablets b.i.d.  She also takes Femhrt 1/5 to 1 tablet daily.  Neurological testing for sensitivity to the lower lip and chin shows that with 2-point discrimination she has a normal response on the left side, but on the right side she could not distinguish two pressure points at 20 mm or less.  Von Fry hairs recorded 1.65 on the left side and 4.17 on the right side, but she felt it mainly as pressure.  With brush stroke, she could get some of the strokes on the right side, but had some difficulties with accuracy.  With sharp stimulus, she could feel sharp on both sides, but not with as good as sensibility on the right side as the left side.  With cold, there was delayed onset of cold sensation, although she could felt it.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows some difficulty in identifying the neurovascular canal beneath the present implant.  In one view, it appears it might be just lateral to the implant and then it looks like it may be medial and then it looks like it is very hard to distinguish.  Panorex shows she is missing all four third molars and has an implant in the mandibular right first molar area.  She has arthritis in both TMJs.  
TMJ tomograms show that she has arthritis in both of her joints, but her joints are asymptomatic.   
Lateral cephalogram shows that she has an adequate oropharyngeal airway.  She has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are full of fluid.  Turbinates are relatively normal in size.

Coronal view shows that the left sinus is almost completely full of fluid and the right side is about half full.  Turbinates appear relatively normal in size and the septum appears relatively straight.  Occlusally, she appears to have a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  She has an implant present in the mandibular right first molar area. 

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:    

Right inferior alveolar nerve traumatic neuroma.
Painful dysthesia to right lip, chin, teeth, and gums. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Management of symptoms with Neurontin 300-mg tablets, dispensing 60 tablets, 1 tablet b.i.d., but may increased to t.i.d. if necessary, refill x4.
Surgery.  
Right mandibular body decortication.
Exploration and excision of traumatic neuroma right inferior alveolar nerve.
Microneurosurgical repair of the right inferior alveolar nerve with possible nerve grafting.