CALEB ROBINSON									10/31/2008

Caleb was referred by Dr. Charles Taylor III, 5200 Buffalo Gap Road, Building C, Abilene, TX 79606.  Caleb has always had a “underbite”.  He underwent orthodontics from the age of 11 to 16.  On two or three occasions, the bite seemed to be lined up fairly well, but then his bite would shift again and the lower jaw would be out in front of the upper jaw.  The progression kept getting worse.  Caleb has been in retainers to keep his teeth aligned in the individual arches, but not to try to correct it any further.  As far as the clicking and popping in his joints, Caleb believes that that began approximately 8 years ago of unknown etiology.  

Caleb has no pain directly in the TMJ area, but does have average daily facial pain at about a level of 2, jaw function at 3, diet at 2, disability at 1.  He gets headaches about 3 times a week at about a level of  3 in the frontal and temporal areas.  He has no earaches or tinnitus, but gets occasional vertigo. The only other joints that bother him are his back.  He did have surgery in November 2006 to correct scoliosis.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  He takes the following medications:

Paxil CR 25 mg q.d.
Ultram 200 mg q.d. primarily for his back.

Primary concerns that Caleb has are as follows:

Teeth do not fit together.
Hits primarily on his molars and those teeth are wearing abnormally.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Headaches.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Caleb has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 26 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -1.  The maxillary midline is about 1 mm to the left.  The mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm to the left.  The mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other.  In profile view, the maxilla is probably at least 6 mm AP deficient.  Chin is about 12 mm AP deficient.  When Caleb bites down all the way, the lower two-thirds of the lower third of the face appear short vertically.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well defined.  There is some slight infraorbital hypoplasia of about 3 to 4 mm.  Intraorally, Caleb has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  The teeth are fairly well aligned.  There may be an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.  He has adequate attached gingiva present.  In the upper arch, he appears to be missing the first bicuspids, but has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has a Class III cuspid relationship on the left side and a slight super Class III cuspid relationship on the left side.  He has anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites, but crossbite is worse on the left side than the right side.  He has a reversed deep bite of about 4 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues looks healthy and tonsils are normal in size.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the left side.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  He has some mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction.  The columella is wide and the nostrils are relatively narrow and the luminal valves are moderately constricted.  To palpation, he has very minimal tenderness over the right masseter, but nowhere else.  On opening, he has clicks and pops in both joints somewhere around 15 mm of opening and at about 10 mm of closing.  Maximal incisal opening is 59 mm and excursion movements are about 6 mm in each direction.   
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  Caleb is missing the maxillary first bicuspids, but has all the rest of his teeth.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size. 
Waters view shows that there is deviation in the bony nasal septum.  The turbinates appear moderate in size, and on the left side it appears that the nasal airway is partly obstructed.   Sinuses appear relatively clear.  
Right TMJ tomogram is a little bit difficult to read, but it appears there may be decreased posterior joint space.  Condylar head and neck appear somewhat elongated.  Articular eminence appears relatively normal in inclination.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Joint space appears reasonable.  Articular eminence is relatively normal in angulation.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Caleb has Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship.  He has a reversed anterior deep bite.  The maxilla appears significantly AP deficient and the mandible appears prognathic.  He has a high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway is only about 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  Caleb has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm in the anterior teeth.  

Basic diagnoses for Caleb would be as follows:    

Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction. 
Mandibular deviated prognathism. 
AP maxillary hypoplasia.  
Class III malocclusion. 
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Partial nasal airway obstruction. 
Impacted third molars x4. 
AP microgenia. 
High occlusal plane angle. 
Missing maxillary first bicuspids. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

MRI of left and right TMJs.
Evaluate facial growth and development.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning with ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward 6 mm, down graft it posteriorly 4 to 5 mm, and correct any transverse discrepancy that may be present. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.  
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
5.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

