DESIREE RODRIGUEZ								04/20/2009

Desiree is 31 years old and referred by Dr. Richard Ingraham, 5525 S. Staples Blvd., Bldg. C, Corpus Christi, TX.  Desiree smokes a quarter pack of cigarettes a day and has done this for about 15 years.  She takes the following medications:

Soma 350 mg q.i.d.
Desyrel 50 mg 1 per day. 
Motrin 800 mg 2 times per day. 

She has had a reaction in the past to morphine.  Primary concerns that Desiree has include the following:

Pain in and around the jaws and jaw joints.
Clicking, popping, and locking in the jaws.
Pain around eyes and headaches. 
Difficulty in chewing, swallowing, and speaking.
Sensitivity to light and sound. 
Neck, shoulder, and back pain. 
Numbness in legs, arms, and fingers.
Teeth and jaws do not fit together. 
Sleep apnea symptoms including snoring, daytime somnolence, and difficulty sleeping. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Desiree has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 1 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all aligned with each other.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance of the upper lips, cheeks, and nose.  Chin appears retruded by probably 8-10 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is obtuse.  Intraorally, Desiree has all of her lower teeth except for the second molars, but does have her third molars with spaces in the second molar area.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through to third molars.  She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and just some very slight reverse in the lower arch.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally, being approximately 5 mm Class II.  She has an anterior open bite of about 3-4 mm and an anterior overjet of about 4-5 mm.  In closing, she touches first on the right second bicuspids and all other teeth are out occlusion.  As she bites a little bit more firmly, the back molars come together.  There is a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1 mm higher than the right side.  Oropharyngeal airway looks healthy and normal.  The nasal turbinates appear moderately enlarged, particularly on the left side where the turbinate appears to almost touch against the septum.  To Desiree’s knowledge, her pain problems began during the teen years.  The only real treatment she has had besides medications is a splint given to her in December 2008 by Dr. David Curtis.  This has helped her.  She also sees a chiropractor for treatments.  She has got continuous earaches and tinnitus, frequent vertigo, but no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her elbows, knees, hip, on top of her hands anterior to her wrists, her feet and ankles.  She gets numbness in her hands particularly at the lateral aspect of her hands and tingling on the sides.  She may have Meniere’s disease.  She gets back pain particularly on the lower left side when she bites a lot with her teeth.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the masseters, TMJs, retromandibular area, SCMs, and posterior neck area and milder discomfort over the temporalis muscles.  Maximal incisal opening is 34 mm, but only 21 mm without significant pain and discomfort.  Excursion movement to the right 5 mm and to the left 6 mm.  She rates her TMJ pain usually at around a level of 6, but that can escalate to 10.  Her average daily pain is at 8.  Jaw function, diet, and disability are all at 6.  In her upper arch, she has an almost 5 mm increased curve of Spee with the central incisors being 6 mm above the bicuspid-first molar area.  it does appear on the models that there is probably a tooth size discrepancy.  

I-CAT EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular second molars.  The rest of the teeth are present.  Sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  
Coronal view demonstrates enlarged turbinates particularly on the left side.  Sinuses are clear. 
Axial view shows that the enlarged turbinate on the left side.  The right side looks a little bit more normal in size.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic with decreased vertical joint space.  There appears to be some elevated osteophytic kind of nodules on the top of the condyle.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly just very minor amounts, no more than 1 or 2 mm.  It appears that the condyle has undergone some resorption vertically. 
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little bit better morphology.  The joint space is quite narrow.  Cortical bone on top appears for the most part to be intact.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has anteroposterior width.  Joint space may be decreased some vertically.  Joint space appears somewhat decreased.   The articular eminence is moderately steep. 
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a decreased posterior joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  There is some flattening in the anterior head and some slight anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.    
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Desiree has a retruded mandible and perhaps a maxilla as well.  Oropharyngeal airway measures only about 3 mm at the soft palate level and about 4 mm at the base of the tongue.  She has a skeletal occlusal Class II relationship and an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and maybe a slight reverse curve in the lower arch.  

Desiree has a photograph of her high school graduation picture that shows that she has pretty good bite at that time without any significant anterior open bite without the appearance of the significant retrusion of the lower jaw that she currently has.  

Basic diagnoses for Desiree would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ reactive arthritis with articular disc dislocations without reduction on the left and with significant adhesions on the right. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
Vertical maxillary hyperplasia. 
Class II occlusion. 
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.  
Anterior open bite of 3-4 mm. 
Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
Difficulties eating and chewing. 
Hypertrophied nasal turbinates. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Medications:  Klonopin 1-mg tablets, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch in segments.  Place a step in the arch wire between the cuspids and the lateral incisors.  Try to extrude the cuspids downward and align the 4 incisors in an elevated plane.  Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1-2 mm to help correct for a mild tooth size discrepancy. 
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints. 
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement (approximately 9 mm) utilizing the TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and close the open bite.  
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry for placement of dental implants and crowns in the missing mandibular second molar area bilaterally.  
