BRADLEY REYNOLDS								03/14/2009

Brad is 18 years old, referred by Dr. Jeffrey Posnick, 5530 Wisconsin Avenue, Chevy Chase, MD.  Brad’s TMJ problems began when he was about 13 of unknown etiology.  His right jaw joint became dislocated.  This has sort of been an ongoing problem for him and he has continued to have pain in the jaw joints.  He gets headaches predominantly in the right side in the frontal temporal, posterior head, and top of the head at a level of 4.  His average daily TMJ pain affecting the right joint is about a level 5, but it can escalate to 8.  Average daily pain is at 6.  Jaw function is at 5, diet at 5, disability at 4.  He gets occasional earaches, occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo.  Other joints that bother him include his right shoulder and right ankle.  He has a diagnosis of asthma.  He has a previous neck injury as well.  He is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime, particularly when he wears his splints.  

Previous treatments have included orthodontics from the age of 9 to 12 and then again began orthodontics in July 2008.  He has had 3 splints that, although they have helped, have been ineffective in correcting the problem.  He had his wisdom teeth removed in 2004.  His ankle injury was in 2005 or 2006.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Brad has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -1.  The maxillary midline is just slightly off to the right side by 0.5 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is 0.5 mm off to the left side.  The mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other.  In profile, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably 3 mm of so.  Maxilla appears to be AP retruded by probably 4 mm or so.  The mandible is also retruded by about 10 mm.  Chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is moderately well defined, but the submental area is slightly full.  Intraorally, Brad has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  There is a some spacing in the lower anterior arch, but he does have a power chain hopefully trying to close the spacing.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars present.  He has a slight Class III cuspid relationship by probably about 2 mm on the right side, but likewise on the left side.  He has a slight anterior open bite of about 1 mm.  He has a anterior crossbite tendency.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy.  Brad has probably moderate to severe snoring at times.  He has some mild daytime somnolence, but no sleep apnea at this time.  However, as a child he had fairly significant sleep apnea with 40 awakenings per hour.  He had tonsils removed and this significantly improved this situation.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear at least to be moderate in size.  Septum could be a little bit deviated, but I could only see the anterior aspect of it.  Brad was evaluated by Dr. Thomas Troost on August 19, 2008.  Dr. Troost has recommended correction of the deviated septum and reduction of the enlarged inferior turbinates.  Brad does have some gingival recession around the maxillary laterals and cuspids bilaterally in the upper arch.  To palpation, he has moderate pain over the right masseter, right TMJ, right posterior neck, right shoulder, and milder tenderness over the retromandibular areas.  Maximal incisal opening is 44.  Excursion movements are 5 mm to the right and 7 mm to the left, opening without discomfort about 28 mm.  Brad feels if he opens his jaw too wide that the right joint will dislocate out of the socket. 

Dental model analysis shows a slight accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.  There is a slight increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch.  Dental model analysis reveals no tooth size discrepancy. 

Basic diagnoses for Brad would be as follows:    

Right TMJ reactive arthritis with articular disc dislocation, but with reduction. 
Possible left TMJ medial disc displacement, but relatively asymptomatic joint.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
AP maxillary hypoplasia and posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia. 
End-on Class III occlusion. 
High occlusal plane angle.  
Anterior cross bite.
Anterior open bite of about 1 mm.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Deviated septum with spurring.
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
Slight reversed curve of Spee in the lower arch. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Sleep apnea symptoms including snoring, daytime somnolence and a previous history of sleep apnea. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Continue to align and level the maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Try to elevate the lower incisors about 1 mm to help correct the slight reverse curve of Spee.   
Surgery. 
Right TMJ debridement and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. 
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction, down grafting the posterior aspect. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction approximately 8 to 10 mm. 
Bilateral inferior partial turbinectomies. 
Nasal septoplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.