B156
B156 is 31 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. B156 has been aware of having clicking in her jaws for as long as she can remember, but she has never had pain until 7 months ago when it became quite significant for her. She had orthodontics around 20 years ago and finished when she was 16. That is about the time she became aware of clicking in her joints. She had two expanders at that time. At age 22, she had orthodontics done again. Through ages 28 and 29, she was treated a third time with Invisalign. Two months ago, she has had physical therapy and massage therapy which was actually quite painful for her and did not improve her situation. She has changed her diet as well and this has not improved. She was put on Flexeril for a while and again she had no significant improvement. She currently takes Advil 2400 mg per day and a BCP. She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her wrists and ankles. She feels the best in the morning when she wakes up. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

B156's primary concerns are as follows:
Severe jaw discomfort and pain that becomes increasingly worse as the days goes on.
Limited range of motion.
Limited ability to eat without pain. Headaches. Difficulty falling asleep due to pain.

She gets headaches at a level on the right side in the frontal and temporal area. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 5, diet at 4, disability at 5.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B156 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. She has some slight increased fullness in the angle of the mandible on the right side that may be 3 mm. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. The maxillary and mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other. In profile view, she has good facial balance vertically and anteroposteriorly. Intraorally, B156 has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars and in the us she is missing first bicuspids. She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. There is a slight cross bite tendency with the right maxillary cuspid and lateral incisor. She has an about a 2 mm anterior deep bite. Oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal. She seems to have perhaps a slight decreased AP oropharyngeal airway. The nasal airway appears clear with relatively normal appearing turbinates and septum. There does not appear to be any nasal airway obstruction. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the right TMJ and right retromandibular area. Maximal opening is 44 mm with deviation to the right of about 3 to 4 mm. She can open 25 mm without significant discomfort. Excursion movement to the right 12 mm, to the left 6.5 mm. Joints seem to function smoothly. In excursion movement towards the left, I did hear a little glitch in the right joint.

Basic diagnoses for B156 would be as follows:
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction. Right mandibular hyperplasia.
Severe TMJ pain. Headaches. Difficulties eating and chewing

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics: Place appliances on maxillary and mandibular arch with arch wires. Surgery. Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Right mandibular sagittal split osteotomy to maintain the occlusion and allow the condyle to shift down and forward to make room for the anterior. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B156 MRI AGE: 31/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. There is decreased joint space more towards the lateral aspect of the joint. There is prominent tissue around the lateral aspect of the condyle. It is difficult to identify discal tissue, however, there may be some anterior and lateral.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. There appears to be decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. There may be disc anterior and laterally displaced.

Sagittal views are not labeled, so Side 1 shows a condyle with some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle and a little bit of anterior beaking. There is slight decreased posterior joint space. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint, but over medially it appears to be in a little bit better position. The disc loses definition towards the medial side of the joint. There is significant fluid in the anterior joint space. On the opening views, there is some restriction in the translation and the disc is translating with the condyle.

Side 2 shows a condyle that appears a little more sclerotic on the head and there appears almost to be bony deposition. The disc is anteriorly displaced sitting in front of the condyle down towards the inferior aspect of the articular eminence. The disc is thickened in the posterior band and shortened anteroposteriorly. There is a significantly decreased posterior joint space. There is significant fluid in the anterior joint space beneath the articular eminence. On opening, there is some restricted translation and the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint with early reduction. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated without reduction and with some significant degenerative changes, although disc appears that it is still salvageable.

