DAVID RICHBURG									11/16/2009

David is 18 years old and referred by Dr. Jay Gaynor, 701 Houston Street, Plainview, TX 79072.
His primary concerns are:

Severe cross bite and underbite since the age of 4 years. 
Difficult to chew food properly.
Jaw pops and hurts.

David does not have any significant problems with headaches.  He rates his TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 7, diet at 0, disability at 1.  David’s TMJ problems may have begun about 4 or 5 years ago when his joints started to click or pop.  He has been in orthodontic treatment since about the age of 4.  He has had 6 palatal expanders and 2 sets of orthodontic appliances.  He has had head gear x2.  The orthodontic appliances finally removed after 6 to 7 years in April 2009.  David takes no medications.  He has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He does get some neck and shoulder pain. He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  At night, he is predominantly a mouth breather, but he and his family are not aware of any problems with snoring, daytime somnolence, or sleep apnea.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, David has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship appears to be about -2 mm.  The maxillary midline is shifted off towards to the left side about 2 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is off to the right side about 1 mm, and the chin is off to the right side about 3-4 mm.  In profile view, David has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably 6-8 mm.  AP wise, the mandible also appears to be deficient, but the chin is quite strong.  The chin neckline actually looks reasonably good.  It appears to be a little foreshortened vertically anteriorly.  Chin neckline is reasonably long, but chin neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, David is missing the lower first bicuspids.  He has the rest of his teeth back to the second molars.  The lower teeth are in slightly more inclination.  In the upper arch, he also is missing first bicuspids.  There is some spacing around the upper cuspid as well as slightly between the lower cuspid and second bicuspid.  David has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship on the right side being probably 4 mm Class III and on the left side is probably 7-8 mm Class III.  He has anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites with the crossbite being worse on the right side as compared to the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the turbinates are enlarged and the septum is deviated just slightly off to the right side.  He does have some moderate nasal airway obstruction.  Columella is moderately wide.  Transversely, the occlusal plane appears relatively level.  The lower right cuspid is about 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  The maxillary left cuspid is probably 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  He has a reverse deep bite of about 1 mm.  He has a negative overjet of about 7 mm.  To palpation, David has some mild tenderness over the masseters and retromandibular area.  On opening, his joints seem to function reasonably smoothly, however, on excursion he has a definite click in the right TMJ and David felt he could hear something in his left side as well.  Maximal incisal opening is 47 mm.  Excursion movement to the right is 6 mm and to the left 5 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of four first bicuspids and all four third molars.  It appears that the maxillary left second molar is impacted and likely ankylosed.  Sinuses are a little bit difficult to evaluate.  There is some spacing in the arches between the second bicuspids, cuspids, lateral incisors in the upper arch and cuspids and bicuspids in the lower arch.  
Coronal view shows that he has a small left maxillary sinus.  The septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  Turbinates, particularly on the right side, are large.  
Axial view shows that the right turbinate is significantly enlarged, but the left one appears a little bit more normal.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little narrow anteroposteriorly and a little sclerotic on top with a little anterior beaking, at least in one or two of the views.  Joint space might be decreased slightly. 
Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly.  It appears to be postured slightly forward in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately inclined. 
Left TMJ coronal tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology, but there appears to be a decreased and particularly lateral joint space.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 3-4 mm. 
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has relatively good mediolateral width.  Joint space on this side looks better than the opposite side.  Lateral rim curves inferiorly probably 3-4 mm.  Lateral joint space looks better on the right side as compared to the left side.    
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that David has an increased occlusal plane angle.  He has AP maxillary deficiency as well as AP mandibular deficiency but AP macrogenia.  The mandibular body length does not look too excessive.  The lower incisors appear that they could be just slightly over angulated.  Oropharyngeal airway looks normal. 

Basic diagnoses for David would be as follows:    

Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Class III occlusion, being worse on the left side compared to the right side.
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites. 
Missing maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids as well as all four third molars.
Impacted maxillary left second molar.
TMJ pain. 
Macrogenia.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

MRI of left and right TMJ.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Try to shift the maxillary midline to the right 2 mm by opening up space between the left cuspid and second bicuspid.  Keep the cuspid root tipped mesially and bicuspid root tipped distally to facilitate an ostectomy to remove that space, or if the space could be increased about 3-4 mm more, it may be adequate for an implant to replace a bicuspid tooth. 
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance it proximally 8 mm. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible onto the facial midline and correct the occlusal relationship. 
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to decrease the prominence of the chin.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Surgical removal of impacted maxillary left second molar. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Placement of osteointegrated implant if space in the maxillary left first bicuspid area is adequate to support a dental implant in the bicuspid. 