ISAI ROBLES									10/21/2009

Isai is 17 years old.  He was involved in a motor vehicle accident on February 2, 2008, sustaining a head injury and multiple facial injuries and fractures.  He apparently had a blow-out fracture in his left orbit and had a fractured skull.  Some teeth were knocked out and they were found along with some glass in his lung.  He required a tracheostomy.  Apparently, he was initially paralyzed from the upper right extremity and lower right extremity.  He was in a wheelchair for a while for mobility, but is now able to walk upright.  Apparently, he has some difficulties using his hands yet.  Some of his problems are:

He cannot smell.
He cannot taste.
Right side is kind of paralyzed.
Difficulty remembering things.
Decreased appetite.
Head hurts a lot.

The facial fractures included:

Nasal bones.
Left zygomatic orbital complex and arch with displacement.
Mandibular fossa.
Symphysis of the mandible.
Anterior aspect of the left frontal sinus.
Left zygomatic arch.
Lateral pterygoid process.
Left orbital floor blow-out as well as medial wall blow-out.
Fracture of lateral maxillary walls.
Right medial blow-out.

He had surgery to repair his facial fractures a few days after the initial injury.  

Current concerns around the jaw area are as follows:

Popping predominantly in the left joint but sometimes in the right TMJ as well.
Missing lower anterior teeth.
TMJ pain.
Significant headaches.
Difficulties eating and chewing.

Isai gets headaches about two times per week at a level of 8 in the left temporal area.  Average daily TMJ pain is about at level of 3, average daily pain around the head and neck around 2 to 3, jaw function at 5, diet at 7, and disability at 3.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  He actually has a fairly good occlusal relationship with a Class I cuspid-molar relationship on the right side and a Class III end-on molar relationship on the left side.  He is missing the mandibular central incisors and the left lateral incisor, cuspid, and both bicuspids.  He has third molars erupting in on lower arch.  In the upper arch, he also appears to have some third molars erupting in.  Isai has some scarring on his lower left eyebrow and eyelid and cheek area as well as in the upper lip.  He has a scar in the tracheostomy area as well.  Upper lip length is about 28 mm and tooth lip relationship is 1 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The incisors are absent so there is no overbite or overjet relationship to be measured.  In profile, Isai has fairly good facial balance with some slight AP chin deficiency of probably 5-6 mm.  He does have all four third molars with the maxillary ones and the mandibular right third partially soft tissue impacted.  He has a hyperplastic uvula and soft palate may be slightly elongated, but other structures look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, he has a septal spur off to the right side of the septum, and the septum is deviated a little bit towards the left side.  Turbinates are fairly enlarged.  He does require medication including nasal sprays and decongestants at night to help maintain his nasal airway.  He is aware of some snoring issues and he also has moderate daytime somnolence.  At night and even during the day if he takes a nap, he has been observed to gasp for air.  To palpation, Isai has moderate pain over the left temporalis, milder pain over the right SCM, and some slight discomfort over the left TMJ.  On opening, there appears to be glitches in his joints bilaterally and he also tends to shift a little bit off towards the left side, probably 2 to 3 mm.  Incisal opening is about 41 mm, excursion movements are about 4 mm in each direction.  On excursion movement, he has a click in the left joint and he may have a glitch in the right side as well.  

Basic diagnoses for Isai would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation (need to be confirmed by a higher quality MRI).  
AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal AP dimension is 11 mm).
Hypertrophied uvula.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Septal spur off the right side of the nose. 
Partial nasal airway obstruction.
Sleep apnea symptoms.
TMJ pain. 
Myofascial pain. 
Headaches. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

New MRI of the TMJs with TMJ coils and high resolution MRI.
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect of the maxilla.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Removal of nasal spur right side of nose.
Partial uvulectomy.
Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.
