AMBER QUINN									02/06/2009

Amber is 21 years old, referred by Dr. Tom Lowder.  Amber believes her TMJ problems may have begun around the age of 16 in 2003 when her joints started to click and pop.  She was in orthodontic treatment from 1998 to 2004.  She wore a Herbst appliance for about 2 years and this was removed in 2000.  Her pain actually started in about 2006.  She has worn splints since March 2007.  Amber gets predominantly in the posterior head area and on the left side, but occasionally on the right side at a level of about 9 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 9, diet at 7, disability 7.  She gets occasional earaches, frequent tinnitus, and frequent vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time, and she clenches a lot during the day as well.  She currently takes the following medications:

Flexeril 10 mg 2 to 3 tablets per week.
Valium 5 mg p.r.n. 
Tramadol 50-mg tablets p.r.n. 
Halcion 0.25 mg q.h.s.
Neurontin 100 mg b.i.d. 

She has had some relief with the splints, but not eliminating her pain or problems.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Amber has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4.5 mm.  The maxillary midline is about 1 mm off towards the right side.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left side.  The mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other.  In profile, Amber has some AP deficiency of the maxilla by about 3 mm.  She has a lip incompetence of almost 12 mm.  The chin is retruded by about 12 mm.  The chin neckline is short, but the chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, she is missing the maxillary and mandibular second and third molars.  Apparently, the second molars were removed because of her excessive bruxism, and, in fact, she wore the teeth out.  She has a Class II cuspid relationship, almost full Class II on the left side and end-on Class II on the right side.  She is probably at least 3 mm Class II on the right and about 5 mm Class II on the left.  She has an overjet of about 3 mm.  Upper lateral incisor, particularly on the right side, is quite small and it is in lingual inclination.  She has about a 0.5 mm overbite relationship.  She has a crossbite with the first bicuspids on the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal.  Septum looks reasonably straight.  Right turbinate appears enlarged, but the left one looks relatively normal, at least anteriorly.  Amber does report some mild snoring, some mild daytime somnolence, but no sleep apnea.  She sleeps fairly well on medication.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night time.  She apparently has no difficulties breathing through her nose at night.  To palpation, she has severe pain over the posterior neck and TMJs and high moderate over the temporalis, masseters, retromandibular areas, and SCMs, and milder tenderness over the shoulders.  Maximum opening is 30 mm with only about 8 mm without pain.  Excursion movement to the right 5 mm, to the left 7 mm.  On opening, the joint was relatively smooth.  On the right side, she had a click or glitch at about 10 to 15 mm of closing, but no noise on opening.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four second molars and all four third molars.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  The right turbinate appears large.  It is difficult to evaluate the TMJs.  She has a lesion at the tip of the mandibular left first bicuspid.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses appear reasonably clear, although she may have a small mucocele on the left sinus along the lateral wall.  The right turbinate appears quite large and may be blocking the airway some.  

Axial view shows that she has a small mucocele in the left maxillary lateral sinus wall.  Right turbinate appears enlarged.  Septum appears reasonably straight. 

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it.  There is a little change from normal architecture.  There is decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.  Articular eminence is moderate in inclination, being greater at the lateral aspect of the joint as compared to the medial.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appear to have some changes and a little bit more sclerotic than the right side, but it also appears a little bit sclerotic.  There is decreased status post and posterior joint space.  The articular eminence is a little bit steeper on this side than the opposite side.  There appears to be increased joint space anteriorly in both joints.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of odd shape to it, being significantly higher at the lateral aspect of the condyle as compared to the medial side.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly a fair amount, probably about 4 to 5 mm.  There is decreased superior and lateral joint space.  Cortical bone, however, appears to be intact.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that likewise has higher level of condyle at the lateral aspect as compared to the medial.  There is decreased superior joint space.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 5 to 6 mm.  There is decreased superior joint space.  In one area, it looks as though this is almost bone-on-bone contact.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has an anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia, AP mandibular hyperplasia, anterior mandibular vertical hyperplasia.  She has some adenoid tissue still in the nasopharyngeal area.  She has a decreased oropharyngeal airway of only about 3.5 mm at the soft palate level and probably 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  She has a slight increased occlusal plane angle.  She has over-angulation of the lower incisors likely due to the prolonged Class II mechanics during orthodontics.  There is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Amber would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Maxillary vertical hypoplasia.
Class II occlusion, being worse on the left side as compared to the right side.
Maxillary midline shifted to the right 1 mm and mandibular dental midline and chin shifted to the left 1 to 2 mm.
Over-angulation of maxillary and mandibular incisors.
Moderately high occlusal plane angle. 
Missing maxillary and mandibular second and third molars (total of 8 teeth).
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm.
Severe headaches. 
Severe TMJ pain. 
Myofascial pain. 
Lack of attached gingiva around the lower incisors.
Periapical lesion beneath the mandibular left first bicuspid. 
Right nasal hyperplastic turbinate.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3.5 mm (normal 11 mm).

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Gingival graft to lower anterior arch. 
Evaluation periapical lesion in mandibular left first bicuspid.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Open about 1 mm of space around the maxillary right lateral incisor as it is excessively small in size and consider placing bonding even prior to the surgery to help maintain the space and tooth size. 
Align and level the lower arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 to 3 mm of tooth structure and retract.  This should help keep the lower incisors from flaring too far forward. 
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxillary superiorly, upright the incisors, and correct any transverse problems that may be present. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Right partial turbinectomy. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Consider placing implants to replace second molars.