ASHLYN RAWLS									05/26/2009

Ashyln is 16 years old and is a self referral.  She has had previous orthodontics with Dr. Michael Steffen.  Dr. Steffen did suggest during the orthodontic treatment that she have an evaluation and orthognathic surgery, but she and the family declined to proceed on with that.  Ashlyn and her parents have been aware that her lower jaw appears to be getting progressively more retruded. 

Ashlyn has been aware of having TMJ problems since about the age of 10 of unknown etiology.  She had a tonsillectomy in 2003 at the age of 10.  She did have orthodontic treatment from 2006 to 2008.  She has no problems with headaches, but rates her TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 3, diet at 2, disability at 0.  Incisal opening is 55 mm and she could open to 43 mm without significant pain.  Excursion movements are 10 mm in each direction.  On opening, she has a definite pop in the right joint at 25-30 mm of opening and at about 20-25 mm of closing.  The left joint is relatively smooth.  To palpation, she has moderate tenderness over the retromandibular area.  

CLINICAL ASSESSMENT:  In frontal view, she has fairly good left-to-right facial asymmetry.  Upper lip length is 20 mm and upper tooth lip relationship is 3 mm.  Nasal dorsum is wide.  In profile, she has AP retrusion of the upper lip and maxilla of 3-4 mm and AP deficiency of the chin of 15-18 mm.  Chin neckline is not well defined.  She has dorsal prominence on her nose and some nasal ptosis.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  Ashlyn has a slight Class II occlusion of about 2 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Some mild to moderate constricture of the fascial pillars is present.  Tonsils are absent, although she has a couple of small areas on the anterior fascial pillar where there is a little what appears to be residual adenoid tissue.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated just slightly off towards the left side.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged, and, in fact, on the left side, the turbinate almost touches against the septum.  I would guess she has probably mild to moderate obstruction.  Columella is moderately wide.  Nostrils are moderately narrow.  To palpation, Ashlyn has some mild tenderness over the retromandibular area.  On opening, she has a soft click in the right joint at about 25-30 mm of opening and at about 20-25 mm of closing.  The left side seemed reasonably smooth.  Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm, opening without discomfort 43 mm.  Excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction.  She has a vertical overbite of 1.5 mm. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  There is a 3 x 3 lower retainer.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints, but they do appear a little bit different.  Turbinates appear large in size.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  
Coronal view shows that the turbinates are extremely large and seem to fill most of the nasal cavity.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.   
Axial view shows the sinuses are clear, but the turbinates are extremely large.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have undergone some resorption.  There is some anterior beaking present.  Joint space looks reasonably good.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space appears relatively normal.  
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that also appears to have undergone some resorption.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space seems reasonably well balanced, although a little bit narrow anteriorly.  There appears to be some anterior beaking present.  
Left TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that seems somewhat narrow mediolaterally.  Lateral rim curves inferiorly quite significantly probably 4-5 mm.  Joint space may be mildly decreased.     
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow, but not quite as narrow as the opposite side.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly quite significantly probably 5-6 mm.  The condylar head appears a little bit arthritic.  There is a lateral bulge at the lateral pole of the condyle.  Joint space may be somewhat narrowed.   
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a slight Class II end-on occlusal relationship, but skeletal Class II relationship.  She has some lip incompetence.  Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat narrow at the AP dimension of about 6 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue 

Basic diagnoses for Ashlyn would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis and articular disc dislocation (compatible with AICR). 
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Hypertrophied turbinates creating nasal airway obstruction. 
Impacted third molars x4. 
Over-angulation of mandibular anterior teeth, but in stable position. 
External nasal deformity.
TMJ pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

MRI of left and right TMJ. 
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisors roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.    
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise rotation.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly. 
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin. 
Partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4. 
External rhinoplasty. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
