TYLER REYNOLDS									03/14/2009

Tyler is 18 years old, birth date 08/30/1990.  Primary concerns Tyler has include the following:

Jaw joint pain.
Frequent headaches. 
Teeth only hit in 3 places.
Jaw opening is limited.
On opening, the jaw shifts towards the right side.

Tyler had orthodontics from the age of 9 to 12.  He began orthodontics again in August 2008.  His TMJ problems began at about the age of 16.  It is unknown exactly what caused the joint situation.  Tyler had his wisdom teeth removed in 2006 and has also had two root canals that may be related to clenching of his teeth.  In 2008, he had significant problems with laryngeospasms due to acid reflux.  He currently takes Prevacid 60 mg b.i.d. to control that and the only other medication he takes is Allegra.  Tyler did have splint therapy from October 2007 to August 2008.  

Tyler rates his headaches that are quite frequent at about a level of 6, and they occur in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area.  They occasionally elevate to 9.  He rates his TMJ pain at 8, with the right side worse than the left side.  His average daily facial pain is at 3.  He rates his jaw function at 8, diet at 6, disability at 2.  He gets right-sided earaches occasionally and gets occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  Other joints that bother him include his fingers and occasionally his toes.  He is aware of clenching at nighttime.  He has had a previous ENT evaluation by Dr. Troost who suggested nasal septoplasty and bilateral turbinectomies.  Tyler is aware of having some moderate snoring at times.  He did have a sleep study done in April 2008 and nothing significant was found.  He also has been diagnosed as having asthma.  Tyler was born 5 weeks premature. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Tyler has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -1.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The nasal tip is just slightly to the left side by 1 or 2 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is also to the left about 1 mm and the mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other.  In profile, upper lip supralabrale is just slightly posterior to subnasale.  In profile, upper lip is retruded about 3 to 4 mm and chin is retruded about 10 mm.  Chin neck is short and chin neck angle is moderately well defined.  Intraorally, Tyler has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth are reasonably well aligned and level.  There is a little bit of spacing between the lower anterior teeth.  There is a little gingival inflammation around the maxillary lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by about 2 mm and about 1 or 2 mm also on the left side.  He has an anterior cross bite and a slight anterior open bite of about 2 mm.  Uvula is moderately hyperplastic.  Otherwise, the rest of the tissues in the oropharyngeal airway look reasonably good.  Posterior fascial pillars are a little bit posteriorly positioned.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged, particularly in the right side.  Tyler has moderate nasal airway obstruction.  Columella is wide and nostrils are moderately narrowed.  To palpation, he has moderate pain  over the right TMJ, left masseter area, and milder tenderness over the right masseter, medial pterygoids, left TMJ, and retromandibular area.  On opening, he could feel an occasional glitch in the right TMJ.  Otherwise, the joints are reasonably smooth.  On excursion movements, there was a click in the left joint on excursion towards the right side.  Maximal incisal opening is 36 mm, opening without discomfort 19 mm.  Excursion movement to the right was 7 mm and to the left 5 mm.  On opening, the mandible does deviate towards the right side probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Tyler has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.  There is a reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch and a slightly accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.  

Basic diagnoses for Tyler would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ reactive arthritis versus connective tissue autoimmune disease. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
AP maxillary hypoplasia and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Slight Class III end-on occlusion. 
Anterior cross bite.
Moderately high occlusal plane angle. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Deviated nasal septum off to the right side. 
Nasal airway obstruction. 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
Reversed curve of Spee in the lower arch. 
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Evaluation by rheumatologist to rule out connective tissue autoimmune disease. 
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Continue to align and level the maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.  Try to elevate the lower incisors slightly to decrease the slight reverse curve of Spee.   
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen or buttock).
Bilateral coronoidotomies. 
Bilateral inferior partial turbinectomies. 
Nasal septoplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.