JARED SANDLER									01/08/2009

Jared is 19 years old, referred by Dr. Hilton Israelson.  Jared has been under orthodontic treatment since June 2006 with Dr. Mark Geller.  Relative to his jaw problems, the first that Jared became aware of it was he was about 14 or 15 years of age of unknown etiology.  He had developed an open bite on the left side of his jaws.  Jared is not sure if it is getting progressively worse at this time or not.  He currently takes Adderall and Mucinex.  

He has no problems with headaches nor TMJ pain nor pain around head and neck area.  He rates his jaw function at 3, diet at 0 on the right side and 4 on the left side, and disability at 0.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  Other joints that bother him include his ankles and knees which he relates to a flat feet problem.  Jared is not sure if he clenches his teeth at night, though he may to some extent.  Primary concerns that Jared has includes the following:

Teeth on the left side of his jaws do not touch.
Difficulties breathing the nose. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Jared has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -2 mm.  The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm to the left, but the chin is also about 2 mm to the left.  In profile, upper lip may be retruded by a couple of millimeters, but the chin is retruded by about 12-15 mm.  The chin neckline short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Some fullness present in the submental area.  Intraorally, Jared is missing the mandibular second bicuspids, but has spaces open and retained.  He has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars.  The teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and leveled.  He has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars present.  On the right side, he has a Class II end-on occlusion by probably 2-3 mm, and, on the left side, he has a Class II occlusion by probably 5 mm.  He has an anterior open bite tendency with vertical overbite of 0 and an overjet of about 2 to 3 mm.  Jared was congenitally missing the second bicuspids in the mandibular arch and the primary teeth were removed and the spaces maintained for future implants and crowns.  The arches appear reasonably symmetric in anteroposterior dimension.  On the left side, Jared has an open bite of at least 1 mm in the molar area and about 3 mm in the first bicuspid-cuspid area.  Transversely, the maxillary arch is fairly level, but the mandibular arch in the cuspid-first bicuspid area is down at least a couple of millimeters lower than the right side.  The uvula is moderately hyperplastic, but the rest of the oropharyngeal structures are relatively normal.  Intranasally, the nasal septum is deviated off towards the right side.  The left turbinate is quite enlarged and appears somewhat inflamed.  The left turbinate at least anteriorly is smaller in size.  On the right side, it appears that the turbinate almost touches against the septum.  Jared has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function smoothly.  Incisal opening is 62 mm.  Excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.     
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of four third molars.  He is missing the mandibular second bicuspids, but the spaces are maintained.  There is good spacing between the upper laterals and cuspids.  The condyles look relatively normal and fairly equal in shape and morphology.  The nasal septum seems to be deviated significantly off towards the right side and the left turbinate appears enlarged. 
Axial view shows that the turbinates are quite large even including the right side, and, in fact, it  appears larger than the left side.  Sinuses appear clear.  In frontal view, the bony septum at least appears reasonably straight, but anteriorly clinically, the cartilaginous septum is tipped way off to the right side.  Turbinates appear quite large posteriorly bilaterally.  
Right TMJ sagittal view tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  Joint space appears relatively well balanced.  Joint space should be just slightly increased vertically.  The articular eminence is moderately steep, and there is a little bit of flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.  
Left TMJ sagittal view tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking present and a little flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is an increased joint space vertically and posteriorly, so the condyle is postured balanced and forwards in the fossa.  
Right coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good shape.  There may be slight decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  Vertical joint space appears fairly good.    
Left TMJ coronal tomograms Show a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Cortical bone across the top is relatively thin.  There is an increased vertical joint space within this joint.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Jared has a skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship.  He has got a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  The oropharyngeal airway only measures about 4 mm at the soft palate level, but closer to 7 mm at the base of the tongue.  The maxilla and mandible appear somewhat retruded.  He does appear to have some adenoid tissue in the nasopharyngeal area that affects the airway at that level with the opening being about 6 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Jared would be as follows:    

Left TMJ synovial cysts.
Anteriorly and inferiorly displaced mandibular left condyle.
Posterior maxillary vertical hypoplasia. 
Slight transverse maxillary hypoplasia. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion being worse on the left side. 
Mandible deviated to the left side approximately 2 mm.
Anterior and left posterior open bite.
Missing mandibular second bicuspids, but spaces maintained for replacement. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal septal deviation.
Hypertrophied nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue. 
High occlusal plane angle. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway and an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal dimension 11 mm).


Recommended treatment would be as follows:

MRI of left and right TMJ.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery.
Left TMJ removal of hypertrophied and cystic tissues with articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction approximately 10 mm at progonion and level transversely. 
Maxillary osteotomies to advance in a counterclockwise direction, down graft, and expand.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Nasal septoplasty.
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy. 
3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
4.   Placement of osteointegrated implants in mandibular second bicuspid area.
5.   Restorative dentistry to reconstruct crowns in the mandibular second bicuspid area. 
