CYNTHIA RUYBAL									08/27/2009

Cynthia is now 37 years old.  I originally saw her in 2002 at which time we had worked up a treatment plan.  At that time, she had spaces recreated to replace missing bicuspid teeth.  Subsequently, those spaces have been closed up.  The main concerns that Cynthia has at this time include the following:

Some spacing in the maxillary left arch between the cuspid and bicuspid. 
She feels that the malar eminences are uneven with the right side being back compared to the left and asymmetry in the face and also in the dental alignment.
Root damage on the lower anterior teeth. 
TMJ pain and headaches particularly when she is under stress. 

At this time, she rates her headaches when she gets them under stress in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area at about a level 7.  She has some TMJ discomfort at about of level of 2 to 3 and average daily discomfort at about a level of 2.  She rates her jaw function at 2.  She was unable to rate her diet, but rates her disability level at 5 particularly if she clenches or bites her teeth together. 

In January 2009, she was hit by a car and sustained multiple fractures of the lower right leg and knee area.  She had surgery performed, but apparently it was done incorrectly and she had to undergo a second surgery in mid-March.  She currently has a Taylor external fixator in place.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is less than 1 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all fairly well aligned with each other.  She has more fullness in the right side of the face in the angle area by probably about 3-4 mm.  The right side of the mandible is down probably about 3 mm or so at the inferior border compared to the left side.  In profile view, she probably is about 4 mm AP deficient in the maxilla.  In the mandible, she is probably 5-6 mm AP deficient.  Chin neckline is a little bit short and chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  She has a slight yaw in the maxillary teeth and probably the mandibular teeth as well with shift off towards the right side of about 3 mm.  Intraorally, she is missing mandibular second bicuspids and probably maxillary first bicuspids.  She is Class I cuspid bilaterally and Class I molar.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  Transversely, she appears to be fairly level relative to her eyes.  The ears may be slightly different vertically with the right one being just slightly lower than the left one.  

After she completed her sixth orthodontic treatment, she then was placed in Invisalign orthodontic treatment with overlying trays.  About a year and a half ago, she discontinued those and feels that her bite has settled into a better relationship since then.  Cynthia has an accentuated curve of Wilson in both the maxillary and mandibular arch.  This does, however, allow the molar teeth to fit together reasonably well.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  Turbinates appear moderate in size, at least in the front.  She feels that she is predominantly a mouth breather at night time.  She has a wide columella and narrow nostrils.  Holding the nostrils open enabled her to breathe easier, particularly on the right side.  Cynthia states that she stays on a fairly soft diet, and she probably rates her diet probably around a 4.  She cannot eat red meats.  She has mild to moderate pain to palpation throughout most of the head and neck area.  On opening, she has some very fine crepitus in the left TMJ, but the right side seems reasonably smooth.  Maximum opening is 56 mm, and she could open 38 mm reasonably comfortably.  Excursion movement to the left was 7 mm, to the right 8 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, mandibular second bicuspids, and maybe the maxillary second bicuspids.  She has a small space between the upper left cuspid and bicuspid.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  Right turbinate appears larger than the left turbinate.  Right condyle may be somewhat arthritic, but difficult to tell in this view.  Vertical height of the mandible at the first molar area seems fairly even.  
Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The right turbinate is quite large.  Septum appears reasonably straight at the level of the cut.  
Coronal view shows that there is a septal spur off towards the left side.  Sinuses appear clear.  Right turbinate appears enlarged.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows condyle that has some mild arthritic changes with some flattening on the head of the condyle and some anterior beaking and a little bit of sclerosis on the top.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  There may be a decreased vertical joint space, particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint. 
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat arthritic with flattening on the top of the condyle and anterior beaking present.  There is a little bit of sclerosis on the head and a little bit of peaking on the head of the condyle.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  Vertical joint space appears somewhat narrow, more so at the lateral aspect of the joint than medially.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows that there appears to significant decreased joint space particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  Lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 3-4 mm.  Medial side of the joint appears to have better joint space. 
Right TMJ coronal view shows likewise a significantly decreased lateral joint space with what could be almost bone-on-bone contact.  Lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  The medial joint space appears wider. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she appears to have some AP maxillary and mandibular retrusion.  Lower incisors appear to be in pretty good angulation.  Maxillary incisors appear to be slightly over angulated yet.  There appears to be reasonably good oropharyngeal airway with some mild constricture at the base of the tongue, but this may be related to the tongue being held somewhat inferiorly in the mouth.  At the base of the tongue, AP dimension of the oropharynx measures about 6 mm.  
Basic diagnoses for Cynthia would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and with significant degeneration and probably nonsalvageable. 
Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Class I malocclusion. 
Missing maxillary first bicuspid and mandibular second bicuspids as well as all four third molars. 
Hypertrophied right turbinate. 
Nasal septal spurring. 
Accentuated curve of Wilson in both the maxillary and mandibular arches with lingual inclination of the mandibular molars and buccal inclination of the maxillary molars. 
Yaw in maxillary and mandibular arch with both being rotated towards the right side approximately 3-4 mm. 
Wide columella. 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
Broken down restoration of mandibular left first molar. 
Slight over angulation of maxillary incisors. 
Anterior deep bite of almost 4 mm.
Residual spacing between maxillary left cuspid and bicuspid.
Foreshortened roots on mandibular central incisors and laterals. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

MRI of left and right TMJ. 
Replace restoration in mandibular left first molar with a temporary restoration.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Retract the left cuspid back against the bicuspid tooth allowing space to develop between the lateral and cuspid.  Decrease the axial inclination of the central incisors by tipping the roots labially in a forward direction (roots currently are tipped back against the lingual palatal alveolus).   Do not expand the posterior maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Tip molar teeth labially to correct the accentuated curve of Wilson.  This may create posterior crossbites, but this would be corrected at the time of surgery.   
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward, expand it, and correct the posterior yaw by rotating the maxillary and mandibular complex to the left approximately 2 mm in the molar area.  
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). 
Right nasal partial turbinectomy. 
Nasal septoplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to replace the mandibular left first molar restoration and provide any other necessary treatment. 
