DEREK SCHLOEMANN								10/23/2008

Derek is 17 years old, referred by Dr. Peter Crump, 24 South Gore, Webster Groves, MO 63119.  Derek states that he has always had an underbite.  When he was age 8 until 9, he had a palatal expander and some orthodontics done on the upper arch.  Then at the age of 13 to 14, he had orthodontics performed again.

He has no headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain, earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  He rates his jaw function, diet, and disability at 0.  He is aware of clenching and bruxing his teeth at night.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Derek has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  The mandible may be just deviated slightly off to the left side.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is probably about 2 to 3 mm.  The maxillary midline and nasal tip are fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted about 3 mm to the left, and the chin is probably 4 mm to the left.  Derek is probably about 4 to 5 mm AP deficient in the maxilla.  Chin projects actually fairly good.  Chin neckline is well defined.  He has a high mandibular plane angle facial morphology.  Chin appears slightly strong compared to the projection of the lower lip.  Intraorally, he has all of his lower teeth back through the third molars.  He has some moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch.  He appears to have adequate attached gingiva, although quite a narrow band around the incisors.  Lower incisors are in lingual inclination.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  There is a full Class III cuspid relationship on the left side and a super Class III cuspid relationship on the right side.  He has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm.  He has a crossbite on the left side anteriorly and a crossbite in the molar area on the right side.  The cross bite is greater on the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy and uvula is slightly enlarged, but the soft palate is normal.  Tonsils, particularly the left one, are moderately enlarged, but he does not give any history of having tonsil problems or sore throats.  Fascial pillars are little bit constricted because of the large tonsils.  Intranasally, the right turbinate is huge and actually fills most of the nasal cavity.  On the left side, the turbinate is enlarged, but not quite as severe as the right side at least anteriorly.  The septum appears reasonably straight anteriorly.  Columella is moderately wide.  Nostrils are slightly constricted, but not too bad.  TMJs are smooth.  No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck except in the right styloid area there is a little tenderness at about a 1 to 2 level.  Joints function smoothly.  Incisal opening is 63 mm.  He does  have about 1 to 2 mm anterior open bite.  Excursion movements are about 7 mm in each direction.
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows impacted maxillary third molars, but all the other teeth are erupted in and present including the mandibular third molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Left turbinate appears quite large.  The condylar head and neck may be somewhat elongated, but difficult to tell from this view.  
Waters view shows that the bony septum at least is quite straight.  Turbinates appear quite large, particularly the left one seems to completely obliterate the nasal airway and the right one is fairly close to obliterating it completely as well.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Condylar head and neck appears elongated  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be good superior and posterior joint space. 
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condylar head and neck that appears elongated and slightly longer than the opposite side perhaps.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space looks reasonably good.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.   
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Derek has AP deficiency in the maxilla, but mandible prognathism above the high occlusal plane angle.  He has a Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 9 mm at the soft palate level and 8 to 9 mm at the base of the tongue.  Lower teeth appear lingually inclined.  The vertical height of the mandible may be slightly elongated, but further assessment and measurement will be necessary to determine that.  

On dental model analysis, it shows that Derek has a lingual inclination of the mandibular posterior teeth including the bicuspids and molars.  The lower incisors are significantly crowded and in lingual inclination.  Repositioning the molars to a Class I position starts a tendency for a cross bite posterior, but will be actually worse if the lower posterior teeth are uprighted over basal bone.  He does have an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.  He has a decreased curve of Wilson in the lower arch.  

Basic diagnoses for Derek would be as follows:    

AP maxillary hypoplasia.  
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.  
Mandibular deviated prognathism. 
Bilateral condylar hyperplasia being worse on the right side as compared to the left side. 
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites. 
Anterior open bite. 
Crowding of lower anterior arch. 
Lingual inclination of the mandibular posterior teeth creating a significantly increased curve of Wilson. 
Impacted maxillary third molars. 
Erupted mandibular third molars.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal airway obstruction. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to upright the bicuspids and molars over the basal bone by tipping them buccally.  Align and level the anterior teeth.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning with ligament repair with Mitek anchors, if condylar hyperplasia is verified.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and expand it.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly and rotate it upwards. 
Bilateral turbinectomies. 
Surgical removal of impacted maxillary third molars x2.
Extraction of mandibular third molars x2.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
