BRIAN ROTSKOFF									10/24/2008

Referred by his father, Dr. Ken Rotskoff.  Brian is 37 years old.  He is a physician.  His primary concerns are as follows:

Sleep apnea.
Sleepiness and reduced abilities to concentrate.  

Brian has familial polyposis and GERD.  He has some slight depression secondary to sleep apnea.  He has been evaluated at Stanford and has had previous surgery for sleep apnea, the first stage of surgery being performed in August 2007 and included a UPPP procedure and a genioglossal advancement.  He subsequently had a hyoid suspension in December 2007.  He continues to have significant problems.  He has no TMJ symptoms apparently and no headaches or TMJ pain.  He has no earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Brian has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  The maxillary and  mandibular  dental midlines are pretty much on the facial midline.  The chin may be just slightly off to the right side 1 to 2 mm.  In profile view, Brian has some AP deficiency in the maxilla of probably about 4 to 5 mm.  Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale.  Chin appears to be retruded about 12 to 15 mm.  Progonion is slightly prominent and may be due to some of the previous surgeries.  Intraorally, Brian does have some crenations on his tongue.  He appears to have all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  Transverse with the lower arch is somewhat constricted.  Teeth are well aligned.  He has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he appears to have all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship and about a 2 mm anterior overbite and a slight diastema between the incisors.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.  Joints function smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 49 mm, excursion movement to the right 10 mm, to the left 11 mm.  Intraorally, oropharyngeal tissues looks reasonably healthy, but he has had a UPPP procedure so the uvula is gone and the soft palate is actually fairly short in length. The fascial pillars looks relatively normal, although there is a scar band across the posterior soft palate down into the pharyngeal area.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the left side.  The right turbinate appears fairly large.  There appears to be a septal spur off to the left side at the base of the septum.  Left turbinate is moderate in size, but the deviated septum may cause some airway resistance.  Brian, even after the UPPP procedure, still has moderate snoring and moderate to severe daytime somnolence.  Sleep apnea he feels at this point is probably mild to moderate.  He feels that most of the time he can breathe through his nose when he is sleeping.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but all the rest of the teeth are present.  The condyles appear to have good architecture.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  There is a diastema between the central incisors.  
Waters view shows that the nasal septum does deviate a little bit off towards the left side and there may be some spurring off towards the right side and a little bit off towards the left side as well back in the bony aspect of the septum.  The turbinates particularly on the right side appear quite large and appear to obliterate a good part of the airway.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows that a condyle that may have a little bit of flattening on the superior aspect, but there appears to be fairly good joint space.  Articular eminence looks relatively normal.     
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has good morphology and good joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is reasonably good translation of both joints.   
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible appear to be retruded, and there appears to be a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway space measures about 9 mm at the soft palate level and about 10 to 11 mm at the base of the tongue.  However, Brian does state that the ENT doctor, who apparently examined him maybe endoscopically while he was laying down, noted that the airway could still be decreased when Brian was in a more horizontal position.  

Basic diagnoses for Brian would be as follows:    

AP maxillary hypoplasia.  
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
High occlusal plane angle. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Sleep apnea. 
Abnormal contour of anterior mandible secondary to previous surgery.
Hypertrophied turbinates.  
Deviated nasal septum. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 5 mm at the incisal edge in a counterclockwise direction decreasing the occlusal plane angle by down grafting the posterior aspect.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction approximately 10 mm. 
Bilateral partial turbinectomies. 
Nasal septoplasty. 
Recontouring of anterior mandible. 
. 
