ARACELY SALINAS								03/16/2009

Aracely is 35 years old, referred by Dr. Gracie Sturdivant, 1007 Sycamore, McAllen, TX 78503.
Aracely has hypothyroidism, TMJ problems, gastritis, and migraine headaches.  She had her gallbladder removed in 1999.  She had hepatitis A in 1997.  She currently takes the following medications:

Topamax 25 mg in the a.m. and 50 mg at bedtime. 
Caltrate 600 plus D b.i.d. 
Ferrous sulfate 325 mg q.d.
Kataplex G 4500 q.d.
Motrin for pain.

Aracely’s primary concerns are as follows:

Right-sided TMJ pain.
Right-sided headaches.
Snoring. 
Daytime tiredness.
Observed episodes of holding her breath and difficulties breathing.

Aracely also has some problems with anemia.  

Aracely’s problems began in December 2007 when she began developing pain in the right side of the head and right jaw area.  Her problems continued to get worse and she ended up going to the ER and was diagnosed with TMJ.  Since January 2008, she has been treated with splint therapy and has had multiple adjustments and also has had equilibrations on her teeth x2.  She has had chiropractic treatment on a regular basis for 6 months and now does it on a more periodic basis.  She also gets massages.  

Aracely rates her headaches, which she gets almost daily, at a level of 9 that occur in the right frontal and temporal area.  She wakes up with headaches often and they generally get somewhat better during the day.  She rates her average TMJ pain at 6 in the right joint pain and average daily pain at 6 on the right side only.  She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 2, and disability at 2.  She gets right-sided earaches, right-sided tinnitus, and vertigo associated with the right side.  She has no hearing loss and no other joints bother her.  She clenches at nighttime and also during the daytime.  She is aware that the splint does make her clench more, and she wakes up with her mouth hurting in the mornings.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Aracely has good facial balance.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 2 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  Nasal tip is just slightly off to the left side about 2 mm.  In profile, she has reasonable balance with just some slight AP deficiency of probably 2 to 3 mm, and the chin may be deficient by probably 6 mm, but not significant.  Chin neckline is a little bit short, although chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Aracely  has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  There is some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch, but she appears to have reasonably attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she is missing the maxillary left second molar, but has the rest of her teeth.  She does have crowns on the molars bilaterally.  She is basically Class I cuspid-molar relationship, but almost end-on incisor relationship.  She has small upper lateral incisors.  She does have some gingiva issues with the gums somewhat receded in a generalized condition.  She has about 1 mm anterior overbite.  Oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal.  Tonsils are mildly enlarged.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off towards to the right side.  Turbinates are moderate in size, but she claims no problems with breathing through her nose.  Initially, however, her sister states that Aracely does sleep a lot with her mouth open and there is some at least mild snoring.  Her mother states that at times she seems to hold her breath and not breathe.  She has difficulties getting to sleep at night, but once asleep she rests very well, but only sleeps about 5 hours a night.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  From I-CAT, Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the maxillary left second molar.  She has root canals on all the maxillary remaining molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Turbinates appear enlarged.  She has arthritis in both joints, but significantly worse in the left side.  
Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight, but turbinates are extremely large.  Sinuses are clear.  
Axial view shows that the turbinates are significantly hyperplastic.  They appear to block the majority of the nasal airway.  
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with flattening on the posterior head and a little bit of flattening anteriorly.  There appears to be slight decreased posterior joint space. 
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears more arthritic.  The condyle appears a little bit shorter vertically.  There is an osteophyte sticking out anteriorly and perhaps just a little bit off the top of the condyle.  The posterior joint space is somewhat decreased.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased joint space.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite flat across the top and there are some little osteophytic kind of projections.  The fossa appears a little bit degenerated as well.  Joint space is decreased vertically.  Joint space is particularly decreased at the lateral aspect of the joint.  
On lateral cephalometric radiograph, she appears to have a retruded maxilla and mandible with a high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway is significantly decreased with an AP dimension of 4 mm at the base of the tongue and about 5 mm at the soft palate level. 
Basic diagnoses would be as follows:    

Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction. 
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
AP and posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal dimension 11 mm).
Sleep apnea symptoms. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal airway obstruction.
TMJ pain, right significantly greater than left.
Headaches, significantly worse on the right side.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3.5 mm. 
Generalized periodontal problems with gingival retraction.
Clenching and bruxism.
Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Klonopin 1 mg ½ to 1 tablet q.h.s. 
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 to 3 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward and to correct for the significant tooth size discrepancy.
CT scan of jaw and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral coronoidotomies. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
