CRAIG SCHENEWERK								08/10/2009

Craig is 34 years old and referred by Dr. Farhad Moshiri, 1320-B E. Kingsley, Springfield, MO 65804.

Primary concerns that Craig has are as follows:

Headaches. 
Jaws and teeth do not fit together properly.
Difficulties breathing through the nose. 
Jaw pain. 

Craig is unsure as to when his problems began, but believes it may have been in the mid-20s.  The etiology is unknown.  He did have orthodontics from the age of 13 to 17.  He was having a significant problems, and his headaches were at least several times a week.  Dr. Moshiri made a splint for him in March 2009 that he continues to wear and this has helped to decrease his headache occurrence and pain levels.  Craig rates his headaches at a level of 6 in the posterior head area, TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 0, diet at 1, disability at 5.  He has no earaches, but does have tinnitus and rarely has any vertigo.  Other joints that bother him includes his knees and shoulders, and he does have some neck and back problems, but this may be more muscular related.  He does some significant nasal airway obstruction.  He does tend to breathe through his mouth when he sleeps; however, he does not report any problems with snoring, daytime tiredness, or sleep apnea. 

Craig takes the following medications:

Fluticasone propionate 50 mcg p.r.n. 
Singulair 10 mg q.d.
Advair 100/50 b.i.d. 
Loratadine 1 mg q.d.
Multivitamin q.d.

Craig is not aware of clenching or bruxism during the day or at night.  Craig does report that he has a lot of problems with motion sickness.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Craig has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm on the left and 4 on the right.  The maxillary midline is about 2 mm to the left.  The mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, Craig appears to have some maxillary deficiency of probably about 6 mm at the incisal edge area and the mandible also appears to be retruded probably about 6 mm.  He has a somewhat foreshortened chin neckline, and the chin neck angle is not real well defined.  Intraorally, Craig is missing the lower probable second bicuspids, but does have his third molars in place.  He has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, he is missing probably the first bicuspids and has all of his teeth back through the third molars in place.  He has a Class III cuspid-molar relationship being on the left side probably 5 mm Class III on the right side and probably 3 mm Class III.  He has anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.  He has an anterior reversed deep bite of 1.5 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal with the uvula moderately elongated.  Posterior structures look relatively normal.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated significantly off towards the right side.  The turbinate on the right side is anterior and appears relatively normal in size, but it could be larger posteriorly.  The left turbinate is significantly enlarged.  He has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm lower than the left side in the maxilla and the mandible being 1 mm lower on the right side as compared to the left side.  He has no significant tooth size discrepancy.  To palpation, he has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function smoothly.  Maximum incisal opening is 45 mm. Excursion movement to the right 6 mm, to the left 7 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of what appears to be all four second bicuspids, but all four third molars are erupted in.  The left molar looks fairly small.  He appears to have significant nasal airway obstruction with a huge left turbinate and the right one appears moderately enlarged.  It appears he may have a mucocele in the maxillary right sinus and also in the left sinuses.   
Left TMJ sagittal view tomogram shows what appears to be good joint space to most of the joint.  Towards the medial side, there may be some slight decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Out laterally, there may be decreased joint space.  The architecture of the condyle is reasonably good.   
Right TMJ sagittal view tomogram shows a condyle with reasonably good morphology.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be fairly good joint space except at the lateral aspect of the joint.  
Left TMJ coronal tomogram shows that there is significantly decreased lateral joint space.  Lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 4 mm, and there appears to be close approximation of the lateral pole of the condyle and lateral rim of the fossa.  
Right TMJ coronal tomogram likewise shows a decrease lateral joint space and lateral rim of the fossa appears to curve inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  It appears that there may be almost bone-on-bone contact at the lateral rim of the fossa.  More medially in both joints, there is better joint space indicative of perhaps a medial displacement of the articular disc.  
Coronal view shows that there is a severe deviation of the nasal septum off towards the right side.  The left turbinate is huge and appears to obliterate the nasal cavity.  The right turbinate is smaller, but may still be obstructive.  It appears to be some thickening of the sinus membrane in the left sinus.  
Axial view shows a deviation of the nasal septum off towards the right side and back off towards the left side at the posterior aspect of the nasal airway.  There is mucocele in the posterior aspect of the right maxillary sinus and thickening of the mucosal lining in the left sinus. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows he is a Class III skeletal relationship and Class III occlusion.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the base of the tongue and also at the soft palate level.  He may have slight increased high occlusal plane angle.   


Basic diagnoses for Craig would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc medially displaced with significantly decreased lateral joint space.  
AP and posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Class III occlusion being worse on the left side compared to the right side. 
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites. 
Missing all 4 second bicuspids. 
Malaligned maxillary and mandibular third molars x4. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5-6 mm (normal is 11 mm).
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Severely deviated nasal septum blocking off the airway anteriorly on the right side and posteriorly on the left side. 
Headaches. 
TMJ pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

MRI of left and right TMJs.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward approximately 7 mm. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction approximately 4-5 mm at the pogonion.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Nasal septoplasty. 
Extract maxillary and mandibular third molars x4. 