JENNIFER ROOSMAN								05-22-02

Jennifer is here for additional surgical evaluation. It appears that she is continuing to have some mandibular growth of probably 1.5 to 2 mm in the past year. She just got her braces on in January on the top and then in March on the bottom. There has not been much time to get too much accomplished.

From an orthodontic standpoint, recommend the following:

Continue to align and level the maxillary arch. Try to open up space between the upper left cuspid and central incisor to equal about 5 to 6 mm (the size of a normal lateral incisor). Upper incisors could stand to have some moderate increase in angulation but not too much. Try to open about 1 mm of space on either side of the right lateral incisor and close the spacing between the maxillary central incisors. 
Align and level the mandibular arch. Close the space on the lower left cuspid-first bicuspid area.
Consider use of Class II elastics on the left side to help distalize the maxillary left cuspid and move the mandibular left posterior teeth forward to lose some anchorage, and, thus, keep from retracting the lower anterior teeth any further posteriorly. Try to upright (buccally tip) the mandibular posterior teeth to decrease the excessive curve of Wilson. 

An easier treatment option for Jennifer may just be to extract the maxillary right lateral incisor, and this could be done at the time of surgery, but align and level the rest of the teeth without trying to open up space for the upper left lateral incisor. Then she could be treated with multiple maxillary osteotomies to remove any residual spacing and place the cuspids and molars in a Class II occlusal position. The occlusion actually fits together much better in that relationship as compared to a Class I position.

Surgery would then involve the following:
Extraction of the maxillary right lateral incisor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies, placing the upper cuspids into the lateral incisor position.
Bilateral high condylectomies as there appears to be continuing to grow as a result of condylar hyperplasia.