OLIVIA SABER									10/05/2008

Olivia is 12 ½ years old, referred by Dr. Douglas Hudson, 1016 Country Club Drive, Moraga, CA 94556.  Primary concerns that Olivia and her parents have are:

Severe sleep apnea.
Lower jaw is retruded significantly.
Difficulty chewing because the teeth do not fit together properly.

She currently takes the following medications:

Methotrexate 10 mg 1 time per week.
Folic acid 1 mg 6 times per week.
Naproxen 10 mg b.i.d. 
Pepcid 20-mg tablets taken p.r.n. 

Olivia was diagnosed as having juvenile rheumatoid arthritis in January 2006.  Prior to that, she had had some problems with her right wrist and with her jaw joints and it was noted that her lower jaw was “not growing”.  She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, nor myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function at 1, diet at 0, and disability at 4.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, but occasional vertigo.  Other joints that bother her currently are her right wrist and some fingers.  She has moderate snoring, moderate daytime somnolence, and severe sleep apnea.  She has a moderate sleep disorder and is a mouth breather at night time and also during the day.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Olivia has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is probably about 18 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 5 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline and chin.  In profile view, she has maxillary AP deficiency of probably about 4 to 5 mm.  The chin is retruded by approximately 20 mm.  Chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is moderately well defined.   She has a definite head postured forward neck position.  Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably 2 mm.  She has a high mandibular plane angle facial morphology.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the first molars erupted in.  There is some very mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Gingiva appears to be reasonably well attached.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth and her second molars are likely erupting in.  In centric relation, the mandibular dental midline is shifted off to the right side by 1 to 2 mm.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally, being a little bit worse on the right side than the left side.  She has a tendency toward an anterior open bite.  She has about a zero vertical overbite relationship.  As she closes in centric relation, she hits on the right first molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.  Oropharyngeal tissues looks reasonably healthy.  There is a decreased distance from the soft palate to the posterior oropharyngeal wall because of the abnormal posterior position of the jaw structures.  The soft palate, however, appears relatively normal in length.  Fascial pillars appear relatively normal with just maybe some mild constricture.  Tonsils appear relatively normal and just slightly enlarged, but not too significantly.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderate in size.  She has a wide columella and narrow nostrils.  She has close to 8 mm of lip incompetence.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Maximal incisal opening is 32 mm.  Excursion movements are no greater than 2 mm in each direction.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the development of the second molars, and, although the upper second molars are at least partially erupted, the lowers are underway.  I do not see evidence of third molars at this point in time.  The sinuses look clear.  She has severe resorption of the condyles and they are functioning forward towards the articular eminences.  
Waters view shows the bony septum is relatively straight.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.    
Left TMJ tomogram shows that severe condylar resorption as well as resorption of the articular eminence.  The condyles are functioning beneath the articular eminence.   
Right TMJ tomogram shows severe condylar resorption with the remnant of the condyle functioning underneath the articular eminence.  There is also significant resorption of the articular eminence.  On opening, there is restricted translation of the condyles.   
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Olivia has severe retrusion of maxilla and mandible.  She has an oropharyngeal airway of perhaps just no more than 2 mm extending from the nasal turbinate down through the base of the soft palate.  The base of the tongue probably yields about a 4 mm airway.  She has a very high occlusal plane angulation.  She has some nasal dorsal prominence.  She has a significantly enlarged adenoid mass in the nasopharyngeal area that is likely a major contributor to the sleep apnea situation that she has.  Olivia weighs 72 pounds and she is 5 feet 1 inch tall.  

Basic diagnoses for Olivia would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. 
Severe AP mandibular hypoplasia.  
AP maxillary hypoplasia.  
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion. 
High occlusal plane angle
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Hyperplastic nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Wide columella and narrow nostrils. 
 Severe sleep apnea. 
Unerupted mandibular second molars. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.    
Align and level mandibular arch.  
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect of the maxilla and advance it forward.  
Augmentation genioplasty. 
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Columella reconstruction.  
4.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.


