LAUREN SAENZ									06/29/2009

Lauren is 14 years old.  Referred by Dr. Richard Ingraham.  Primary concerns that Lauren has are as follows:

Headaches. 
Teeth and jaws do not align properly.
Difficulties breathing through her nose. 

Lauren has no TMJ pain and on a usual day she does not have any significant pain.  She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability at zero.  She rates her headaches on the left side in the frontal and behind her eye, which would include the temporal area, at about a level of 9.  These occur about once a week and more often occur on Mondays, but can occur any day of the week.  She has had these since the third grade.  They used to begin right before lunchtime, but sometimes she will wake up the headaches.  The only medication she currently takes is Imitrex 50 mg p.r.n. headaches.  She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  It suspected that she may clench and grind her teeth at night, and she has had a mouth guard made for that, but it has not been documented that she actually has the clenching and bruxism. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Lauren has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the right and chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile, she may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency and slight mandibular prognathism.  Chin neckline and chin neck angle actually look relatively normal.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has thin tissues around the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth at least back to the first molars erupted in.  She has a TPA appliance in on the first molars.  She has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship and is probably about 5 mm Class III bilaterally.  She has an anterior crossbite.  In Class I molar relationship, she may have just some slight transverse maxillary excess.  She has an increased curve of Wilson in the maxillary first molar area and perhaps a slight increased curve in the lower arch as well.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the left side.  Turbinates at least anteriorly are mildly enlarged, but do not appear too significant.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 5 mm, to the left 7 mm. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that Lauren has four impacted third molars.  Maxillary second molars have not quite erupted in yet.  She has bands on the maxillary first molars and a TPA present.  The maxillary second molars that have not erupted in yet should be erupting in fairly soon.  
Coronal view shows that she has hypertrophied turbinates.  The bony septum at least is straight and there is deviation off to the left with a cartilaginous septum more anteriorly.  Right sinus is full of fluid.  She states she has had a stuffy nose and some congestion for the past 2 weeks. 
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology and there appears to be good joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow. 
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology, although with a little flattening on the anterior head and in one area there is slight anterior beaking present.  Joint space looks reasonably good.  Articular eminence is relatively flat.
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  There is a lateral extension of the lateral pole of the condyle.  Joint space appears slightly decreased particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.   
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width and extension of the lateral pole of the condyle.  Joint space look narrow particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  
Dental model analysis shows that she has an open bite involving the right lateral incisor, cuspid, and probably the first bicuspid on the right side and on the left side about the same including the lateral incisor, cuspid, and first bicuspid.  She has accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch and a slight reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has Class III skeletal relationship and moderately increased occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway appears constricted with an AP dimension of only about 5 mm at the soft palate level and 6 mm at the base of the tongue.  She has some adenoid tissues present in the nasopharynx.  She has a Class III occlusal relationship.  Lauren has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of almost 3 mm. 

Basic diagnoses for Lauren would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ medial displacement of the articular discs and anterior displacement at the lateral aspect of the joint.
Mandibular prognathism. 
Maxillary AP hyperplasia. 
Rule out bilateral condylar hyperplasia.
Class III end-on occlusion (5 mm).
Anterior crossbite.
Open bite in the lateral incisor, cuspid, and first bicuspid area bilaterally. 
Increased curve of Wilson in the maxillary first molar area.
Weekly headaches. 
Impacted third molars x4. 
Partially erupted maxillary second molars. 
Hypertrophied turbinates causing nasal airway obstruction.
Very thin attached gingiva of the lower anterior arch. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of almost 3 mm. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Periodontal evaluation with possible consideration of gingival grafting to the lower anterior arch.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Removal of transpalatal arch.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisors roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  May need to uncover the maxillary second molars to encourage their eruption.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure to help compensate for the significant tooth size discrepancy.  
Reassess to rule out active condylar hyperplasia.
Surgery. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition the mandible slightly posteriorly and decrease the occlusal plane angle.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and correct any transverse discrepancies in the arch. 
Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies if active condylar hyperplasia is confirmed with articular discs repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
