SABRINA SCHMIDT								08/17/2009

Sabrina is 19 years old.  Referred by Dr. Al Bishop, 360 Peak One Drive, Frisco, CO 80443. 
Sabrina has had previous orthodontics x3.  She had orthodontics in 1998 and then she had it again in 2002 and then a third set of braces in 2006.  She has oral bars and expanders, splint treatment, retainers, and oral exercises.  In 1997, she had tonsils and adenoids removed because of significant snoring problems.  To the best of Sabrina’s knowledge, her jaw problems began when she was about 15 years of age in 2004.  This is when she became aware of having some noises in her joints such as clicking and popping as well as headaches and also that her lower jaw began to be more retruded.  

Sabrina has significant problems with headaches predominantly in the frontal and temporal area that she rates at a level of 7.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 7, diet at 3, disability at 6.  She gets occasional earaches, but no problems with tinnitus nor vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  She does tend to breathe a lot through her mouth at night and also during the day.  She has perhaps some mild snoring, but significantly less than it was prior to the tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy.  She has no daytime somnolence and no sleep apnea symptoms, although she is predominantly a mouth breather at nighttime and also during the day. 

Primary concerns that Sabrina has are as follows:

Clicking noises in the jaw joints. 
Jaw gets stuck occasionally. 
Headaches. 
Pain in the jaw joints. 
Lower jaw retruded and getting worse. 
Poor bite position. 
Difficulties breathing through the nose.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Sabrina has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is almost 5 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all shifted to the left 1 mm.  The maxilla is retruded by probably 4-5 mm and the chin is retruded by about 20 mm.  Intraorally, Sabrina  has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  There is mild crowding in the lower anterior arch, but she has some real thin tissues around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars, and she has some mild crowding up there as well.  She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with a crossbite on the left side.  She has about 1 mm vertical overbite.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy.  Sabrina has extremely narrow and constricted nostrils.  Luminal valves also are restricted.  It is hard to see inside the nose, but the turbinates are probably enlarged.  I could not really evaluate the septum very well.  
To palpation, she has high to moderately severe pain in the masseters, TMJs, styloid areas, SCMs, posterior neck, and shoulder areas.  She has moderate tenderness over the medially pterygoids and milder tenderness over the temporalis muscles.  On opening, the joints seem to function reasonably smoothly, but on excursion movements in the right joint, she would have a click as she shifted the mandible to the left. 
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  She has fairly significant prominence of the gonial notches.  
Axial view shows that the septum appears reasonably straight with must maybe a slight lean towards the left side.  The left turbinate is quite enlarged and appears to obliterate the airway on that side.  The right turbinate is more normal in size.  
Coronal view shows that the septum deviates just slightly off towards the left side.  The left inferior turbinate is quite large.  Sinuses are clear in both views.  
TMJ films are not available at this time.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Sabrina has retrusion of the maxilla and severe retrusion of the mandible.  Posterior maxilla is vertically hypoplastic.  The mandible is appears may be similarly elongated.  She said she has no chin neck angle and no chin neckline.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 2 mm at the base of the tongue and 5 mm at the soft palate level.  She has a high occlusal plane angle and she has a vertical difference with the occlusal plane angle being greater at the molar level.  

Coronal tomograms of TMJ joints show bilateral loss of vertical volume.  Lateral rims curves inferiorly about 2 mm on each side.  There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that is small in size and appears to have lost vertical and anteroposterior volume.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle appears to positioned posteriorly in the fossa.  There appears to be a pseudocyst in the head of the condyle.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost vertical and anteroposterior volume.  There is anterior beaking present and it is positioned somewhat posteriorly in the fossa.  

Basic diagnoses for Sabrina would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction (compatible with adolescent internal condylar resorption). 
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia and anterior vertical hyperplasia. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and anterior vertical hyperplasia.
AP microgenia. 
High occlusal plane angle of 20 degrees.
TMJ pain. 
Myofascial pain. 
Headaches.
Left posterior crossbite. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm (normal AP dimension is 11 mm).
Predominantly a mouth breather.  
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm with the lower teeth being too large compared to the upper teeth. 
		



Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Periodontal evaluation with probable gingival graft to the lower anterior arch. 
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.  
Place brackets on all four second molars and attach to the arch wire to better align the molars with each other and with each arch, particularly in the maxilla. 
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible forward in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. 
Genioplasty of 8 mm augmentation.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
