JANET SCHMIDT									11/13/2008

Janet was referred by Dr. Terry Daugherty.  Janet is 40 years old.  Primary concerns she has are as follows:

She has a cant in the occlusion. 
The teeth do not fit together. 
Left-sided TMJ pain. 
Left-sided headaches. 
Difficulties eating and chewing.

Janet had orthodontics as a teenager in the 1970s.  She began orthodontic treatment again in April 2002 and continues to be under orthodontic treatment since that time.  In December 2003, she had lower jaw surgery to advance the mandible and also a blepharoplasty.  She has had significant complications as a result of that surgery.  She has total anesthesia to the lower lip and chin area.  She rates her TMJ pain on the left side at a level of 5, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 5, diet at 6, disability at 4.  She gets headaches on the left temporal and top of the head area at a level of 6.  She gets earaches on the left side, but no tinnitus and gets occasional vertigo.  She feels she is developing decreased hearing.  Other joints that bother her include her left elbow and wrist.  She states that her speech is affected since the surgery and talking increases the pain.  Talking is an important part of her living.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

She takes the following medications:

Celebrex. 
Tramadol.
Aleve.
Fish oil.
Flax seed oil.

The TMJ problems did really become significantly apparent until after the surgery was done.  Her speech problems developed after she began having the TMJ problems.  Janet became aware of having TMJ problems and headaches when she was about 18 or 19 years of age.  She remembers two traumas, one when she was in the seventh grade and she got hit in the jaw with a door, and then when she was 15 she got hit in the jaw with a boom on a tiny sailboat that she remembers being a little bit sore afterwards.  Otherwise, the etiology is unknown.  Janet does have some problems with her left arm in her elbow joint, but also if she types too long she develops numbness down through her left arm.   

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  Janet has chronic tearing due to the fact that her lacrimal ducts apparently were injured with her blepharoplasty surgery.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxillary dental midline and mandibular dental and chin are all fairly well aligned to the facial midline.  In profile view, Janet has fairly good facial asymmetry.  Chin neckline may be just slightly shorter and for the most part has fairly good facial balance.  Intraorally, Janet is missing the lower first bicuspids extracted for orthodontic reasons probably.  She has a space between the left second bicuspid and cuspid that is about 2 mm wide.  In the upper arch on the left side, she is fairly close to being Class I cuspid and maybe just a slight Class II tendency by 1 or 2 mm.  On the left side, she is closer to Class I and has a space between the cuspid and the second bicuspid.  She has a slight open bite tendency in that side in the bicuspid area and cuspid area.  Transversely, the maxillary left cuspid is about 1.5 to 2 mm higher than the right cuspid.  In the mandible, the left cuspid is up about 3 mm compared to the right cuspid.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm.  The oropharyngeal tissues all look relatively normal.  As Janet bites her teeth together, she feels that she occludes only on the left cuspids and the rest of her teeth are apart.  To palpation, Janet has some mild tenderness on the left side over the masseter, retromandibular area, SCMs, posterior neck  and shoulder area.  Maximum incisal opening is 45 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 7 mm, to the left 6 mm.  On opening, she has a pop in the left joint about 35 mm and a closing click at about 25.  The right side functions relatively smoothly.  Intranasally, the turbinates are mild to moderate in size.  The septum seems reasonably straight.  It is difficult to tell if there is any significant nasal airway obstruction.  She is not aware of whether she snores.  She states she has rather severe daytime somnolence, but is not aware of having sleep apnea.  She has probably a moderate sleep disorder and wakes up every 2 hours or so.  She does not know if she is a mouth breather or not.  She does wake up dry in the morning however.  She does have some lower lip ptosis of about 4 to 5 mm.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the mandibular first bicuspids.  There are a few screws in the ramus on the right side with at least one appearing to go through the mandibular second molar.  There are four screws on the left mandibular ramus.  There is a bone plate in the left lateral incisor area in the chin position.  She appears to have significant arthritis in the left jaw joint.  The right side is a little bit more difficult to evaluate.  The sinuses look reasonably clear.  
Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Septum in the bony area is fairly straight.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The screws are extremely long that were used in the mandible.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic with some flattening on the anterior head.  Superior joint space appears narrow.    
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic with some flattening and broadening of the head.  Joint space posterior actually appears a little bit increased, although superiorly it appears decreased.  On opening, there is slightly better translation of the right condyle as compared to the left condyle.  The right condyle actually appears a little bit smaller in anteroposterior width as compared to the left side, but the condylar head and neck appears longer on the right side as compared to the left side.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Janet has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  She is somewhat retruded in the chin area.  Oropharyngeal airway is about 6 to 7 mm at the soft palate and about 6 to 7 mm at the base of the tongue.  

NEUROLOGICAL ASSESSMENT.  With 2-point discrimination, Janet could distinguish 2 points at 20 mm on the left side, but could not detect that on the right side.  With von Frey hairs, she was 1.65 in the upper lip, 3.84 in the left lower lip, and 4.08 in the lower right lip.  With brushstroke, she could tell direction fairly reasonably on the left side.  She also got some correct on the right side, but not quite as accurate as on the left side.  With sharp, she could distinguish between sharp and dull sensation bilaterally.  With cold, she could sense cold in both sides of the lower lip.  Therefore, her loss of sensibility in the lower lip is probably between 1 and 2.   

Basic diagnoses for Janet would be as follows:    

Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with possible reduction on wide opening. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Transverse maxillary asymmetry with the right side being 2 mm lower than the left side and the mandible being 3 mm lower than the left side. 
Spacing in the mandible lower arch between the cuspid and first bicuspid. 
Ankylosed mandibular right second molar.
Vertical discrepancy in the marginal regions between the mandibular right first and second molars.
Bone screws through the roots of the mandibular right second molar.
Bilateral deformity at the inferior border of the mandible secondary to previous mandibular ramus osteotomies.
Left TMJ pain. 
Left-sided headaches. 
Left-sided myofascial pain. 
Bilateral infraorbital hypoplasia.
Permanent nerve and muscle injuries to the eyelids secondary to previous blepharoplasty surgery with the left side being worse than the right side. 
Anterior mandibular vertical hypoplasia.
Lower lip ptosis.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Close all the spacing in the lower arch.  Adjust the bracket heights on the mandibular right molars and bicuspid so that the teeth are aligned to each other.  
Surgery Stage 1.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward about 5 to 6 mm at the Pogonion, level it transversely, as well as slightly decrease the occlusal plane angle. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 3 to 4 mm, down graft it slightly posteriorly, level it transversely, and correct any transverse discrepancy that may be present. 
Partial bilateral inferior turbinectomies. 
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to down graft the chin about 3 to 4 mm.
Resuspension of the mentalis muscle to eliminate lower lip ptosis. 
Augmentation of inferior border of the mandible bilaterally with HTR.
3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
a.  Finalize the alignment in occlusal relationship.
b.  Stabilize using permanent retention in the lower arch if necessary to keep the spaces closed.  Use Hawley type retainers for post orthodontic retention.. 
4.   Surgery Stage 2.	
a.  Bilateral infraorbital osteotomies to advance and superiorly reposition the infraorbital rims. 


