KIMBERLY SCHRONK								07/20/2009

Kim is 42 years old.  Referred by Dr. Terry Adams.  She also has been treated by Dr. Perry Goldberg and Dr. Hilton Israelson.  

The primary concerns that Kim has are that:

Cannot open her mouth very much. 
Loose teeth. 
Headaches. 

Kim had orthodontics done at about the age of 12 to 14.  She had what appears to be upper second bicuspids and lower first bicuspids extracted and all the teeth retruded.  She has had her wisdom teeth removed as well.

The onset of her TMJ problems is unknown.  Her mother states that her dentist used to always say that she had a small mouth even when she was young.  Etiology is unknown.  The only medication she takes is Aleve.  She gets occasional headaches, but no tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her right elbow and right wrist.  She does have itching around her ears.  Her mother thinks that she may have some clenching and bruxism which she did as a child and may still be present at night time.  It is possible her TMJ issues may have been present in childhood. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Kim has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 15 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship appears to be about 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular midline may be just slightly towards the left side.  Chin appears to be probably about 2 to 3 mm to the left side.  In profile, the maxilla appears to be retruded by approximately or maybe 5 mm.  Chin has fairly good projection, but the dental alveolus in the mandible is retruded by probably 4 to 5 mm.  Chin neckline is reasonably long, but chin neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, Kim is missing the lower first bicuspids and maxillary second bicuspids.  She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch and also the upper arch.  Transversely, the arches look quite narrow.  She has essentially a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and on the left side she has an end-on Class II cuspid relationship.  She is also Class II end on on the right side.  She has an anterior overbite of about 2 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy, although it was difficult to see them because of the tongue control and the narrowness of the arches that seem to displace the tongue posteriorly and superiorly.  In 1986, Kim did have some internal nasal work done as well as an external rhinoplasty performed.  Kim does not believe that she snores.  She has mild daytime somnolence, but apparently no sleep apnea symptoms.  She breathes through her nose most of the time.  To palpation, Kim has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, she has a glitch that is consistent in the right joint.  The left joint seems to function smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is about 24 mm, excursion movements to the right 1 mm, to the left about 2 mm at the most.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, the mandible first bicuspids, and the maxillary second bicuspids.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Difficult to evaluate the condyles.  No other significant pathology noted. 
Coronal view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear quite large and seem to fill up a good portion of the airway.  Septum, at least in the bony area, appears reasonably straight.  
Axial view shows that she has significantly hypertrophied turbinates particularly on the right side.  Sinuses appear clear.  
Left MJ sagittal tomograms shows condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  There is some anterior beaking and it appears there is some condylar resorption that has occurred in this previously.  There is increased superior joint space, but decreased posterior joint space.    
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with a large pseudocyst in it.  There is anterior beaking present and decrease posterior joint space, although the anterior and superior joint spaces appear reasonably good.  There appears to be a little calcification sitting in front of the condyle.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat arthritic and sclerotic.  There is an extension of the lateral pole of the condyle.  There is decrease medial and lateral joint space.     
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some arthritic changes associated it.  There is significantly decreased lateral joint space, although the medial joint space appears reasonably good.    
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a low occlusal plane angle and a very short upper lip.  She appears to have basically a skeletal Class III jaw relationship.  Dental alveolar ridges in both the maxilla and mandible appear to be retruded.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is about 7 mm and at the base of the tongue appears to be about 9.  Vertical height of the maxilla and upper lip appear short.   

With forced manipulation on my part, I could shift the mandible about 4 mm to the left and about 2 mm to the right into excursal movements 

Basic diagnoses for Kim would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and degeneration of the articular discs with joint adhesions. 
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular dental alveolar hypoplasia.
AP macrogenia. 
Class II end-on cuspid and molar relationship.  
Missing mandibular second bicuspids and maxillary first bicuspids. 
Severely decreased incisal opening of 14 mm (normal 45 mm).
Probable bilateral temporal muscle fibrosis. 
Headaches.
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism. 



Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Medications.  Klonopin 1-mg tablets q.h.s. to prevent nocturnal clenching and bruxism.  
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Ct scan of jaws and jaw joints. 
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a clockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward approximately 4 to 5 mm and superiorly reposition the posterior aspect. 
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
AP reduction genioplasty. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry. 
