JED SHOAF										10/20/2008

Jed is 36 years old, referred by Hilton Israelson, DDS, 702 W. Arapaho, Suite 108, Richardson, TX 75080.  Jed is in good health and has no major medical problems.  He has a family history of people having joint problems and also sleep apnea problems.  He has one brother who is on a CPAP machine.  He has one sister who has had orthognathic surgery in the past.  

Jed’s TMJ problems began he was about 21 years old in 1992 while in college of unknown etiology.  Since then, he has been treated with splints for the past 10 to 15 years.  He also has had chiropractic treatment for his back and his TMJ.  He takes Advil and Tylenol for pain.

Jed rates his TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 2, diet at 3, disability at 7, and headaches which he gets in the temporal and posterior head area at about a level of 3.  The headaches have been more intense particularly during the last week or so, and he usually he does not have much trouble with headaches, although the TMJ pain is there fairly constantly.  He gets earaches, tinnitus, and has some hearing loss, but this is likely due to previous ear problems where he has had reconstructive surgery in his right ear x2 and his left ear x1.  Other joints that bother him include his right ankle, wrists, and fingers, and he does have some back issues as well.  He is aware of clenching and bruxing his teeth at night time and also during the day.

He has moderate snoring, moderate daytime somnolence.  His wife has observed him with some apneic episodes.  He has a moderate sleep disorder and wakes up every 2 to 3 hours.  At night time, he is predominantly a mouth breather and also during the day as well.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Jed has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 27 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is probably about 1 mm.  The maxillary midline may be about 1 mm off to the l.  The mandibular dental midline and chin appear to be pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Jed is probably 5 to 6 mm AP deficient in the maxilla.  The mandible is probably 20 to 25 mm AP deficient.  Chin neckline is extremely short, although the chin neck angle is moderately well defined.  The lower third face appears elongated.  Intraorally, Jed has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present.  He has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He is probably about 5 to 6 mm Class II in the cuspid area.  He has an overjet of probably a 7 mm.  He has a zero vertical overbite relationship.   He has a cross bite tendency on the right side in the first and second molar area.  In occluding, Jed hits only on the second molars bilaterally and all other teeth are out  of occlusion.  Jed did have his wisdom teeth removed when he was about 18.  

Basic diagnoses for Jed would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations. 
AP maxillary hypoplasia.  
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.  
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
Class II occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
TMJ pain. 
Sleep apnea symptoms. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Deviated septum with septal spur.
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Occluding only on the second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Periodontal evaluation and treatment as necessary to maximize periodontal health. 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints if total joint prosthesis are indicated based on MRI evaluation.
Surgery.  
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.    
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses and mandibular advancement.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible if disc repositioning procedure is done.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and expand it.  
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Nasal septoplasty.
5.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

