DARREN SMITH									08/06/2009

Darren is 26 years old.  Referred by Dr. George Adams.  Darren has been aware of TMJ problems since his early teens.  The etiology is unknown.  He had orthodontics from about the age 8 to 10 including head gear.  He was aware of having some joint issues prior to beginning orthodontics at about the age of 15 to 17 with Dr. George Adams.  He has been in splint therapy with Dr. Bender where he wears a night guard and this was begun in 2005.  The splint did improve his symptomatology, but did not eliminate it.  He stopped wearing the splint about 2 months ago, and his symptoms have increased.  Darren has some dental problems that required a crown, and, therefore, the splint did not fit any more.  

Darren currently takes the following medications:

Lunesta 3 mg q.h.s.
Ibuprofen 4 to 12 tablets per day.

Darren rates his headaches about a level of 4 that occur throughout the head bilaterally.  He rates his TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 5, diet at 5, disability at 4.  He rarely gets earaches, but occasionally gets tinnitus and vertigo.  He is not aware of any hearing loss.  Other joints that bother him include his hands, fingers, possibly his right hip, and his back at L3-L4.  He is aware of clenching and bruxism at night time and clenching during the day.  Darren states he has had pain as long he can remember his back, right leg, and TMJ/jaws.  The three different areas seem to stimulate each other causing increased pain in other areas when one area flares up.  Darren is not sure whether he breathes through his mouth or his nose when he sleeps.  He is aware of moderate snoring, moderate daytime tiredness, and mild sleep apnea issues.  He does have moderate difficulty sleeping at night and does tend to toss and turn.  He does not wake up at night unable to catch his breath.  He has some mild problem with his arms and legs jerking at nighttime.  He at night, however, will get pains in his stomach that wakes him up and makes him sit up in bed.  It seems to affect his muscles.   He did have a sleep study done about four or five years ago and was told that he was fine, although there is no report available.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Darren has a little bit more fullness in the left side of his face than the right side.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is a little bit off towards the right side about 1 mm.  The nasal tip is off to the right side about 1-2 mm.  The chin is off to the right side about 3-4 mm.  In profile view, Darren has just some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe 3-4 mm.  The mandible is retruded by about 15-18 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not defined.  Intraorally, Darren has all of his teeth in the lower arch back to the second molars, but there is some mild crowding anteriorly.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  Darren  has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship bilaterally with about a 3-mm anterior overbite.  He has a slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being only about 1 mm higher than the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal.  Uvula appears moderately enlarged.  Other areas appear relatively normal.  There may be a slight yaw in the maxilla and mandible off towards the left side 1-2 mm.  To palpation, Darren has moderate to high moderate pain over most of the head and neck areas including the TMJs.  On opening, he has loud audible clicks and pops that he can generate in both joints.  However, he has to manipulate his jaws to create the clicking and popping.  If he opens straight, it is quite uncomfortable for him and he is more limited in his opening.  The maximum opening he was able to achieve was 60 mm with significant discomfort.  He could open to about 25 mm without significant pain. Excursion movement to the right was 9 mm, to the left 10 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Darren would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis with large cyst in the right condyle. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations with significant deformation and degenerative changes with very questionable salvageability. 
AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
AP and mandibular hypoplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal AP dimension is 11 mm).
Posterior maxillary and mandibular yaw with the jaw structures being deviated towards the left side approximately 2 mm. 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Large nasal septal spur off towards the left side. 
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Sleep apnea symptoms including snoring, daytime somnolence, restless sleep, and abrupt awakenings at night. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of approximately 2 mm. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower teeth forward. 
CT scan of jaws and joint joints (TMJ Concepts protocol) if total joint prostheses are elected to be done. 
Surgery Treatment Option 1. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the jaws in a counterclockwise direction. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Nasal septoplasty. 
Surgery Treatment Option 2.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Nasal septoplasty. 

There are two treatment plans proposed for Darren.  The total joint prostheses would give us the most predictable result based on the advanced arthritis he has and the severe deformation of the articular discs.  However, Darren may elect to try to use his own discs.  The prognosis is much less if we are trying to salvage his own discs as compared to using the total joint prostheses.  

The orthodontics is relatively straightforward with aligning and leveling the arches and slenderizing the lower anterior teeth to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.  