STEPHANIE SINOWAY								01/26/2009

Stephanie is 29 years old and will be 30 in 1 month.  Her TMJ problems began when she was 22 in about 2001 of unknown etiology.  She began developing pain and discomfort in the jaw joints. It originally started on one side, but now she has pain on both sides.  The pain and problems originally were on the left side.  Since 2002, she has worn a splint, particularly at night.  She had physical therapy for 2 months in 2003.  She had Botox injections x5 plus dry needle insertions into the muscles x4, all prior to 2005.  She has been put on lots of different kinds of medications from 2002 until the present.  She is on a soft diet.  

Current medications include the following:

Celebrex 100 mg q.d. 
Lutera (BCP).
Valtrex 500 mg q.d.
Multivitamin.

Stephanie gets headaches about 4 times per month that occur primarily behind her eyes which would indicate probably the temporal area at a level of 5.  Her TMJ pain is at a level of 7, average daily pain at 3, jaw function and diet at 5, and disability at 2.  Stephanie believes that her bite problem is getting worse and her bite continues to slowly open more in the front and her lower jaw is slowly becoming more retruded.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  The only other joint that bothers her is her right thumb.  Of interest is that she began having hearing problems in elementary school, but the situation got much worse in college and she subsequently lost her hearing in both ears.  In May 2001, she had a cochlear implant placed in the left side.  It is interesting about that same time is then she began developing the pain in the jaw joints.  Stephanie does not remember having any pain before the cochlear implant surgery, and she was intubated for that.  However, I do not know if there is a good correlation relative to the cause of the apparent condylar resorption that has resulted in the open bite.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Stephanie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  There may be a slight increased fullness in the angular area in the right side compared to the left side.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to the left of the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The chin may be just slightly to the left 1 or 2 mm.  In profile view, Stephanie has some slight AP deficiency of perhaps 2-3 mm.  The chin appears to be retruded about 12 mm.  The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  She does have a little bit of prominence of the nasal dorsum. Stephanie  has had orthodontic treatment from the third to the fifth grade.  Intraorally, Stephanie has all of her teeth back through the second molars as well as all of her teeth in the upper arch through the second molars.  She has about a 5 mm anterior open bite and probably about a 3 to 4 mm overjet.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally and probably 4 mm Class II.  In centric relation, Stephanie occludes only the right second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.  If she bites a little bit harder, then the left side second molars will touch.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy.  Nasal structures look relatively normal.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the TMJs, masseters, temporalis, and moderate discomfort over the shoulders.  On opening, her jaws and closing she had a little bit of a glitch in the right joint on closing about 5-10 mm.  She feels as though she has some grinding kind of noises in her joints at time.  I cannot distinguish any overt click or pop.  Maximal incisal opening is about 32 mm and she can open about 20 mm within significant pain.  Excursion movements are about 5 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  I-CAT coronal view shows that she has relatively large turbinates.  Sinuses appear clear.  Axial view shows that she has what appear to be hypertrophied turbinates, although the sinuses are clear.  
Panorex shows that she has all of her teeth actually back through her third molars erupted in and in position.  Therefore, she occludes on her second and third molars.  She has significant arthritis in both TMJs.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  
Right TMJ coronal views show she has some significant arthritic changes within the joints.  In some areas, there appears to be erosion on the head of the condyle.  Vertical joint space may be relatively normal.    
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe bony changes.  There is loss of vertical height at the condylar head.  At the lateral pole of the condyle, there appears to be significantly decreased joint space.  The medial pole of the condyle extends quite a ways medially.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic.  There is some anterior beaking present.  There appears to be almost a pseudocyst in the condylar head.  There are degenerative changes associated with the head of the condyle.  
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant degenerative changes and overall significant loss of bone volume, particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  There is some anterior beaking, and the entire condyle appears small in size.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Stephanie has a high occlusal plane angle in the mandible and appears to occlude only the second and third and perhaps only the third molars.  She has an anterior open bite of about 4-5 mm and an overjet of about 3-4 mm.  Oropharyngeal airway actually appears quite constricted with less than 3 mm of an airway space between the base of the tongue and the posterior pharyngeal wall.  She has a skeletal occlusal Class II occlusal relationship.  

Basic diagnoses for Stephanie would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ reactive arthritis with articular disc dislocation and severely deformed and nonreducing. 
Progressive mandibular hypoplasia.
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia. 
Anterior open bite of 5 mm that is getting progressively worse.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2.5 mm (normal 11 mm).
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal airway obstruction.
TMJ pain. 
Myofascial pain. 
Headaches.
Class II occlusion. 
Occluding only on the left and right second and third molars with all other teeth out of occlusion. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in counterclockwise rotation. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral coronoidotomies.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

