MATTHEW SLATER								01/26/2009

Matt is 28 years old.  He has had TMJ problems that began around the age of 10 when he was aware of clicking in his right jaw joint.  He fell off a chair around the age of 8 and 9 and ended up with a laceration in his chin area and does not know if this contributed to the problem or not.  He had loud clicking in the right TMJ following that time of event.  At least by age 20, he had clicking in both joints.  He had been in splint therapy since the age of 18, and this seemed to make the clicking worse.  He had audible clicking in the right joint when he was 18.  He went off to college to the University of Washington and was treated in their oral medicine clinic.  Dr. Earl Sommers and Dr. Truelove were the primary people seeing him there.  He eventually ended up with orthodontics with Dr. Ward Damon.  He eventually moved to Albuquerque, New Mexico.  He had orthodontics continued on there and eventually had orthognathic surgery in 2006 with Dr. Jerry Jones.  Altogether he has had six bite splints constructed, all without any significant relief.  He has been on numerous medications without improvement.  He currently takes the following medications:

Flexeril 5 mg.
Amitriptyline 10 mg q.h.s.
Cymbalta 30 mg q.d.
Mobic 15 mg 2 times per day. 

Matt rates his TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 6, diet at 2, disability at 7.  He gets headaches predominantly in the right side in the frontal, temporal, posterior, and top of the head at about a level of 4.  He does get muscle tension on the left side, but he does not classify that as a headache.  He gets right-sided earaches, tinnitus, and some vertigo.  No other joints bother him.  He does apparently have some depression associated with his continued jaw problems and particularly with being unable to find any help.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Matt has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about zero.  The maxillary and mandibular dental midline are just slightly to the left about 1 mm.  The chin is off to the left side about 3 mm.  In profile view, Matt has fairly reasonable facial balance with just some slight AP mandibular deficiency and slightly decreased chin neck angle.  Intraorally, Matt has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has basically a Class I relationship.  He has about a 1 mm anterior deep bite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  However, the fascial pillars are somewhat constricted transversely.  Nasal airway looks relatively normal and there appears to be good area of breathing bilaterally.  To palpation, he has some mild to moderate pain throughout most of the head and neck area with some high pain in the posterior neck area.  He does report having some crepitus in the right joint, although the left joint seemed reasonably smooth today.  Incisal opening is 63 mm, excursion movement to the right 8 mm, to the left 9 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of 4 bone plates in the maxilla.  He has a root canal in the maxillary left second bicuspid.  There is a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints in these films.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  
Axial view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  He has got a little mucocele on the floor of the sinus on the right side, but otherwise sinuses appear clear.   
Left TMJ sagittal view show a condyle with some anterior beaking.  Articular eminence is relatively flat.  Joint space looks reasonable.  
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to be postured forward just slightly.  There are degenerative changes in the head of the condyle.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  There appears to be reasonably good joint space.  Lateral joint space is slightly decreased, but not real significant.  
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  There is significantly decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint and in some areas it appears there could be almost bone-on-bone contact there.  The medial joint space looks more appropriate and corresponds with the MRI that shows that there is a medial displaced disc in the right joint.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has basically a Class I skeletal occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway looks within normal limits.  

Basic diagnoses for Matt would be as follows:    

Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction with significant deformation and degeneration. 
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc medially displaced with almost bone-on-bone contact at the lateral rim of the fossa. 
Relative mandibular AP hyperplasia. 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment Option 1 would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to maintain occlusion and create space within the joint the accommodate the articular disc. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.



Treatment Option 2 would be as follows:

1.  Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

