LINDA SEE										10/10//2008

Linda is 50 years old and referred by Dr. Tom Pitts, 4786 Caughlin Parkway, Reno, NV 89519.  Linda’s TMJ problems began when she was about 21 years old when she was involved in a motor vehicle accident and suffered a fractured mandible.  During the years, she has had some other injuries to the jaws that did not result in fractures, but still trauma to the jaws and TMJ area.  She has been in splint therapy three times, in 1981, in 1987, and in 2002.  She has had chiropractic treatment over the years to help with her pain problems.  

Linda rates her headaches at a level of 8 that occur in the frontal, temporal, and behind the eyes.  She gets her headaches three or five times per week.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 8, diet at 8, and disability at 7.  She gets occasional earaches and she also gets tinnitus and vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her left elbow, wrists, hands, fingers, hips, knees, ankles, toes, neck and back.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night time and also during the day.  Previous surgeries include a C-section and then carpal tunnel surgery to both hands as well as a tubal ligation.  

Primary concerns Linda has are as follows:

Pain in the jaw joints. 
Headaches.
Difficulties eating and chewing. 
Mouth can lock open or lock closed.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Linda has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline as is the chin.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted about 3 mm to the left.  In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to by subnasale by probably 2 mm.  Linda is AP deficient in the maxilla by probably about 5 to 6 mm.  The mandible is retruded by probably at least 15 mm.  Chin neckline is extremely short and not well defined.  Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular left bicuspid and that is the reason for the shift in the midline around towards the left side.  Left cuspid almost lines up with the right first bicuspid.  She has significant wear on her incisor edges.  She has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she is missing the right second molar, the left second molar, as well as a left bicuspid.  She has real small upper lateral incisors particularly on the left side.  In the upper arch, the left cuspid is about 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  It appears that the mandibular left secondary bicuspid is a tooth that is missing.  On the right side, she has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship probably about 2 to 3 mm and on the left side she has a full Class III cuspid relationship.  The maxillary left cuspid is completely rotated 90 degrees.  She has about a 6 mm deep bite relationship.  She has a reversed curve of Spee in the upper arch and a slightly increased curve of Spee in the lower arch.  Oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal.  Septum is deviated off towards the right side and there is a spur at the base of the septum.  Turbinates appears moderately enlarged.  It appears there may be more of an obstruction on the right side than the left side.  She appears to have somewhat narrow nostrils and the luminal valves may be slightly restricted, although Linda does not have any complaints about difficulties breathing through her nose.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles and moderate pain over the shoulders.  On jaw function, she has crepitus in both joints.  Maximal incisal opening is 26 mm and she could only open to about 16 mm without pain.  Excursion movement to the right 8 mm, to the left 3 mm.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and maxillary second molars.  It is possible it could be the first molars that are missing and the seconds molars in the upper arch are drifted forward to the first molar position.  She is missing the mandibular left second bicuspid and maxillary left probably second bicuspid.  The septum is deviated off towards to the right side with a septal spur.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged with the right side appearing to be obliterated, although on the left side there may be some airway.  She has severe arthritis in both temporomandibular joints.  
Waters view shows that the bony septum at least is straight, although clinically cartilaginous septum is deviated off towards the right side.  The right turbinate appears quite large and it appears that the right nasal airway is fairly well obstructed.  On the left side, there is some passable airway.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone significant degenerative changes and arthritic changes.  There is sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  There is decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is arthritic, although not as severe as the right side.  There is sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  There is decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.  Articular eminence is a little bit flatter on this side.  There is significant arthritic changes within the joint.  On opening, there is restricted translation on both sides, although there seems to be a little bit better translation of the right joint as compared to the left joint.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  The maxillary incisors are in extreme vertical.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 to 6 mm at the base of the soft palate as well as about 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  She has a slight increased occlusal plane angle.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis. 
AP maxillary hypoplasia.  
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Class II cuspid relationship on the left side, Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side.  
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.  
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.
Mild crowding of the lower anterior arch. 
Lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being 6 mm posterior to the right cuspid. 
Missing mandibular left second bicuspid, maxillary left second bicuspid, bilateral maxillary second molars.
Anterior deep bite.  


Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Consider opening space on the left side between the bicuspid and molar to equal about the size of a bicuspid tooth.  Loose some of the posterior anchorage so that molar will move distally.  Open 1 mm of space around the upper left lateral incisor to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Open up space between the left first bicuspid and first molar to equal the size of a bicuspid tooth (approximately 6 to 7 mm).  Try to maximize the posterior anchorage so that the left cuspid will advance forward and the midline will shift towards to the right approximately 3 mm back on to the facial midline as well as develop AP symmetry in the lower arch. 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 5 to 6 mm.
Bilateral mandibular coronoidotomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry.
Place implants on the left maxillary and mandibular arch in the bicuspid spaces. 
Place crowns on the implants. 


