JAMIE STEINER									10/29/2009

Jamie is 33 years old and referred by Dr. Andrea Quaroni.  Jamie’s problems began in about May 1999 when she got her face stepped on by a horse.  She lost 7 teeth.  There were no other fractures of the facial area except for the alveolar fractures and the 7 teeth.  She may have injured her joints at that time.  She had orthodontics done from 2006 to 2007 in preparation and post retention for orthognathic surgery which was performed on October 10, 2006, by Dr. Quaroni where maxillary and mandibular osteotomies were performed.  When the procedure was performed, she was having no pain or symptoms at that time.  In the spring of 2007 after she got her braces off was when she first began having TMJ symptoms on the right side.  She subsequently developed problems on the left side as well.  Currently, her left TMJ symptoms are worse than the right side.  In July 2007, she had physical therapy, and in October 2007 she began splint therapy.  In September 2009, she had left TMJ arthrocentesis.  She currently takes Klonopin 0.5 mg tablets at night.  She currently takes nothing for pain.  

Jamie gets headaches about one time a week at about a level of 5 in the temporal areas bilaterally and on top of her head.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, worse on the left side than the right side.  Average daily pain is at a level of 4.  Jaw function at 7, diet at 4, disability at 3.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She does get pain that radiates down through her neck and shoulders.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night and also some during the day.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Jamie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline and so is the mandibular dental midline.  The chin is shifted just slightly off to the right side about 2 to 3 mm.  Jamie has a cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about a good 2 mm higher than the left side at the cuspid area.  In her centric relation, her mandibular dental midline is almost 3 mm off to the right side and chin is about 3 to 4 mm off to the right side.  The mandibular dental midline may be just slightly to the right of the chin midline.  In profile, Jamie has good facial balance vertically and anteroposteriorly.  She has very good definition of the mandibular chin neckline and chin neck angle.  In the lower arch, she has 5 implants in the mandible to replace the missing teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  In the lower arch, she has her natural teeth from the right second bicuspid through second molar and on the left side from second bicuspid through the second molar.  On the right side, she has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship by about a good 4 mm and on the left side she is probably 2 mm Class II.  She tends towards a buccal crossbite on the left side and tends towards a posterior crossbite on the right side.  She has an overjet of about 2 mm and open bite of probably 1 mm.  Intranasally, she has deviation of the nasal septum off towards the left side and at the base of the septum a spur off to the right side.  Turbinates are mildly enlarged.  She does not claim any difficulties breathing through her nose.  She has had her wisdom teeth removed.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the TMJs and masseter muscles.  On opening, she has some fine crepitus in the left joint, but the right side functions smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 27 mm and she could open about 20 mm without significant pain.  Excursion movement to the right 1 mm, to the left 7 mm.  
  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of bone plates in the mandible from previous sagittal splits osteotomies.  She has got five implants.  She has got a Class III molar relationship bilaterally.  She has got four bone plates with a micro mini plate system with 6 bone plates on each of plates adjacent to the nasal rim and what appears to be 6 screws and plates on each side in the zygomatic area.  Joints look arthritic with loss of greater volume on the right side than the left side.  Right sinuses appears a little bit more full. 
Coronal view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged and the septum is deviated off towards the left side.  There is sinusitis present in the right maxillary sinus.  
Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  There is sinusitis in the right maxillary sinus.  
Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show significant degenerative changes in the joints with erosion through the back of the head of the condyle and a posterior osteophyte.  The top of the condyle is not smooth.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is decreased posterior joint space and superior joint space.  It appears that there could be bone-on-bone contact.  
Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that quite deformed with significant loss of condylar volume.  There is some anterior beaking present.  The condyle is narrow anteroposteriorly.  There is some decreased joint space. 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has some erosions in the head and a little bit of sclerosis.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 3 or 4 mm.   
Right TMJ coronal tomograms show significant loss of condylar volume vertically and mediolaterally.  There is a little lateral osteophyte sticking out.  There is decreased joint space.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 or 4 mm.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has got a skeletal and occlusal Class II cuspid relationship.  With the mandible in centric relation, her oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm at the base of the tongue and at about 6 mm at the soft palate level.  She does have her head flexed backwards so this may affect the airway quality some. 

Basic diagnoses for Jamie would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with greater condylar resorption on the right side than the left side. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations, non-reducing and non-salvageable.
Class II cuspid relationship being worse on the right side than the left side.
Anterior open bite.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side, missing 7 lower anterior teeth with replacement of 5 of those teeth with osteointegrated implants.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch. 
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Consider placement of arch bars if patient elects not to have orthodontic appliances placed.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
