SHERRY STARRICK								11/17/2008

Sherry is 58 years old.  She is referred by Dr. Duane Keller.  Her prosthodontist who has been managing her for the past 20+ years is Dr. James K. Richey, 115 W. Union Street, Marion, IL 62959, phone number (618) 997-4514.

Sherry has been treated for myofascial pain problems since 1986.  She has been treated with splints since that time.  She had splints constructed in 1986, 1987, 1993, 1998, 2002, 2005, and 2008.  She began dental reconstruction in about 2002 and has had crowns placed on most of the teeth.  She has had no other specific treatment for the TMJ issue.  In July 2008, her situation got significantly worse when she developed significant difficulties eating, chewing, and even with relatively minimal jaw function.  

Sherry currently takes the following medications:

Relafen 500 mg 2 caps b.i.d. 
Neurontin 300 mg q.i.d.
Caltrate 600 mg q.d.
Extra Strength Tylenol 500 mg 2 tablets p.r.n. pain.

She gets occasional earaches, has tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her elbows, knees, feet, ankles, toes, shoulders, and her neck at C5-C6.  In 2005, she had a right toe joint replacement and in 2007 she had an implant in the left great toe.  Her shoulders bother her and she has had manipulations in her shoulders.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night time.  She has depression likely related to the pain and dysfunctional factors.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 10, diet at 10, disability at 7.  Headaches are a level of 9 and occur primarily in the back of the head and behind the left eye.  These usually occur early mornings from about 3:00 to 9:00 a.m.  

Primary concerns that Sherry has include the following:

Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches. 
Pain through the jaw muscles. 
Significantly decreased jaw function.
Sherry also notes some changes in her bite relationship.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Sherry has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is probably -1 to 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm to the left.  Chin, however, is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, Sherry has fairly good facial symptom.  Intraorally, Sherry has crowns on all of the teeth back through the second bicuspids.  The first and second molar on the right side and the second molar on the left side are uncapped.  In upper arch, she appears to have caps on all the teeth except for the second molar on the right side.  She has an end-on Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and a full Class III cuspid relationship on the left side.  She has an anterior deep bite of probably 4 to 5 mm.  She is missing either a bicuspid or a molar on the mandibular left side.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  Uvula is moderately elongated.  The soft palate may be mildly elongated.  The fascial pillars are asymmetric with the right side showing a little bit more constricture than the left side.  Tonsils appear probably relatively okay except maybe the right one is a little bit enlarged.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off to the left side toward the medial and anterior aspect.  The turbinates appear moderate in size on the right side, but smaller on the left side.  Sherry complains of no nasal airway obstructive problems.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters, retromandibular area, and significantly greater pain in the shoulders and the TMJs.  She has some mild tenderness in the posterior neck area.  Maximal incisal opening is 29 mm with about 1 mm of excursion movements.  Jaw joints seem to function fairly smoothly, but she does have a glitch in the right joint.
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the four third molars and the mandibular left first molar.  She has crowns on practically all the teeth except for the mandibular right first and second molars and the left second molar.  She has root canals on the maxillary first and second molars bilaterally and the mandibular left first bicuspid.  The sinuses appear clear.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints.  A little bit of vertical difference in the height of the mandible with the bony height of the body on the right side being slightly greater than the left side.  
Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  She has a spur off the septum towards the left side in the bony area.  Right nasal airway appears wide open.  The left side appears to be a little more constricted.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows that she has arthritic changes there and sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  The joint space is vertically and posteriorly significantly reduced.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.    
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some anterior beaking and some arthritic changes.  In one view, it appears that the joint space is decreased.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  On opening, there is severely reduced translatory movements.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she does have a skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship.  However, the oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal. 

Basic diagnoses for Sherry would be as follows:    

Atypical connective tissue autoimmune disease with poly-arthritic involvement.
Bilateral temporomandibular joint severe arthritis secondary to atypical connective tissue autoimmune disease. 
Severe TMJ pain. 
Severe headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
Significantly limited jaw function. 
Significant masticatory dysfunction. 
Class II end-on occlusion on the right side with Class II occlusion on the left side. 
Nocturnal and daytime clenching and bruxism. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Evaluation by rheumatologist.
Medications:  Klonopin 1 mg q.h.s. to control nocturnal clenching and bruxism.
CT scan of jaws and joint joints for construction of 3-D model.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). 
Postsurgical management as necessary to control her pain, dysfunction, and rehabilitate her jaw function.


