LILI SMITH										11/19/2008

Lili is 14 years old.  Referred by Dr. William Schmohl.  Lili was born with Apert’s syndrome.  In 1994, she had cranial surgery to release the cranial sutures.  Later on that same year, she had an additional surgery to release the lambdoids.  In 1997, she had her adenoids removed.  In 2003, she mid-face and forehead advancement.  In 2004, she had her tonsils removed.  Up until 2003, Lili had severe sleep apnea problems and was actually on a BiPAP machine.  Following the mid face advancement and the subsequent tonsillectomy, Lili is pretty free of the sleep apnea problems.  She breathes unassisted and is doing very well from that standpoint.  Lili has no TMJ problems or TMJ symptoms.  She takes Accutane and that is the only medication.  She still has some mild snoring.  She has to sleep on her side.  If she tries to sleep on her back, her has breathing difficulties.  She breathes through her mouth at night when she is sleeping.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Lili has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  The intercanthal distance is about 45 mm.  The papillary distance is almost 70 mm.  The nose is deviated off towards the left side than back closer on to the midline.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -4 mm.  In profile view, Lili has AP maxillary deficiency and some AP mandibular deficiency as well.  Intraorally, Lili is missing the mandibular first bicuspids.  She has residual space on the right side between the cuspid and the second bicuspid.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  Mandibular left cuspid is 1 or 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  In the upper arch, she is missing some permanent teeth, perhaps the maxillary left central incisor, and she has a significantly deformed maxillary right central incisor.  It appears that she is missing the maxillary right cuspid and on the left side the cuspid and lateral incisor are transpositioned.  She appears to be missing a bicuspid on each side, but has the first and second molars present.  She has a massive amount of soft tissue in the palatal area.  Oropharyngeal tissues looks healthy, but the uvula is extremely small and the soft palate is moderately short in AP length.  Facial pillars appear to constrict relatively normally.  Tonsils are absent.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated far off towards to the left side and, in fact, displaces the nose towards the left side.  It obstructs intranasally in just putting the nasal scope in.  Turbinates appears to be relatively normal in size, but can only see anteriorly and the left nasal airway is blocked off mainly because of the septum.  There is a spur off the right side of the septum that appears to be blocking some of the airway on the right side.  Apparently, following the mid facial surgery, the nasal dorsum was fairly straight, but has significantly shifted since that time.  Joints function smoothly.  Lili is essentially a full Class III occlusal relationship.  She has an anterior open bite of probably about 2 mm and a reverse overjet of about close to 8 mm.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  The condyles appear to be postured forward in the fossa.  She has bone plates in the maxillary and zygoma area.  She has an anterior open bite. 
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly, but there appears to be reasonable joint space.  Articular eminence is relatively normal in inclination.    
Right TMJ was essentially missed in the tomogram.  It is very difficult to identify the right joint.  There appears to be reasonably good translation of both joints.
Waters view shows a severe deviation of the bony nasal septum.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  It appears that there is some significant nasal airway obstruction.  Sinuses were quite small in the maxilla.  She has bone plates in the temporal areas, nasal frontal area, zygoma, and maxillary areas.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has AP maxillary deficiency.  It appears that she has decreased oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue where it measures about 7 mm and at the soft palate level which measures about 6 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Lili would be as follows:    

Apert’s syndrome. 
AP maxillary vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular prognathism. 
Hypertelorism. 
Telecanthism. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Deviated nasal septum.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Impacted 3rd molars x4. 
Decrease oropharyngeal airway dimension.
Severe hyperplastic tissue on the palate.

Recommended treatment at this time would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Continue aligning and leveling the maxillary arch.  
Continue aligning and leveling the mandibular arch.  
Surgery.
Maxillary osteotomies to bring the maxilla forward in a counterclockwise direction so that the incisor tip is advanced about 8 to 9 mm and at the osteotomy site only about 3 mm.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4. 
Nasal septoplasty to create a functional nasal airway. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to reconstruct the maxillary occlusion.
Cranial facial surgery to correct hypertelorism and telecanthism. 
External nasal reconstruction. 
Reduction of hyperplastic palatal tissue to create more room for the tongue.

