MELISSA SMITH 									05/26/2009

Melissa is 23 years old.  Referred by Dr. Robert Westbrook, 6405 N Navarro St, Victoria, TX, 77904.  Dr. Westbrook is an orthodontist in Victoria.  She has had some previous sinus surgery for removal of extremely large cysts.  This was done in July 1987.  She has had an upper right pulmonary lobectomy.  She has ear tubes and mastoid surgery as well as dental work.  She has a seizure disorder.  She also has asthma and some allergy problems.  She takes the following medications:

Depakene 250 mg/5 cc, 4 cc 3 times a day. 
Klonopin 0.5 mg per tablet 1 tablet 3 times a day.
Nasonex p.r.n. 

She apparently has no joint issues.  She gets occasional headaches about a level of 2 that occur in the forehead area.  She says she does not clench her teeth.  She does get some back pain that may be due to scoliosis.  She has no TMJ pain.  She has no restriction in what she can chew.   She has difficulties pronouncing words because the teeth and lips do not fit together properly.  She does not snore nor have any daytime tiredness nor sleep apnea.  She does breath some through her mouth when she sleeps because of the dental protrusion.  She apparently did not have this problem in earlier years.  She does have a controlled seizure disorder.  Melissa to date has had no jaw or dental treatment.  No impressions are available as she could not tolerate having impressions taken. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  Upper lip length is 18 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is approximately 7-8 mm.  In profile, she has a little fullness in the upper lip by probably 3-4 mm.  Chin may be a little bit deficient by about 6 mm.  She has a lip incompetence of about 8 mm.  Melissa has a full Class II cuspid relationship.  She has about a 4 mm anterior open bite.  She has a 12 mm overjet.  She hits primarily on her cuspid and molar teeth.  As best I could see, the oropharyngeal tissues looks reasonably healthy.  As best I can see, the turbinates appear relatively normal.  I do not believe there is any significant nasal airway obstruction, although there could be.  Columella is moderately wide.  Nostrils may be just slightly narrow.  She has no history of snoring, no history of daytime somnolence or sleep apnea problems.    

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of impacted maxillary third molars, but mandibular third molars are not present.  She may have something in the right sinus such as a mucous retention cyst.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints.  
Coronal view shows 2 cysts in the right sinus, but the left one appears reasonably clear.  Turbinates appear actually fairly large.  
Axial view likewise shows fairly large turbinates and 2 cysts in the right sinus.    
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  There appears to be reasonably good joint space, although the posterior joint space may be just slightly decreased.  
Right TMJ condyle appears to have fairly good morphology as does the fossa.  There appears to be good joint space present.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows that there is some decreased joint space over at the medial aspect of the joint, but otherwise the joint space looks fairly well balanced.  Likewise, the right side in coronal view shows some decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint.  Joint morphology itself looks fairly good. 
Lateral cephalometric analysis shows that Melissa has a high occlusal plane angle profile for the upper arch.  She has a maxillary alveolar dental protrusion.  Oropharyngeal airway is about 8 mm at the soft palate level and about 7-8 mm at the base of the tongue. 

Basic diagnoses for Melissa would be as follows:    

Vertical maxillary hyperplasia. 
AP maxillary hyperplasia. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Class II occlusion.
Anterior open bite of 4 mm.
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. 
Hypertrophied turbinates creating nasal airway obstruction. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Impacted maxillary third molars x2.
Severe lip incompetency.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Extract maxillary second bicuspids. 
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch closing the extraction space.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly approximately 7 mm. 
Possible mandibular ramus osteotomies to align the mandible with the maxilla.  
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Removal of impacted maxillary third molars. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
