DAVID STANLEY									09/15/2009

David is 55 years old and referred by Dr. Hilton Israelson.  In December 2008, David had all 4 of his third molars extracted.  Following surgery, he had significant change in sensation to the left side of his tongue.  The sensation to the left side of the tongue has improved since the initial occurrence.  David tends to chew food on his right side because he is afraid of biting his tongue on the left side.  He said food has a totally different feeling and sensation to him compared to before surgery.  He cannot taste as well as he could before the injury.  To sharp sensation, David actually had hypersensitivity in the left side of the tongue.  To dull stimulation, he could not feel quite as well on the left side as the right side.  David states that the left side of his tongue is more sensitive to warm foods or fluids as compared to the right side.  He has good tongue mobility with relatively symmetric movements.  To palpation, along the inner surface of the mandible and adjacent to the internal oblique ridge which is where I believe his nerve is located, it does cause some pain when I palpate the area.  It does not particularly cause any electrical shocks to the tongue.  

I discussed with David the findings that he has had a nerve injury that now is causing some hypersensitivity and decreased taste sensibility.  However, I did explain to him to attempt a nerve repair could render his situation significantly worse than it currently is.  If a nerve exploration and repair would be done, he would almost be sure to lose any chance of regaining taste sensation.  He could have significantly worsened sensation and pain.  I did tell him that the lingual nerve has a poor prognosis than almost any other nerve in the body in reference to repair prognosis.  I answered all the questions he had at this time.  I strongly suggested that he wait and give a little more time to see if better improvement will occur.  I suggested he return to see me in about 6 months. 

Basic diagnosis for David would be neuropraxia of the left lingual nerve.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Continue to monitor progression of return of sensation. 
Consider surgery only if symptoms become significantly worse and unbearable. 
Consider medications if the injured nerve becomes significantly hypersensitive and/or painful.
