ALEX SWANSTON									11/17/2009

Alex is 21 years old and is a self referral.  He is in good health with no major medical problems except for his ongoing jaw problems.  In January 2009, Alex was pursuing some cosmetic dentistry and had his maxillary 10 teeth prepped and crowns placed.  He immediately developed pain and headaches that he felt were in the sinus area afterwards.  He went to another dentist, Dr. Gary Alhedef who told him his teeth are too big.  He made a splint and this helped for a while.  The splint was then cut back and orthodontic appliances placed to try to close the bite posteriorly, but this increased his problems and Alex became aware of the TMJ problems at that time.  Dr. Alhedef recommended full mouth reconstruction so temporaries were placed on the upper and lower teeth.  Alex is afraid to proceed on from this point relative to the dental reconstruction until the pain problems are controlled.  

He has constant pain and constant pain in his jaw muscles.  He has some hyperfunction of the frontalis muscles and gets some spasms in the eyelids and lip areas.  

Alex gets headaches at above a level of 2 that are predominantly in the frontal area that he relates to sinus factors.  He rates his daily TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 2, jaw function and diet at 0, disability at 6.  He currently takes an antibiotic and about 6 Aleve per day. He gets some right-sided earaches occasionally, has right-sided tinnitus, and has moderate occurrence of vertigo.  No other joints bother him.  He does have chronic sinus infection problems.  He is aware of clenching and bruxing his teeth at night and also does it some during the day, although he tries to control it during the day.  Alex’s primary concerns are as follows:

Chronic pain in the jaws.
Muscle fatigue in the face.
Facial muscle spasms.  

He has worn his splint for about 3 months in the past that did help some, but he has had the full mouth reconstruction done.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Alex has good facial symmetry and balance.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are fairly well aligned to the facial midline.  In profile view, Alex has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Alex has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars, but all have temporary crowns on them.  He has a little gingival cleavage around the two central incisors.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars with temporary crowns on them.  Alex has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with about 3 mm deep bite anteriorly.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Intranasally, there is some deviation of the septum and turbinates appear moderately enlarged, but there appears to be a passable airway.  To palpation, he has moderate pain over the right TMJ and mild pain over the left TMJ and right masseter muscles.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Incisal opening is 61 mm, excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction.

Alex usually feels the best in the morning when he gets up, but within 3 hours he will start to get his muscle spasms and pains either in the head or in the TMJ area.  
Basic diagnoses for Alex would be as follows:    

Reactive arthritis right TMJ. 
Myositis affecting the muscles of mastication and muscles of facial expression.
Full mouth reconstruction with temporary crowns on all of his primary teeth.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Medications. 
Klonopin 1-mg tablets, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s. 
Celebrex 200-mg tablets, 1 tablet q.d.
Magnesium 250-mg tablets, 2 tablets in the morning and 2 tablets in the evening. 
Discontinue caffeine. 
The patient to call in 2 weeks to inform me of his progress.
Consider possible TMJ surgery. 
