SARAH SOULIER									01/05/2009

Sarah is 15 years old.  Referred by Dr. James Dyer, 617 Ball Street, Grapevine, TX 76051.  Sarah’s TMJ problems began when she was about 13 years old and she first noticed it while she was chewing gum.  She had previously had orthodontics done in the second and third grade and then orthodontics again in the sixth and seventh grade.  She would have been age 12 to 13 with the second round of orthodontics.  She was placed in a splint when she was about 13 years old because of the developing TMJ problems.  The only medication she currently takes is Aleve p.r.n.  

Sarah gets headaches about three times a week that she rates at a level of 9 that occur predominantly in the right frontal and temporal areas as well as on the top of the head.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 9, diet at 5, and disability at 7.  She gets earaches on her left side occasionally and vertigo occasionally, but no tinnitus.  The only other joints that bother her are her knees.  She does a lot of dance and drill team.  She previously did play sports such as volleyball and basketball in fifth through eighth grade.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at night. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, she has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 4 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Nasal tip is off to the right side about 3 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is off towards the right side about 1 mm and the chin is probably about 2 to 3  mm off towards the right side.  In profile view, upper lip is retruded about 4 to 6 mm and chin is retruded about 20 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well defined.  She does have a head postured forward neck position.  Sarah may have occasional mild snoring.  She may have mild to moderate daytime somnolence.  She has no overt sleep apnea problems.  She has a mild sleep disorder and wakes up several times at time at night.  She is predominantly a mouth breather at night time.  Intraorally, Sarah has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  The teeth are nicely aligned and level.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer.  She has very thin attached gingiva around the lower central incisor.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilateral being about 3 mm Class II with about a 3-mm overjet.  She has an anterior open bite of about 2 to 3 mm.  She appears to occlude predominantly on her second molars on the right side and the left side perhaps on the second bicuspid, first and second molars.  Intranasally, the septum appears to be deviated a little bit off towards the left side at its base.  The turbinates appears moderately enlarged.  Columella is moderately wide and nostrils are moderately narrow.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 3 mm higher than the right side.  There is some AP asymmetry in the lower arch with the right cuspids in both upper and lower jaw being posteriorly positioned about 1 to 1.5 mm compared to the left side.  To palpation, she has some moderate pain over the TMJs and milder discomfort over the masseters and the right retromandibular area.  Maximal opening is 30 mm but only about 18 mm without discomfort.  Excursion movement to the right is 5 mm, the left 9 mm.     
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth.  The four third molars are impacted.  There is significant deviation of the nasal septum off towards the left side, particularly back in the bony aspect of the septum.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  She appears to have small condyles bilaterally with the right side being smaller than the left side.  
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost some vertical volume.  The condyle appears moderately wide.  There is decreased superior joint space.  Lateral rim of the fossa is relatively shallow.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic and appears to have lost vertical volume.  Joint space is somewhat constricted. 
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle is quite small in mediolateral width.  There appears to be a little bit of anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is decreased posterior and superoposterior joint space.  There is some anterior beaking present.  
Left TMJ tomogram sagittal view shows a condyle that appears quite small anteroposteriorly and appears to have lost vertical volume.  Articular eminence is relatively steep.  Joint space may be slightly decreased posteriorly.  There is some significant flattening of the head of the condyle, particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  
Coronal x-ray shows the sinuses are clear.  She has huge turbinates, particularly on the right side.  The nasal septum is deviated significantly off to the left side and appears to obliterate the major portion of the airway, particularly at the inferior aspect of the nasal cavity.  In the axial views, the turbinates appear quite large.
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Sarah has a posterior vertical maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency.  She has a high mandibular plane angle and Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship and anterior open bite.  Oropharyngeal airway has somewhat constricted with an AP dimension of only about 5 mm at the base of the soft palate and at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnoses for Sarah would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction compatible with adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR). 
AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia. 
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Anterior open bite. 
High occlusal plane angle. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm (normal 11 mm).
Transverse cant in the maxillary arch with the right side being 3 mm higher than the left side.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
Impacted third molars x4.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Deviated nasal septum.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Place brackets on the second molars, but do not extend the arch wire to the second molars at this time.  Can use bonded brackets on all the teeth.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and down graft it posteriorly. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance it forward approximately 20 mm.  
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Partial turbinectomies. 
Nasal septoplasty.
3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

