B165
B165 is 21 years old. They were actually referred by the XXXXs. B165 is in good health except for her jaw problems. She is not sure exactly when her jaw problems began, but the family became aware of a problem at least by the age of 15 of unknown etiology. She had orthodontics for about a year and half from age of 13 to 15. She has new braces on beginning 3 months ago. She gets a headache just about once a month at about a level of 4, but the rest of the time she has no real headache problems. She rates her TMJ pain at 2, average pain at 2, jaw function at 1, diet at 3, disability at 3. She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. She does occasionally get some hearing loss in the right ear. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime. She has severe snoring, probably moderate daytime somnolence, and probable moderate sleep apnea. She is predominantly a mouth breather day and night.

In frontal view, B165 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 5 mm on the right and 4 mm on the left. The maxillary dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left side. The nasal tip is about 1 mm off to the right side. The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the left and chin is probably 3 mm to the left. In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 3 to 4 mm and the mandible is retruded about 25 mm. The chin neckline is continuous with no real development of a chin neck angle. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars in position. Teeth are actually fairly well aligned and leveled. She has some stripping of the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars present. She has appliances only on her lower teeth including all of the teeth except the second bicuspids. She has an end-on Class II cuspid relationship bilaterally being probably 3 mm Class II. She has an over jet of about 2 mm. She has about a 0.5 mm vertical overbite relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues all look relatively normal. Intranasally, there may be a little bit of deviation of the septum off towards the right side. The turbinates appear moderate in size. She had a head postured forward neck position. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the TMJs and retromandibular area. The maximal incisal opening is 42 mm, opening without discomfort 25 mm. The excursion movement to the right is 7 mm, to the left 6 mm. There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1.5 mm higher than the right side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. The rest of the teeth are present. There is essentially an absence of the mandibular condyles. The bony septum appears reasonably straight. There is some antigonial notching.

Coronal view shows deviation of the septum off towards the right and then off towards the left at the base of the septum. The right turbinate is quite large in this view and the turbinates seem to block a portion of the airway. The sinuses have increased thickness of the sinus lining.

Axial view shows that the turbinates are enlarged, particularly on the right side, with a little deviation of the septum off towards the left side. The sinuses both at this level appear to have thickened sinus membranes and probable sinusitis.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is severely arthritic with severe condylar resorption. The articular eminence is essentially absent. There is increased vertical joint space.

Right TMJ sagittal view likewise shows a condyle that is essentially totally degenerated and resorbed. The articular eminence is flat. It appears there could even be a perforation to the fossa into the middle cranial fossa. The articular eminence has been resorbed as well.

Left TMJ coronal view shows that the lateral rim of the fossa has been resorbed as well. There is no virtually no vertical stop on the ramus area. Actually, there appears to be an extension of the lateral rim of the fossa where there may be some bone-on-bone contact.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is severely resorbed. The lateral rim of the fossa likewise where the condyle is functioning has very little support. Back in the actual fossa area, there is no condyle as the condyle is postured anterior on the articular eminence or in front of it.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that her condyles actually are functioning completely anterior to the articular eminence and are not in the fossa at all. The maxilla appears slightly AP deficient but vertical hyperplastic but posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia. The mandible is retruded in a clockwise direction. She has a severe skeletal Class II jaw relationship. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm at the soft palate level and 4 to 5 mm at the base of the tongue. The soft palate appears to have relatively reasonable length. She has AP microgenia and a high occlusal plane angle.

Basic diagnoses for B165 would be as follows:
Bilateral severe mandibular condylar resorption.
Total disarticulation of mandible condyles with displacement into the temporal fossas.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
AP microgenia.
Class II end-on occlusion. High occlusal plane angle of 25 degrees (normal 8 degrees).
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Sleep apnea.
Periodontal defects lower anterior arch. Impacted maxillary third molars x2.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Gingival graft to anterior mandible.
2. Presurgical orthodontics: a.	Continue to align and level maxilla arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b.	Align and level mandibular arch, but slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing.
3. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
4. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ and mandibular reconstructions with mandibular advancement using TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction, down grafting the posterior aspect 8 mm. c.	Bilateral coronoidotomies. d.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. f.	Surgical removal of impacted maxillary third molars x2. g.	Medpor implant to anterior mandible.
5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B165 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is extremely narrow mediolaterally. I really do not see any good definition of the condyle. There is tremendous destruction of the condyles. The lateral rim of the fossa is flat.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes and resorption. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. There is not much but there appears to be soft tissue present within the joint space bilaterally.

In sagittal view, it is hard to even find the ramus or condyle at all on the right side. It is almost impossible to identify any condylar structures in these joints. It appears on the lateral view that there may be some bone on the left TMJ, but there are significant degenerative changes and resorption of the articular eminences with the remnants of the condyle functioning anterior to the fossas and almost beneath the articular eminences.

