B171
B171 is 18 years old, a self referral. The only medication he takes is sulfa methoxazole TMT 1 tablet b.i.d. B171's problems began when he was 17 years old and when he had his third molars extracted. Following extraction of his third molars, B171 began developing headaches, TMJ pain, pain through his jaws, and difficulty with jaw function. A splint was made for him last year, but was of no help to him. He has had no other treatment for his TMJ problems. B171 has had previous orthodontics with braces roughly from the age of 12 to 15.

B171 rates his headaches at a level of 5 that occur in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area predominantly. He rates his TMJ everyday pain to about a level of 10, average daily pain at 9, jaw function at 9, diet at 6, disability at 9. He gets severe bilateral earaches, moderate tinnitus, and moderate vertigo. Other joints that bother him include his knees and his spine. He does have some problems with his feet and has to wear special shoes.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B171 has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm. In profile view, B171 has fairly good facial balance. Intraorally, B171 has all of his lower teeth present back to the second molars. He has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch. There is a little bit of spacing between the cuspids and first bicuspids. He has adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has veneers on the central incisors. He is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. He has an anterior deep bite of about 1.5 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal. Intranasally, turbinate on the left side looks a little bit enlarged, but on the right side it looks relatively normal. Septum looks relatively normal. Oropharyngeal tissues looks normal. To palpation, he has severe pain in the retromandibular area right below the ears and in the TMJ area. He has moderate pain to palpation in the temporalis muscles and the masseter muscles. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly, but he could periodically elicit an audible pop that can occur on both sides. Maximal incisal opening is 66 mm. Excursion movement to the right about 11 mm and to the left 12 mm. He could generate periodic audible clicks in the jaw joint, but with routine movements the joints seem to function reasonably smoothly. His occlusion actually fits together better than in the photographs that we took today.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Coronal view shows that he has moderately enlarged turbinates. Sinuses appear clear. The septum appears a little bit wide in some areas. Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged. There is a little septal spur off to the left side. Sinuses appear clear. Panorex radiograph shows the absence of all 4 third molars and the presence of a 3 x 3 retainer. Sinuses appear clear. No other significant pathology is seen. Condylar heads and necks appear elongated. Left TMJ sagittal views show a condyle with some slight anterior beaking and perhaps some slight flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space appears reasonably balanced. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some slight anterior beaking and a little bit of flattening on the head of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space looks fairly well balanced. Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. There is decreased lateral joint space. Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. There is significantly decreased lateral joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa in both fossas curves inferiorly about 1-2 mm.

Basic diagnoses for B171 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ medially displaced articular discs. Mandibular hyperplasia. Severe TMJ pain. Severe headaches. Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Surgery: Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors and arthroplasty.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization. Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.

I feel this will get us the best opportunity to eliminate his severe headache and pain problems.
B171 MRI AGE: 18/M
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. The disc appears to be medially displaced. The condyle may be a little bit enlarged. There is significantly decreased vertical joint space. The disc also appear to be slightly anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is fairly wide and enlarged. There is significantly decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa is flat. The disc appears to be medially displaced. The disc also appear to be slightly anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condylar head and neck that appears elongated. Articular eminence is fairly steep. The articular disc is not well seen out laterally, but over medially it appears to be in a normal anteroposterior position. This could be compatible with a medially displaced disc. No significant inflammatory response seen. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc appears to translate well with the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows out laterally there is not much evidence of discal tissue, but more medially the disc appears to be in normal position. There was some flattening in the anterior head of the condyle. No significant inflammatory process seen. On opening, there is fairly good translation of condyle and the disc is in a reduce position. The condylar head and neck appear elongated.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ medially displaced articular discs. Elongated condylar head and neck compatible with condylar hyperplasia.

