B172
B172 is 42 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX and also by B172's father, Dr. XXXX. B172's jaw joint problems began he was about 22 years old when he went for some chiropractic treatment ,and the chiropractor manipulated his jaw and since that time he has had some significant TMJ joint problems. B172 pain is worse side is the right side, but he has some symptoms with the left side as well.

Primary concerns that B172 has at this time in reference to his jaw situation are:
Pain in the TMJs, right side worse than the left.
Bite is off.
Difficulties eating and chewing.

He currently only takes Norco and takes this at night at times primarily for a torn rotator cuff in the right shoulder. The only previous treatment for this condition that B172 has had is his father made a bite splint for him that he has had for somewhere around 4 to 5 years. B172 has no significant problems with headaches. He rates his TMJ pain at about a level of 5, average daily pain at 1, jaw function at 7, diet at 0, disability at 1. He is able to reasonably well control his pain and dysfunction by limiting the use of his jaws. He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. Other joints that bother him include his right shoulder and his right foot. He is aware of clenching and bruxism at night time and states that the splint does help him in that regard.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B172 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about -1. The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all fairly well aligned with each other. In profile view, B172 has fairly good facial balance. He may have just some slight AP maxillary and mandibular retrusion, but not too significant. Intraorally, B172 has all of his teeth back through the second molars present. He has some crowns on the posterior teeth. The teeth appear nicely aligned and leveled. He has good attached gingiva of the lower arch. In the upper arch, likewise he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has an end-on incisor relationship with slight Class III occlusal tendency being probably about 2 to 3 mm Class III. He has an open bite on the right side. He has a tendency towards posterior crossbite particularly on the left side and anterior end-on incisor relationship. Oropharyngeal airways all look relatively normal. At least anteriorly, the turbinates look relatively normal in size. The septum may be deviated slightly to the left side. I do not see any physical obstruction of the nasal airway. To palpation, he has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Opening and closing, he does have some crepitus noises in both joints. Incisal opening is about 44 mm. As he opens, his mandible shifts towards the right side probably about 5 mm. He does have about 9 mm of movement in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows that the B172 has all of his teeth except he is missing his wisdom teeth. Sinuses look relatively clear. Right joint appears some arthritic with some heterotopic bone formation associated with it. Coronal view shows that the left turbinate is quite large while the right one is relatively normal in size. A little bit of a nasal septal deviation, but not too significant and does go off towards the left side. Sinuses look clear. Axial view shows that the left turbinate is quite large. Sinuses are relatively clear. Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking, but not too significant. The articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space looks excessive vertically. Condyle appears slightly postured forward. Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that has anterior beaking and out laterally has some significant osteophytic growth with a relatively large bony development. In the medial direction, there is increased vertical joint space and the condyle may be postured forward slightly. Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There appears to be some increased vertical joint space, but some decreased joint space a the lateral aspect of the joint. Right TMJ coronal view shows that medially there is increased vertical joint space. Out laterally, there is a large osteophytic growth out from the lateral pole of the condyle that extends out beyond the lateral rim of the fossa and occludes against the lateral rim of the fossa with virtually no joint space present. Oropharyngeal airway is quite constricted with an AP dimension of about 6 to 7 mm at the soft palate level and about 5 to 6 mm at the base of the tongue. Basic diagnoses for B172 would be as follows:

Right TMJ severe arthritis with heterotopic and osteophytic bone deposition on the lateral and posterior aspect of the condyle. Right TMJ articular disc dislocation. Possible left TMJ articular disc dislocation. Class III end-on occlusion. Maxillary AP hypoplasia. Mandibular AP hypoplasia. Anterior and left posterior crossbite tendency. Bilateral TMJ pain, being worse on the right side.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Snoring.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
MRI of left and right TMJ. Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch. Surgery (this will be dependent on MRI findings). Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning with ligament repair if discs are still salvageable. Unilateral or bilateral TMJ total joint prostheses (TMJ Concepts system) to slightly posteriorly reposition the mandible or advance it if the airway is to be corrected at the same time, depending on MRI findings. Maxillary osteotomies if the airway is to be corrected by advancing the maxilla about 6 mm. Left inferior partial turbinectomy. Unilateral or bilateral TMJ fat grafts if total joint prostheses are used to reconstruct the joints. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B172 MRI AGE:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. It appears there may be discal tissue displaced medially. The condyle may actually be a little bit narrow in width. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. The disc may also be anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite large and extends well beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. There is bony extension that does light up more than the rest of the condyle. It appears that there may be some medial displacement of the articular disc. The disc may also be anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that a condyle has fairly good morphology. At the lateral aspect of the joint, the disc may be anteriorly displaced, but more medially the disc is in a better position. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Left TMJ on opening shows reasonably good translation of the condyle with the disc in a reduced position. The top of the condyle appears a little bit flat in some of the views. There is actually moderately good translation of the right condyle even with the large osteochondroma extending forward lateral and posterior to the head. There is some slight anterior beaking on the head of the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of difference in shape. Over medially, the disc appears to be in fairly good position, however, out lateral there is a large bony mass compatible with an osteochondroma. The osteochondroma extends lateral and also anterior beneath the articular eminence. The disc loses its visibility towards the lateral aspect of the joint. At the lateral aspect of the joint, the disc is anteriorly displaced relative to the posterior head of the condyle. The osseous growth off the condyle extends superior and posterior off the head and appears to almost impede on the posterior wall of the fossa.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteromedially displaced with early reduction. Right TMJ osteochondroma extending anterior, lateral, and posterior on the head of condyle with the disc anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint.

