B174
B174 is referred by Dr. XXXX.
Primary concerns that B174 has includes the following:
Long-term indications of narrow airway.
Desire to successfully straighten teeth.
Desire to breathe through nose.

B174 is not sure when his jaw joint problems began or the original etiology. He had previous orthodontics when he was about 8 or 9 with a maxillary expander. His current orthodontics began 13 months ago with Dr. BXXXX. B174 apparently had an impacted maxillary right cuspid and he had a primary tooth extracted and the impacted cuspid uncovered and brought down into position. B174 gets headaches predominantly on the right side in the temporal area and in the back of the head that occur about twice a month. He has no overt TMJ pain or myofascial pain or headaches on a usual day. He rates his jaw function, diet, and disability at zero. He takes no medications. He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo or hearing loss. He has no other joint problems. He is not aware of clenching or bruxing.

In frontal view, B174 has some various areas of asymmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth relationship is about 2.5 to 3 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The nose is about 2 mm to the left. The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the left and the chin is slightly to the right about 1 or 2 mm. In profile, the maxilla appears to be about 5 mm AP deficient and the mandible about 10 to 12 mm AP deficient. The chin neckline is a little bit short. Intraorally, B174 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. He has a nice wide arch. The teeth appear to be nicely aligned and leveled. He is fairly weak on the attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has some springs on between the upper laterals and cuspids to open some space and he has about 1 mm of space on each side. He has an anterior cross bite and a left posterior cross bite. On that side, he is fairly close to being in a cross bite. He has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally. He has about 0.5 mm reverse deep bite relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy. Uvula may be a little bit elongated. Intranasally, there may be a little deviation with the nasal septum. The left turbinate appears quite large and filling most of the nasal cavity. On the left side, the turbinate appears normal in size. B174 does have a transverse cant to the occlusal plane with the maxillary right cuspid being about 2 mm higher than the left side and the mandibular right cuspid being 1 mm higher than the left side. On opening, joints seems to be reasonably smooth, but there is an occasional slight glitch in the left side. He has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. The maximal incisal opening is about 54 mm, and excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of impacted four third molars. Nothing else abnormal is seen.
Coronal view shows the left turbinate is quite enlarged. There is some deviation in the nasal septum. Right turbinate appears more normal. Sinus appears clear.

Axial view shows that there is some deviation in the nasal septum. The left turbinate appears enlarged and appears to block the airway whereas the right turbinate appears more normal in size. Sinuses are clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit of sclerosis on the top. There appears to be a little bit of anterior beaking developing. The articular eminence has a relatively soft slope to it. The joint space appears reasonably well balanced. There appears to be a little flattening on the top of the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit of flattening on the top and in some areas there appears to be some sclerosis. The articular eminence has a soft inclination. The joint space appears fairly well balanced and may be slightly decreased posterior.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There is a slight decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint, but otherwise it looks pretty good. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. There appears to be decreased lateral joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are AP deficient, although there is a skeletal Class III and occlusal Class III relationship. There appears to be some vertical difference between the right and left sides.

I have previously done a workup on B174 and the outlined diagnoses and recommended treatment stands as previously reported. I will wait to see the radiologist's impression of the joint situation. Otherwise, the treatment recommendations remain as previously recorded.

Bill, if you could please send me the I-CAT from when you first saw B174 that would be very helpful so I can assess to see if he has active condylar hyperplasia. That would give us a year growth assessment.

B174
I-CAT examination shows the condylar heads and necks are elongated. The joint space looks reasonably good. The left turbinate appears enlarged. The sinuses appear clear. Oropharyngeal airway is constricted and probably somewhere around 4 to 5 mm. Cranio based references, cella and nasion are not included in the radiograph. The bridge of the head and forehead are not included in the radiograph. He has impacted third molars x4. He appears to have a moderately high occlusal plane angle. He has a Class III occlusal relationship, but may have a Class II skeletal relationship. Model analysis shows that he has spacing between the upper cuspids and first bicuspids of about 2 mm on the right side, 1 mm on the left side. He has an accentuated curve of Wilson, particularly on the right side. He has an anterior cross bite and at least a right-sided cross bite. The left side may be a tendency towards an anterior cross bite and potential for bilateral posterior cross bite.

He presents with history of headaches in the right temporal and back of the head at a level of 5 and gets this one to two times per month. He has some popping in his right joint. He has no earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. He rates his headaches at 5, TMJ pain at 0, average daily pain at 0, jaw function, diet and disability all at 0. Primary concerns he has include the following:

Decreased airway.
Wants his teeth straightened and fitting together properly.
Desires to breathe through his nose.
Basic diagnosis for B174 would be:
Rule out bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Right TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction.
AP maxillary posterior vertical and transverse hypoplasia. Mandibular AP hypoplasia. Class III occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
Anterior cross bite.
Increased curve of Wilson, particularly in the right side. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Impacted third molars x4. Hypertrophied turbinate, particularly on the left side. Spacing between the upper cuspids and first bicuspids. Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 to 3 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. MRI of left and right TMJ.
2. Evaluate previous records to determine if active condylar hyperplasia is present.
3. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Retract cuspids back against the bicuspids and can leave residual spacing between the lateral incisors and cuspids to help compensate for the tooth size discrepancy. Try to decrease excessive curve of Wilson in the upper arch, particularly on the right side. b.	Continue to align and level mandibular arch.
4. Surgery. a.	Consider bilateral mandibular high condylectomies if condylar hyperplasia is proven to be present. b.	Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. c.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance in a counterclockwise direction as well as to maximize the occlusal fit. e.	Consider left partial turbinectomy. f.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B174 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly only about 1 to 2 mm. Discal tissue may be anteriorly and medially displaced. The joint space actually looks reasonably good vertically.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. The disc likewise appears to be medially displaced.
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has little changes on the surface with a little bit of flattening on the anterior head and a little tendency towards beaking. Out laterally, the disc is more difficult to see and could be just slightly anteriorly displaced at most lateral aspect of the joint, but more medially the disc appears to be in better position. The articular eminence has a moderate steepness. The disc appears to have fairly good morphology. There appears to be a little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint space. On opening, there is some limitation in translation, although the disc appears to be in a reduced position and there appears to be reasonable translation of the condyle and the disc.

Right TMJ has some flattening on the anterior head and a little tendency towards beaking. Out laterally, the disc is difficult to see and may be indicative of a medial displacement and perhaps an anterior displacement. More medially, the disc appears to be in reasonably good position. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. There may be a little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. On opening, there is some limitation in translation, although the disc appears to be in a reduced position and there appears to be reasonable translation of the condyle and the disc.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular discs medially displaced and anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint. However, there may be no significant clinical symptoms.

