B176
B176 is 44 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. Her dentist is Dr. XXXX. She currently takes the following medications:
Wellbutrin 300 mg XL. Yasmin.
Ambien 10 mg q.h.s.

B176 has been on the Wellbutrin for 7 years.
B176's primary concerns are as follows:
Clicking in the jaw joints. Crossbite. Headaches and TMJ pain.
B176 had orthodontics x2 from the age of 12 to 14 and then from age of 15 to 17. She had a bicuspid extracted from each quadrant. It is unknown when her TMJ problems began and the etiology is unknown. B176 gets headaches about once a week behind the right eye which would include the frontal and temporal area. She rates her TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 4, diet at 0, disability at 0. She gets occasional right-sided earaches, occasional right-sided tinnitus, and she does have some right-sided hearing loss. The only other joints that bother her are her ankles. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night and also during the day. She has had previous nose, sinus, septum, and turbinate work by Dr. XXXX. B176 is not aware of snoring, but she does have moderate daytime somnolence and she is predominantly a mouth breather at night time and also during the day. She is not aware of having any sleep apnea issues.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B176 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. The maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin midline are all fairly well aligned with each other. In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency and some slight AP mandibular deficiency of probably about 4 mm. Chin neckline is a little bit short and chin neck angle is not well defined. She has a slightly head postured forward neck position. Intraorally, she is missing what appears to be probably the first bicuspids in all four quadrants. She is basically a Class I cuspid relationship with bilateral posterior crossbites. She has about a 1 mm overbite and 1 mm overjet. Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal. Intranasally, there is some mucous material that makes it difficult to evaluate, but turbinates appear relatively normal as best as I can see them in the front. The septum may be reasonably straight. She has constricture of the luminal valves. The nostrils are somewhat narrow. Holding the nostrils open with a nasal scope significantly improved her abilities to breathe through her nose. She currently has moderate nasal airway obstruction. Both maxillary and mandibular arches are quite narrow and constricted. To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area. She has a click in the left joint at about 10 mm of opening and 5 mm of closing. The right side seems to function reasonably smoothly. Incisal opening is 47 mm and excursion movements are 7 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and four first bicuspids. She has root canals on mandibular second molars bilaterally and maxillary left first and second molar and right first molar. Coronal view shows that her turbinates have essentially totally removed in the anterior and mid part of the nose, but there is still some inferior turbinate tissue posteriorly but there appears to be adequate airway. Sinuses appear clear. There is a septal perforation present. Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight with just a little deviation off towards the left side. There is some residual inferior turbinate bilaterally at the posterior aspect of the nose. Sinuses appear clear. Left TMJ sagittal view shows condyle that appears to have fairly good morphology with just some slight anterior beaking. Joint space appears reasonably good. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that there is decrease superior and anterior joint space. There appears to be in one view a little erosion on the anterior head of the condyle. The joint spaces seem less on this side compared to the opposite side. Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with moderately good mediolateral width. There is decreased lateral joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves downward probably 4 mm. Right TMJ coronal view shows significantly decreased vertical joint space and almost bone-on-bone contact at the lateral aspect of the joint. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows B176 has some moderate AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 8 mm, but at the base of the tongue there are some areas that measure about 3 mm to 6 mm.

Dental model analysis shows that there is only about 1 mm of vertical overbite relationship. There are bilateral posterior crossbites. The four bicuspids have been removed. The maxilla appears to be approximately 10-12 mm deficient transversely in the second molar area. B176 has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.

Basic diagnoses for B176 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction on the left side and probably nonreducing on the right side. Maxillary significant transverse hypoplasia and to a lesser degree AP hypoplasia. Mandibular AP hypoplasia. Bilateral posterior crossbites.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
TMJ pain. Headaches. Bilateral collapse of the nasal luminal valves.
Nasal airway obstruction. Recommended treatment would be as follows:

MRI of left and right TMJs.
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level mandibular arch. Surgery. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction (method will be dependent on MRI findings).
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and significantly expand it. Reconstruct nasal luminal valves with bone grafts from posterior maxilla.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B176 MRI AGE: 44/F
Left TMJ frontal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width and good vertical height. There is decreased lateral joint space. There disc is medially displaced. There could be some anterior displacement of the articular discs.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width and vertical height. It appears that the joint space is decreased vertically, although there may be some discal tissue in pace. There appears to be some decreased lateral joint space and so the disc also may be medially displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. A little bit of flattening on the anterior head. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. The articular disc is not seen out laterally, bur more medially it appears to be in reasonably good position, although perhaps just slightly forward. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space, but not too significant. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc does reduce into a good position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows out lateral the disc is not as readily identifiable. More medially, there appears to be better imaging of the disc, although the disc appears quite thin in all the views with a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space, but not too significant. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc appears to be in a reduced position and translates well with the condyle.

IMPRESSION:
1. Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc medially displaced with reduction.
2. Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc medially displaced with reduction on opening.

