B178
B178 is 39 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX.
HISTORY OF CURRENT SITUATION. B178 was involved in a motor vehicle accident 33 years ago when he was six years old sustaining injury to his jaws. At the age of 18, he had maxillary and mandibular osteotomies performed by Dr. XXXX. B178 used to get headaches five days a week, but then got a splint and this has helped him significantly to where he has just severe headaches two days a week.

B178 rates his headaches that occur predominantly and frontal and temporal areas particularly behind his eyes that he gets two times a week at about a level of 8. They start in the morning and usually do not subside until about 6 o'clock in the evening. His rates his TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 7, diet at 1, and disability at 8. Primary concerns B178 are:

Migraine headaches. TMJ pain.
Difficulties opening the jaws.
B178 gets occasional earaches on the right side and has continuous tinnitus but no vertigo. He has hearing loss in the right side. The only other joint that really bothers him is his right shoulder. He is aware of clenching at nighttime. The only treatment that he has had to date over the last 21 years is a splint that he received 10 months ago. This has reduced his headaches from five a week to two per week.

He takes the following medications:
Nortriptyline 25 mg q.h.s.
Zomig p.r.n. headache and he takes usually two per week.
Ibuprofen.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B178 has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face. The lower third face is somewhat asymmetric. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline is probably about 2 mm off to the right side as is the mandibular dental midline. Chin is probably about 5 mm off to the right side. Nasal tip is 2-3 mm off to the right side. In profile view, B178 has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably 8 mm and the mandible is retruded by 18-20 mm. The chin neckline is short with no definition of the chin neck angle. Intraorally, it appears that B178 is missing the mandibular cuspid, lateral incisors, and both centrals with the replacement with only three pontics. He has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars on the right side and is missing probably the first bicuspid and both molars. He is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship on the right side and on the left side he has a cuspid that is positioned between the two lower bicuspids. The lower left cuspid is set up as a lateral incisor. He has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 3-4 mm higher than the right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy, but the uvula is moderately enlarged and the soft palate is hyperplastic in an anteroposterior direction. In fact, the uvula just sticks against the posterior pharyngeal wall. Intranasally, the right turbinate is moderately enlarged, but the left one is normal. The septum could be deviated a little bit towards the left side, but not too significant. There does not appear to be any significant nasal airway obstruction. Maximal opening is 37 mm, opening without discomfort 27 mm. Excursion movement to the right is 10 mm, to the left 1 mm. To palpation, he has no pain around the head and neck area. On opening, he has a click in the left joint at about 10 mm and a closing click at about 5 mm. On the right side, the right joints function fairly smoothly today. However, he says that in the morning when he wakes up he has got to open his jaws and he gets a pop in the right joint first thing in the morning and then that is pretty much clear after that. In excursion movements, he also has a click in the left joint and no noise in the right joint, although there is no translation in the right joint.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of four bone plates I the maxilla. There are three screws in each side of the ramus bilaterally. There is some wire fixation in the chin area. He is missing four lower incisors and the left cuspid with a 7-unit bridge replacing three teeth. He has a crown on the mandibular right first molar that has root canal treatment. He is missing the maxillary left first bicuspid and all three molars. Right TMJ joint appears significantly deformed. The left side appears to be arthritic. Axial view shows that the sinuses have fluid or at least inflammation of the sinus membranes as both sinuses appear full. The septum appears reasonably straight, and turbinates appear relatively normal in size with a passable airway. Coronal view shows that the septum may be deviated just slightly to the left side, but turbinates appear relatively normal in size. There is fluid or increased sinus membrane thickening in the floor of both sinuses. Left TMJ sagittal views show a condyle that is very narrow anteroposteriorly. There is a little bit of beaking towards the medial side of the joint as well as in the mid part of the joint. There is decreased posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There is slightly increased anterior joint space. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is severely deformed. There is extreme flattening of the articular eminence. There is decreased vertical joint space, particularly at anterior aspect of the joint. It appears as though there has been a previous fracture inside this joint that has abnormally healed. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space, particularly at the anterior aspect of the condyle. Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There is a significantly decreased vertical joint space and particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint Right TMJ coronal view shows that there is likely a subcondylar fracture with a condyle that ended up being seated a little bit more on the medial side. There is significant down growth of the lateral rim of the fossa with it being probably 5-6 mm below the roof of the fossa. There is decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint and also towards the anterior aspect of the joint.
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that both maxilla and mandible are significantly retruded. The oropharyngeal airway measures about 2 mm at the soft palate level and perhaps about 4 mm at the base of the tongue.

Basic diagnoses for B178 would be as follows:
Right TMJ arthritis and fibrous ankylosis. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia with transverse asymmetry.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and transverse asymmetry. Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 4 mm shorter vertically than the right side. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm (normal 11 mm).
Missing mandibular left cuspid, lateral incisor, central incisor, and right central incisor replaced with a 7-unit bridge with only 3 pontics instead of four.
Missing maxillary left first bicuspid and all molars with the first bicuspid replaced by a 3-unit bridge.
Anteroposterior arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 3-4 mm posterior to the left cuspid in the lower arch and in the upper arch the right cuspid is 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
2.	Surgery.
a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. c.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to address the chin asymmetry. d.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
e.	Bilateral cornoidotomies. f.	Application of mandibular and maxillary arch bars.
g.	Removal of previously placed bone plates in the maxilla x4 and bone screws x14.
3.	Removal of the arch bars.
4.	Restorative dentistry to include the possibility of placing implants to eliminate the bridges and pontics as well as to replace the maxillary left first molar.

B178 MRI AGE: 39/M
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears quite arthritic. It appears somewhat narrow mediolaterally. There is decreased vertical and lateral joint space. The disc appears to be anteriorly and medially displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. The lateral rim of the fossa appears to curve inferiorly quite significantly with virtually no lateral joint space. There could be bone-on-bone contact at the lateral aspect of this joint. There appears to be some discal tissue within the joint, but the medial and lateral joint spaces are quite narrow. There appears to be evidence of a previous subcondylar fracture in this joint.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite narrow anteroposteriorly. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The articular eminence is fairly steep and vertically long in length.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite broad anteroposteriorly and is almost absent the articular eminence with extreme flattening. It appears there is some discal tissue present and evidence of a previous subcondylar fracture. On opening, there is relatively good translation of the left condyle where it comes down beneath the articular eminence but the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. The disc is deformed and short anteroposteriorly and is somewhat thickened with significant decrease in the dimension of the intermediate zone. On opening, there is severely restricted translation of the right joint. There is discal tissue present within the joint space with virtually no movement.

IMPRESSION:
1. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated without reduction and with degenerative deformation.
2. Right TMJ fibrous ankylosis with the disc in position at least in the medial part of the joint, but with significantly decreased joint space medially and laterally with virtually no transitory movements of the joint.
3. The patient likely candidate for bilateral total joint prostheses.

