B180
B180 is 35 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. B180 is in fairly good health. She weighs 180 pounds and is 5 feet 7 inches tall. Her primary concerns are as follows:

Increasing jaw pain, worse on the right side. Headaches with increased frequency. Ear pain, worse on the right side. Increasing difficulty eating and chewing.
Increasing noises with chewing. Increased flare-ups in the jaw area relative to pain and dysfunction. Molars do not touch.

B180 takes the following medications:
Zoloft 75 mg per day. Aleve 1 to 2 tablets 1 to 2 times a day. Motrin 4 tablets per day.
She does have a history of anxiety and depression and is currently under treatment for this. B180's problems began when she was about 24 years old that she feels likely were related to stress. She has really had no treatment, but has had consultations for treatment at ages 22, 29, 33. She rates her headaches at a level of 4 in the temporal and posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 1, jaw function at 4, diet at 3, disability at 2. She gets occasional earaches, no tinnitus and no vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her right knee and her SI joint. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time, but not during the day. She has severe snoring and occasionally is tired during the day, but does not claim any sleep apnea. She has no difficulties sleeping at night.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B180 has fairly good facial symmetry with just some slight increased fullness in the right side. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. In profile view, B180 has fairly good facial balance. Intraorally, B180 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Teeth are fairly well aligned and level, and she appears to have adequate attached gingiva of the lower anterior arch, although thin in some areas. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. B180 is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has an anterior deep bite of about 2.5 mm. B180 has really good bite relationship. She did have orthodontics when she was 15 for about 1 year. To palpation, B180 has no pain around the head and neck area today. However, she states that she frequently gets pain on the right side in the posterior body of the masseter muscle in about the vertical mid portion area. She does not have pain to palpation directly over the joint itself. On opening, B180 has bilateral popping in her joints that is almost audible at about 5-10 mm of opening and pops at about 5 mm of closing. Maximal incisal opening is 47 mm, opening without significant discomfort 35 mm. Excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction. Going into excursion movement, she does have significant clicking and popping in both joints. Oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal and healthy. Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderately enlarged. The septum deviates a little bit off towards the left side anteriorly, and it is difficult to see how it goes posteriorly. B180 previously has had her wisdom teeth removed.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but the rest of the teeth are all present. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged. The condyles appear flattened on the front with a little bit of peaking in the condyles. Coronal view shows that the sinuses are actually clear. Septum appears reasonably straight. Turbinates appear extremely large and appear to obliterate most of the nasal airway. The lateral turbinates are moderately enlarged as well. Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. The septum appears reasonably straight. Turbinates appear quite large and appear to obliterate most of the airway. Left TMJ sagittal tomograms shows that there is some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle and some very slight anterior beaking. There appears to be a decreased posterior joint space with slightly increased vertical joint space at the most anterior part of the condyle. Right TMJ likewise shows flattening on the anterior head of the condyle and some posterior position of the condyle. Articular eminence in both joints are moderately steep. Joint space appears a little bit better balanced on the right side as compared to the left side. Left TMJ coronal tomograms shows a condyle that has some flattening at the lateral pole of the condyle. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space and lateral rim space. Right TMJ coronal tomogram shows a condyle that has a little flattening on the lateral pole of the condyle and a little bit of peaking in the condyle towards the medial aspect of the joint. Joint space superiorly and laterally may be somewhat decreased. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has an oropharyngeal airway space of about 6 mm and at the base of tongue perhaps 5 mm of airway space. It is difficult to tell where the superior surface of the tongue is positioned relative to the hard palate. She does appear as though she has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. The tongue itself does not clinically look excessively large. In the lateral ceph, the soft palate may be somewhat elongated. That coupled with the hypertrophied turbinates may account for the snoring problems that she has.

Basic diagnoses for B180 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction. Mandibular hyperplasia. TMJ pain. Headaches. Bilateral hypertrophied nasal turbinates causing nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch. Surgery. Bilateral TMJ articular discs repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain the Class I occlusion and create space in the joints for the discs. Bilateral partial nasal inferior turbinectomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B180 MRI AGE: 30/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. There appears to be decreased joint space. There is discal tissue medially displaced. Joint space is of greater decrease at the lateral aspect of the joint. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There is decreased lateral joint space. Discal tissue may be anteriorly and medially displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of peaking in the mid part of the condyle. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced, particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. Medially, it is in a little bit better position, but still slightly anterior. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. On opening, there is early reduction and good translation of both the condyle and the articular disc.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with flattening on the anterior head and also a depression in the posterior head in one view at about the midpart of the condyle. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. More medially, it is in a little bit better of position indicative of a rotational displacement similar to the opposite side. There is a slight bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint space. On opening, there appears to be early reduction and good translation of both the condyle and the articular disc. . IMPRESSION:

Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with early reduction. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with early reduction.

