B182
B182 is 47 years old. Primary concerns she has are as follows:
Tightness and pain in jaw and throat.
Pain in side of the head in the temporal area. Vision deterioration.
Difficulties with concentration.
Snoring.
Headaches.
Inability to smile.

She currently takes two medications:
Prozac 20 mg q.d.
Headache medicine that the name is not available today.
She does suffer from depression. Her TMJ problems began when she was about 40, but they did not really become significantly problematic until 3 years ago. Her jaws started to get tight around that time and she was told that she clenching and bruxing her jaws. She was put in splints and has had two over the past 6 years. She does have a history of previous trauma at the age of 7 when she fell out of a tree and also she had a bike accident with face plant at age 29. However, her TMJ problems did not begin until 3 years ago. She went to Germany and had artificial discs placed in her cervical vertebrae area and then she had lumbar discs that were removed, cloned, and then replaced. She has done very well in reference in these particular procedures. However, while in the hospital, she had her first migraine headache that is felt to be related to her TMJ issues.

B182 gets headaches at a level of 9 in the left frontal and temporal area. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 7, diet at 5, disability at 7. She gets left-sided earaches, but no tinnitus and no vertigo and no hearing loss. The only other joints that have been problematic include her spine, both the lumbar and cervical area, but these are doing well now. She does suffer from depression. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also does some of that during the day.

In frontal view, B182 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm. The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline. In profile, the maxilla is retruded by probably 5 to 6 mm and the chin is retruded by about 15 mm. The chin neckline and angle are not defined. Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. She has thin attached gingiva around the two lower central incisors. In the upper arch, she has had first bicuspids extracted. She is basically a Class I cuspid molar relatively with an anterior deep bite of probably about 4 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy, but uvula is moderately elongated. The soft palate and fascial pillars are normal and her tonsils and adenoids have previously been removed. Intranasally, the septum appears to deviate off towards the left side. Right turbinate looks relatively normal, but the left one appears moderately enlarged. There appears to be decreased airway on the left side. The columella is wide and the nostrils are constricted, particularly on the left side. The nasal septum is deviated off towards the left side. The right turbinate is normal. The left turbinate is moderately hyperplastic. She has severe snoring and moderate daytime somnolence, but she is unaware of sleep apnea. She says she has had a previous sleep study that was normal and that was performed in 10 months ago. She tends to sleep on her side. To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, and milder pain over the retromandibular, SCMs, and shoulder areas. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly. The maximal incisal opening is 53 mm, excursion movement to the right 10 mm, to the left 12 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and maxillary first bicuspids. She has root canals in the maxillary central incisors. The left turbinate appears enlarged. The condyles appear a little bit arthritic and the right condyle appears larger than the left condyle.

Coronal x-ray shows that the right sinus is full of fluid and the left one has thickening of the sinus membrane on the floor as well as a little bit along the medial sinus wall. The left turbinate is quite large. The right turbinate appears enlarged, but the mucosa seems fairly thin around it today.

Axial view shows that the septum may be a little bit off to the left side anteriorly. The left turbinate appears enlarged and appears to be blocking most of the airway. The right side appears a little bit more open. The right sinus is full of fluid. The left appears to have increased thickness of the sinus membrane along the anterior lateral, posterior, and medial walls, but there is some air space in the center.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a decreased joint space vertically and posteriorly. There is anterior beaking present and degenerative changes in the head of the condyle. It appears that there is a little peaking of the condyle. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit more arthritic than the opposite side with a little bit more sclerosis on the head of the condyle. There is some anterior beaking present. There may be just a slight depression in the head of the condyle towards the lateral aspect of the joint. The joint space appears better on this side. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.
Left TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good mediolateral width. There is decreased lateral joint space indicative of a medially displaced disc. The lateral rim of the fossa curves about 1 to 2 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B182 has an AP deficient maxilla and mandible. Her oropharyngeal airway measures less than 3 mm at the base of the soft palate as well as at the base of the tongue.

Basic diagnoses for B182 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations. Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia. Mandibular AP hypoplasia. Decreased oropharyngeal airway of less than 3 mm (normal AP dimension is 11 mm).
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Deformed columella creating narrow nostrils.
TMJ pain. Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Missing maxillary first bicuspids as a result of previous orthodontics. Hypertrophied uvula.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Sleep study.
2. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
3. Surgery. a.	Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars, if orthodontics is not performed. b.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. c.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and down graft it posteriorly. d.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward approximately 13 mm. e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. f.	Reconstruction of the columella. g.	Uvulectomy.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics, if orthodontic appliances are placed.

B182 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology with a little bit of sclerosis on it. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little arthritic changes to it with some sclerosis on the top of the condyle. The articular disc is medially displaced and there is a decreased lateral vertical joint space.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head and a little peaking on the condyle and anterior beaking. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. The disc is anteriorly displaced. The posterior band is quite thick. There is decreased superior and posterior joint space. There is some significant fluid in the superior joint space and a little bit of fluid in the inferior joint space. This is present more towards the lateral aspect of the joint. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc is in a reduced position. There is translation of the disc.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit more arthritic than the opposite side. There is sclerosis in the head of the condyle and some anterior beaking present. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. Out laterally, the disc is not seen very well, but more medially it is more prominent and correlating to the coronal view of medial disc displacement. The disc is actually seen to be medially displaced as the disc is viewed beyond the head of the condyle. There are some erosions in the posterior head of the condyle. The top of the condyle is a little rough. There is some significant fluid in the superior joint space and a little bit in the inferior joint space more towards the lateral aspect of the joint. There is good translation of the condyle and disc but the degenerative changes on the condyle are obvious. There is translation of the disc.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with early reduction, but fluid in the lateral aspect of the joint spaces. Right TMJ more severe arthritis and articular disc medially displaced but with reduction on opening and with fluid in the lateral joint spaces.

