B185
B185 is 39 years old. He got my name off the Internet. He has had the previous surgical procedures:
Rhinoplasty.
Sliding genioplasty in approximately 14 years ago.
Four months ago, double jaw surgery to advance the maxilla and mandible.

PRIMARY CONCERNS: Sleep apnea.
B185 had orthodontics done at the age of 18 with extraction of upper and lower first bicuspids and teeth retracted. He had repeat orthodontics at about the age of 30 to close up some residual space but this moves his teeth back even further. The double jaw surgery in 4 months ago was to correct his sleep apnea problems but B185 does not notice much difference or improvement. He still needs about 10 to 12 hours of sleep at night to even be able to function the next day and sometimes still his mind is foggy. He is getting very poor quality REM sleep.

The only medication that B185 takes is Clonazepam 0.5 mg tablets 1 to 2 tablets at bedtime.
B185 has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain or myofacial pain. No trouble with earaches or vertigo but does have bilateral tinnitus. He has significant hearing loss and wears bilateral hearing aids. He is not aware of clenching or bruxing at night or during the day.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
:
In frontal view, B185 has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. In profile view, B185 has some slight AP maxillary deficiency maybe about 3 to 4 mm. Infraorbital hypoplasia with the infraorbital rims being probably about 6 mm deficient. The chin is probably 12 to 15 mm AP deficient. Maxillary teeth actually are more retruded than the maxilla is because the teeth are retruded posteriorly fairly significantly. Intraorally, B185 is missing lower first bicuspids but has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars. The lower teeth are in a little bit in lingual inclination. It shows some of the root. In the upper arch, he is missing first bicuspids. He has the rest of the teeth back through the second molars. He has basically a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side by probably 3 mm but on the left side closer to Class I relationship. He has probably about almost 5 mm vertical overbite. Oropharyngeal areas look reasonably healthy. There is evidence of a previous UPPP procedure and B185 remembered that he had that done in approximately 18 years ago, but experienced no improvement in his airway following that procedure. He also has tried the Thornton appliance but this did not improve the situation and actually only made his teeth loose. Intranasally, the septum appears fairly straight. He has probably had previous turbinectomies. Perhaps on the left side, however, there are some of the turbinates still remaining posteriorly but there does appear to be adequate air space inferior and there appears to be adequate airway on both sides. Even with the UPPP procedure, B185 is aware of having some mild snoring. He has some moderate to severe daytime somnolence. He has moderate to severe sleep apnea issues. TMJ joints seem to function smoothly. He has no apparent tenderness around the head and neck area.

Incisal opening is about 42 mm counting the overbite. Excursive movements are about 9 mm in each direction and opening is 42 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. He has root canals on the maxillary left second molar and left lateral incisor. He has a crown on the maxillary left first molar and central and lateral incisors. There are bone plates present in the maxilla. Bone screws are present in the mandible. He has bone plates in the anterior mandible from his previous chin procedure. There are some bony defects present in that area. The condyles look reasonably good. The styloid processes are hypercalcified and elongated.

Waters view shows that the right nasal airway appears wide open and the left one appears that there is some turbinate and that may be the area seen posteriorly and may obstruct that side some. The bony septum at least is straight. The sinuses look relatively clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle appears narrow anteroposteriorly. There appears to be adequate joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that there is probably adequate joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle is hard to identify. On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is AP retrusion of maxilla and mandible. There is slight increase in the occlusal plane angle but too much. The chin is strong relative to AP position of the mandible. Upper incisors are actually angled posteriorly. Oropharyngeal airway measures less than 3 mm (normal AP dimension would be 11 mm.) At the soft palate level, the airway measures about 6 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP macrogenia.
Significantly decreased inclination of maxillary incisors. Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars.
Severely reduced oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2.5 mm (normal dimension of 11 mm.)
Severe sleep apnea.
Moderately increased occlusal plane angle.
Class II end-on occlusion on the right side but fairly close to being a Class I on the left side. Anterior deep bite of 5 mm. Previous double jaw surgery performed 4 months ago.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up first bicuspid spacing by pushing the anterior teeth forward to increase angulation of the upper incisors as well as to distalize the posterior teeth at least a couple of mm. Open up the space to equal the size of a first bicuspid tooth approximately 7 mm. This should tip the upper incisors forward at least 5 mm from their current position.
Align and level mandibular arch. Surgery.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla about 2 to 3 mm and downgraft it posteriorly approximately 4 mm. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward approximately 14 to 15 mm. Consider possible extraction of second molars if impingement on the discal tissues of the mandible.
Consider possible anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to set the chin backwards about 3 to 4 mm. Removal of previously placed maxillary bone plates x4 and screws x22 as well as removal of mandibular bone plates x2 and screws x13.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Bilateral maxillary osteointegrated implants to the first bicuspid area.
Restorative dentistry to place crowns on the maxillary first bicuspid implants.

