B187
B187 is 39 years old and is in good health. He takes Ziac for blood pressure. He has seen Dr. XXXX for orthodontics. B187's primary concerns are as follows:

Popping and clicking in the TMJ.
TMJ pain. Underbite that needs to be corrected.
Snoring.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B187 has fairly good facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is zero. The maxillary midline may be just slightly to the left and, in fact, is fairly close to being on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental line and chin. Nasal bridge shifts off to the right side at the top and then off to the left side a couple of millimeters at the tip. In profile, upper lip is retruded about 6-8 mm. Chin appears to have fairly good AP projection. There is some ptosis of the nasal tip. Intraorally, B187 has all of his lower teeth through the second molars on the right side and through the first molar on the left side. He has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch and attrition of his lower anterior teeth. He has some mild crowding present. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has some mild crowding in the upper arch. He has anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites and he has a full Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally. Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy. Soft palate may be somewhat elongated. Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the left side. The left turbinate is relatively normal in size at least anteriorly and the right turbinate is enlarged. To palpation, B187 has some mild tenderness over the right masseter muscle. On opening, he has a definite audible click in the right joint at about 10 mm of opening and 5 mm of closing. He seemed to have a little bit of a softer click perhaps on the left side at about 10 mm of opening and 5 mm of closing. Maximal incisal opening is 47 mm, but 30 mm with comfort. Excursion movement to the right 8 mm, to the left 10 mm. Going side to side, he has an audible pop in the right joint and a softer one on the left side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. He is also missing the mandibular left second molar. The maxillary second molars and the left first molar may be slightly hyper-erupted. He has a lot of crowns on his posterior teeth. Tongue appears enlarged.
Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear. The left turbinate is normal in size. The septum is deviated just slightly to the left side. Right turbinate is extremely enlarged and appears to obliterate most of the right nasal airway cavity. Axial view shows there is a little bit of deviation in the septum off towards the left side anteriorly. Left turbinate appears relatively normal in size while the right side is enlarged and appears to be blocking a good part of the airway. Right maxillary sinus has a mucocele attached to the anterior wall. Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a little bit of arthritis in this joint with some flattening on the anterior head and some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderate in inclination. Posterior joint space is mildly decreased. Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that is narrow anteroposteriorly particularly in the mid part of the condyle. Articular eminence is relatively normal in inclination. There is decreased posterior joint space with the posterior head of the condyle almost touching against the posterior wall of the fossa. Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm. There is an extension off the lateral pole of the condyle and there is decreased joint space between the lateral pole of the condyle and the lateral rim of the fossa. Right TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that has good mediolateral width. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly significantly about 4 mm and appears to be in close proximation to the lateral pole of the condyle. Vertical joint space is decreased as well as the lateral joint space. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla is retruded anteroposteriorly. The mandible appears to have pretty good AP position, although the lower teeth are retruded. Oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue is about 6 mm and at the soft palate is less than 3 mm or approximately 2.5 mm. The soft palate appears somewhat elongated.

Basic diagnoses for B187 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with reduction. Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia.
Mandibular prognathism.
Class III occlusion.
Lingual inclination of lower incisors with significant crowding.
Hyperplastic soft palate and uvula.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2-3 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Sleep apnea symptoms.
Missing mandibular left second molar.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Sleep study.
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level mandibular arch tipping lower incisors forward. Surgery. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and expand it. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly. Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP).
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B187 MRI AGE: 39/M
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. There is peaking of the condyle in the mid part of the fossa. Joint space may be slightly decreased. It is difficult to tell where the disc is, but it may be anteriorly displaced. Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width and, in fact, the lateral pole extends almost beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. There is decreased joint space vertically. There could be some discal tissue anteriorly displaced. Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly. Out laterally, the disc appears to be anteriorly displaced, but more medially, the disc is in a little bit better position. Articular eminence is relatively shallow, but the eminence is long. There is a little bit of fluid in the inferior joint space, but no real significant inflammatory process seen. On opening, there is early reduction of the disc and good translation of the disc and condyle forward. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a disc that is anteriorly displaced throughout the entire joint process. There is decreased posterior joint space. The condyle is narrow anteroposteriorly particularly in the mid portion of the joint. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. There does not appear to be any significant inflammatory process present. On opening, there appears to be partial reduction of the disc, but for the most part the disc appears to remain somewhat anteriorly displaced. IMPRESSION:

Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with earl reduction. Right TMJ articular disc anteriorly displaced with partial reduction on opening.

