B188
B188 is 50 years old. She is referred by Dr. XXXX. B188 has had previous surgery for a hysterectomy, tonsillectomy, wisdom teeth, eye tumor, broken nose surgery, and melanoma removal. She takes the following medications:

Aspirin. Levothroid. Estrogen.
Progesterone. Vitamin and mineral supplements.
Occasional Ambien. Occasional Skelaxin. Occasional Fioricet. Occasional migraine medication.
Occasional Feldene.
Zomig nasal spray.
Maxalt.

She is allergic to IV iodine (anaphylaxis reaction), Demerol and codeine (vomiting), and sulfa (rash). Primary concerns that B188 has includes the following:

Clicking and popping in the jaws. Left-sided joint pain. Left-sided headaches.
Left-sided neck and shoulder pain. Asymmetry of the jaws.
Jaw joints are asymmetric.

B188 has had several traumatic injuries. When she was teenager, she fell off a roof and struck her face on a trampoline fracturing her nose and bruising her face. Again, when she was in high school, she got hit in the face with a softball, although she did not seek medical help. Fourteen years ago, she was hit as a pedestrian by a car that fractured her pelvis as well as caused some facial injury and no apparent facial fractures, although she did have a concussion and a whiplash injury.

She has had previous orthodontics at the age of 13. She wore splints in her 20s and then again in her early 30s, but neither treatments were of any help. She had physical therapy also in her late 20s. She has no problems with earaches and no tinnitus, but gets occasional vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her left hip and occasionally left shoulder and wrists. She is not aware of clenching and bruxism.

She rates her headaches at a level of 9 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area on the left side predominantly. Her headaches may be fairly constant, and she frequently wakes up when the headaches in the morning, but they can progress during the day. She rates her jaw function at 8, diet at 2, disability at 7. When her pain gets real severe, she will go and get injections done predominantly in the muscles of the left neck and shoulder area. She has difficulties breathing through her nose that is moderate and she tends to breathe through her mouth when she sleeps and then sometimes during the day as well. She is aware of some snoring factors, moderate daytime tiredness, but no overt sleep apnea. She does have a mild sleep disorder.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
: In frontal view, B188 has fairly reasonable symmetry in the middle and upper third face. There is some mild asymmetry in the dorsum of the nose and also in the alar domes where the left dome is higher than the right side and perhaps a little more prominent. The left dome is more narrow in the mediolateral width as compared to the right dome. There is a curvature of the nasal dorsum off towards the right side and then back towards the left side. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about zero. The maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline also fairly close to being on the facial midline about 6 to 7 mm. In profile view, the nasal tip has greater projection than the dorsum area. The domes are quite prominent and the skin is very thin over the alar domes. She is slightly retruded in the subnasale about 2 to 3 mm. The upper lip itself at the vermilion area is slightly prominent. Chin neck distance is quite short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. The mandible and chin appear to be significantly retruded. The chin may be retruded by approximately 12 mm. Intraorally, B188 has all of her lower teeth back through the third molars. She has some significant crowding of the lower anterior arch of probably 6 mm. The posterior teeth on the left side are at significant lingual inclination. She has a lingual tori of moderate size on the left side. In the upper arch, B188 has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has a Class I cuspid molar relationship on the right side as well as on the left side. She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm. B188 has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 3 mm higher than the right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. Intranasally, at least anteriorly, the turbinates appear to be only mildly enlarged. I cannot see posteriorly very well. The septum appears reasonably straight at least anteriorly. Maximal opening is 49 mm but only about 23 mm without pain. Excursion movement to the left 9 mm and to the right 7 mm, but painful. As she opens, she deviates to the left side approximately 3 mm. To palpation, she has high moderate tenderness over the masseters, retromandibular areas, and left TMJ and moderate tenderness over the SCMs and medial pterygoids. On opening, she has a click in the right side at about 20 mm and a closing click at 10 mm. The left side functioned reasonably smoothly, although she says at times she does hear noises in that joint as well.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Right condyle looks reasonably normal whereas the left one appears quite arthritic with significant loss of volume and shortening of the condylar head and neck area. Waters view shows that the nasal septum is reasonably straight. The right turbinate appears quite large and may be blocking the right nasal airway. The left side appears more open. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Asymmetry in the mandible can be seen with the left angle of the mandible being almost 1 cm higher than on the right side. Right TMJ tomogram shows that the morphology of the condyle appears fairly normal. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space appears fairly well balanced.
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is severely atrophic with loss of vertical and anteroposterior volume. There is a decreased posterior and to a lesser extent superior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is excellent translation of the right condyle and some restricted translation of the left condyle. The joint space significantly decreases in translation on the left side. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are moderately retruded. Vertical height of the mandible on the left side is about almost 9 mm short of vertically than the right side. The oropharyngeal airway is significantly decreased with an airway dimension of only about 5 mm at the soft palate level and at about 5 mm at the base of the tongue as well. This may account for some of the airway factors that B188 is concerned with. At the occlusal plane level, there appears to be about a 5 to 6 mm vertical difference at the molar area with the left side vertically shorter than the right side. B188 has significant difficulties swallowing and this has been going on since her TMJ problems developed. She cannot swallow tablets and has to chew them or crush them in order to get them down. B188 has had Restylane injections to the upper lip and has made it more full. This was 2 years ago and has not resolved away as much as expected.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and severe deformation. Right TMJ articular disc dislocation with early reduction. Slight AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Class I malocclusion. Transverse cant in the arches with the left side being 3 mm vertically short compared to the right side. Crowding in the lower anterior arch. Lingual inclination of the mandibular left posterior teeth and buccal inclination (increased curve of Wilson) in the left maxilla. Severe left TMJ pain. Severe headaches. Myofascial pain. Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Difficulties swallowing. Hypertrophied right turbinate. Partial nasal airway obstruction. External nasal deformities secondary to previous nasal trauma (x2).
Anterior deep bite of 4 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1.5 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy. Try to upright the posterior teeth on the left side decreasing the accentuated curve of Wilson.
CT scan of TMs and jaws (TMJ Concepts procotol).
Surgery.
Left TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Left TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).
Left coronoidotomy.
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Right mandibular sagittal split osteotomy.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to transversely level the arch and advance both the maxilla and mandibular in a counterclockwise direction. Right inferior turbinectomy.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I did give her a prescription for Klonopin 1-mg tablets, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x5.
B188 MRI AGE: 50/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite small in mediolateral width. It appears to have undergone significant degenerative changes with loss of volume. Joint space is significantly decreased vertically. There are degenerative changes in the fossa as well. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm. Lateral rim is somewhat abnormal in shape.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There appears to be decreased joint space vertically particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. Lateral rim of fossa curves inferiorly probably about 2 to 3 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite small in size with evidence of both significant condylar resorption vertically as well as anteroposteriorly. The condyle is quite small compared to the size of the fossa. Articular eminence is of moderate inclination. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting for the most part at the posterior aspect of the inferior portion of the articular eminence. The disc is quite thickened particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint. More medially, the disc has a thinner confirmation of probable questionable salvageability. The disc is short anteroposteriorly. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present. There may be some slight fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle, but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced and severely degenerated and deformed.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. A little bit of flattening on the anterior head, but not too significant. Articular eminence has moderate inclination. The articular disc appears to be in relatively normal position except at the lateral aspect of the joint the disc is not seen. More medially, the disc is in good position. It is quite possible this disc could be medially displaced and perhaps anteriorly displaced at the most lateral aspect of the joint. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle. Towards the most lateral aspect of the joint, the disc may be slightly anteriorly displaced. The disc has good morphology.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated without reduction and severe deformation. Right TMJ very mild arthritis and articular disc may be slightly anteriorly displaced at the most lateral aspect of the joint and also may be slightly medially displaced.

