B190
B190 is 20 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX and Dr. XXXX. She is currently seeing Dr. XXXX for orthodontic treatment. B190 began having TMJ problems at about the age of 12 of unknown etiology. She did have an MRI when she was 14 that showed she had an anteriorly displaced disc on the right side with some arthritis and nonreducing discs. Prior to the onset of her TMJ problems, she did have phase 1 orthodontics from about the age of 9 to 12 years. She was treated by Dr. XXXX, whom the family is very pleased with and he apparently did a palatal expansion and she was then put on hold for orthodontics because of her TMJ problems. She wore head gear for almost 2 years. She then basically was put on hold orthodontically because of her TMJ issues and did not finally get to wearing braces again until about 18 months ago. In the meantime, she has had some ongoing TMJ treatment. She had splints x2 from about the age of 13 to 15. Five years ago, she had arthrocentesis to the right joint only. She has had an electrophoresis and NSAIDS. With the arthrocentesis she had 5 years ago, she had steroids injected in the joint. She began her orthodontic treatment with Dr. XXXX 18 months ago and just this past month transferred to Dr. XXXX.

B190 takes the following medications:
Nexium 20 mg b.i.d. Synthroid 50 mcg q.d.
Singulair 10 mg q.h.s.
Allegra 180 mg q.d.
Celebrex 100 mg b.i.d. Nasonex nasal spray.
Vicodin 5 mg q.h.s.
Skelaxin q.h.s.

B190 rates her headaches that she gets in the temporal area only at a level of 1. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 4, jaw function, diet, and disability all at 4. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, nor hearing loss. The only joint that bothers her is her right shoulder. She does have the following medical conditions:

GERD.
Chronic sinusitis.
Hypothyroidism.
TMJ problems.
She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at night.
Primary concerns that B190 has include the following:

TMJ pain.
Bite position is off.
Difficulties eating and chewing.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B190 has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right and chin may be off 2-3 mm off to the right. In profile, B190 has about 4 mm of AP maxillary deficiency and probably about 6 mm of AP mandibular deficiency, although her jaw structures are in reasonably good balance. Chin necklines and chin neck angle appear relatively normal. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has lingual braces in the upper and lower arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. In centric relation, her lower dental midline is 2 mm off towards the right side and the chin is probably 3 to 4 mm off to the right side. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side being probably close to 4 mm Class II and on the left side she is probably 1-2 mm Class II. She has about a 1 mm overbite relationship and probably 2 mm overjet. She has an almost 3 mm transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 3 mm higher than the left side. She has lingual and buccal tads in and around the first molar area. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal in architecture and texture. Tonsils are mildly enlarged. She has had previous nasal surgery to treat her chronic sinus problems and she has had a partial reduction of the turbinates, but it looks like it was just the anterior part that was addressed and not the middle or posterior part. Apparently, she had some work done on her septum as well. B190 has had her wisdom teeth removed. To palpation, B190 has high moderate pain over the TMJs and moderate pain over the masseters, retromandibular area, mild tenderness over the temporalis and shoulders. Incisal opening is 51 mm and she can open 29 mm reasonably comfortably. Excursion movements are 8 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Turbinates appear moderate in size. The right joint looks somewhat arthritic. The septum appears reasonably straight. Coronal view shows the presence of tads in the maxilla. Sinuses look clear. Turbinates are quite large and appear to block a good portion of the airway. Axial view shows that the turbinates are quite large. Sinuses are clear. Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show some arthritic changes associated with the condyle. The articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space looks reasonably good, just some slight decreased posterior joint space. Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show that there is some slight arthritic changes that have occurred in the condyle with some loss of vertical volume as well as some anterior beaking. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. Joint space appears fairly equal and balance, although could be slightly decreased vertically. Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is smaller in size than the left one with decreased vertical height and mediolateral width. Joint space actually looks fairly good. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has over-angulation of the lower incisors but appears to have a Class III skeletal and fairly close to a Class I occlusal relationship. Occlusal plan may be must moderately high. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm at the soft palate level and probably 7-8 mm at the base of the tongue. There is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.

Basic diagnoses for B190 would be as follows:
Right TMJ reactive arthritis with articular disc dislocation without reduction and with significant degenerative changes.
Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated with early reduction.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia. Transverse cant in the occlusal plan with the right side being 3 mm higher than the left side. Class II end-on occlusion being worse on the right side as compared to the left side. Mandibular dental midline shifted to the right 2 mm. Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction. Decreased oropharyngeal airway. TMJ pain. Myofascial pain. Tooth size discrepancy with 2+ mm Bolton's difference.
Over angulation of lower incisors.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for a tooth size discrepancy as well as to decrease the over angulated lower anterior teeth. Surgery Stage 1: Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Presurgical orthodontics: Continue with the alignment and leveling of the arches. Surge Stage II:
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, down graft it slightly posterior, and correct for the asymmetry. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to correct the facial asymmetry and advance the mandible.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B190 MRI AGE: 20/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is moderate in width. It may have lost some vertical height. Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with only about a 2-mm lip. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. The disc may be anteriorly and medially displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite small in size. It appears to have lost vertical volume. There is decreased vertical joint space and some areas that appear relatively normal. Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat, curving inferiorly only about 1-2 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that actually relatively normal in height. There is flattening on the anterior head. There is perhaps the beginning of some slight anterior beaking. The articular disc actually looks as though it is in reasonably good position. Articular eminence is significantly shallow. The disc appears somewhat degenerated up in the fossa. On opening, there appears to be good translation of the condyle and the disc with the disc in relatively normal position. It is possible the disc could be anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit shorter in vertical height than the opposite side. There is definite flattening on the head of the condyle and a little bit of sclerosis. There is some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence and it is more evident at the lateral aspect of the joint than medial. On opening, the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced and nonreducing. The disc is foreshortened anteroposteriorly and is thicker than normal.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ relatively normal joint architecture with some mild arthritic changes of the condyle and possible anterior dislocation at the lateral aspect of the joint. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction.

