B191 ,
B191 is 66 years old. B191 is a self-referral. B191's problems began when he was about 38 years old of unknown etiology when he started with some changes in his bite as his teeth were being ground down. It was when he was in a very stressful government job. His jaw joint problems, however, just occurred within the past year of unknown etiology. He was chewing on something and he heard a loud pop on one side and that sort of began the TMJ problems and for the past six months he has had the increased pain factors present. Primary concern that he has is in reference to grinding and snapping that he has in the jaw joints and he is concerned as to the damage that may require surgery.

B191 is on a list of medications that are listed on a separate sheet in his chart.
B191 headaches at about a level of 5 in the right temporal area. He rate his TMJ pain at 5 on the right side. Average daily pain is about a 5. He rates jaw function at 5, diet at 7, disability at 1. He gets right-sided earaches, but no tinnitus and no vertigo. Other joints that bother him include his fingers, hands, right big toe, left wrist. He has a strong history previously of bruxism. Currently, he does not feel that he does any significant clenching or bruxing.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B191 has good left-to-right facial balance. Upper lip length is about 26 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about -4. The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline. The nasal tip may just be slightly off to the left side about 2 mm. In profile, he probably has some AP maxillary deficiency at the incisal edge level about of about 4-5 mm. The chin appears to be retruded about 10-12 mm. Chin neckline is short and not well defined. Intraorally, B191 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present. He has an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch and some moderate crowding of the lower anterior teeth. He has some significant wear on his teeth. His attached gingiva appears reasonably healthy, although there is some inflammation around the mandibular right central incisor. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He is basically Class I cuspid on the right side and Class II cuspid on the left side. He has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm. He has some audible noises in the right TMJ. To palpation, he has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Joints function smoothly on the left side, but on the right side he has crepitation. He does have occasional loud crackling, popping kind of noises in the right TMJ only. Maximum incisal opening is 43 mm, opening without discomfort about 36 mm. Excursion movement to the right about 9 mm and to the left 6 mm. On excursion movements, he had audible clicking noises in the left TMJ, but not so much on the right side. He did have a little crepitus on the right side, but more noticeable and audible was the clicking on the left joint. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy, but the soft palate appears somewhat elongated and fascial pillars appear moderately constricted. He has previously had his tonsils removed. Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderately enlarged. His septum appears reasonably straight. B191 does not claim to have any nasal airway obstruction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. There are crowns on most of the posterior teeth particularly the molars. Sinuses look reasonably clear. It is difficult to evaluate the TMJs. Septum appears reasonably straight. Coronal view shows that he has significantly hypertrophied turbinates. Septum is reasonably clear. Sinuses appear clear. Axial view shows that he has hypertrophied inferior turbinates with a very constricted airway. Sinuses look clear. Left TMJ coronal tomograms show that he has got good vertical joint space, but decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint. There may be a little extension of the lateral pole of the condyle out laterally. This may be indicative of a medially displaced articular disc. Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with a significantly decreased lateral joint space with probably bone-on-bone contact. Vertical joint space appears a little bit better balanced. Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has some degenerative changes associated with it. There is some anterior beaking present. Vertical space appears almost increased. The condyle appears to be postured forward slightly in the fossa. Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows some advanced arthritis in the joint. There is some anterior beaking and decreased anterior joint space. The condyle appears to be postured forward in the fossa. Towards the medial side of the joint, it appears that there is getting close to being bone-on-bone contact. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B191 has some AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency. However, the oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate measures 7 mm and at the base of the tongue measures almost 8 mm. He does have a slight increased occlusal plane angle. The maxilla and mandible appear retruded.

Basic diagnoses for B191 would be as follows:
Right TMJ severe arthritis. Right TMJ pain.
Recommended treatment would be as follows:
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints. Surgery. Right TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Fat graft to right TMJ (harvest from the abdomen). Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.

B191 MRI AGE: 66/M
Left TMJ coronal view shows that he appears to have some arthritis in his joints. There appears to be some discal tissue present within the joint, but it might be medially displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat arthritic. Joint space appears decreased. There may be some discal tissue displaced laterally.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. There is some sclerosis and a little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is fairly steep. There appears to be discal tissue that is in position, although the disc does appear degenerated. Out laterally, it is difficult to identify discal tissue. This would be compatible with the medial displacement of the articular disc. It is interesting that in the T2 films the disc appears almost posteriorly displaced with significantly degenerated changes in the intermediate zone. There is definite fluid in the superior and inferior joint space. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle and the disc appears to move forward with it.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. There is flattening on the anterior head and some anterior beaking in some views. In one view, it appears that the condyle is very narrow anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep, but not as steep as the opposite side. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and there is decreased superior joint space. There is significant fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. There is decreased vertical joint space. On opening, there is moderately good translation, but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. It appears that there is probably bone-on-bone contact indicative of a perforation.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and probable medial displacement of the articular disc. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction with severe deformation and perforation.

