B194
Referred by XXXX and also Dr. XXXX. B194 is 27 years old and in good health. She is gluten intolerant. The onset of her jaw problems began she was about 20 and may be due to bruxism. She is not aware of having any trauma to her jaws. She gets headaches at about a level of 6 throughout most of the head. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 3, diet at 0, disability at 2. The medications she takes includes Yasmin and Flonase. She also does take multivitamins, calcium, magnesium, zinc, and flax oil supplements. Treatments she has had so far include bite appliances. She has had several bite appliances including the NTI, soft rubber splint, and she is basically disposed to those type of appliances. She has also had yoga to try to decrease her stress. She does get occasional earaches, occasional tinnitus, and moderate vertigo. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also during the day. B194 was slow to mature and did not go through puberty until she was about 15 or 16. It is about this time she believes that her bite opened some. The opening was somewhat progressive, but it has been stable like it is for the last several years. She had her wisdom teeth removed in the eighth grade. She did have orthodontic treatment including head gear beginning sometime around the age of perhaps 9 and finished at about age 11. Dr. XXXX placed her in a tongue guard which was very uncomfortable for her and this was placed probably around the age of 13 to 14.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 2 mm. The maxillary midline is off to the right side about 1 mm as is the mandibular dental midline. The chin is off to the right side about 2-3 mm. She appears to be slightly more full on the left side of her face by maybe 2-3 mm. In profile, she has good facial balance. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Teeth are fairly well aligned and level. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has an anterior open bite of about 3 mm. She is fairly close to being Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has a slight accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and a slight reverse curve of Spee in the mandibular arch. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. Nasal airway looks reasonably good. On functioning, the jaws are fairly smooth. To palpation, she has low severe pain over the TMJs, high moderate pain over the masseters, moderate pain over the shoulders, posterior neck, styloid areas, and temporalis area and mild tenderness over the SCMs. TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is about 47 mm, but only about 15 mm without discomfort. Excursion movements are about 7 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
: Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. She has an anterior bite. It is difficult to evaluate the condyles because of overlying structures.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates are moderately enlarged, particularly on the right side where it appears to obliterate a good part of the airway. The septum appears reasonably straight.

Coronal view shows the sinuses are clear. Right turbinate is significantly enlarged compared to the left one.
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that at the lateral aspect of the joint is quite flattened. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Joint space appears somewhat narrow at the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is flattened along the anterior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle appears to be reasonably positioned within the fossa.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There is significantly decreased joint space at the last aspect of the joint and there appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 mm.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint. There is almost bone-on-bone contact in some of the areas. Lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm. These radiographs would tend to indicate a medially displaced articular disc.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the patient has fairly good facial balance. Oropharyngeal airway looks good.
Dental model analysis reveals that there is a reversed curve of Spee in the lower arch and in the upper arch there is an accentuated curve of Spee. Lower incisors are depressed almost 3 mm from normal position. There is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 0.5 mm. Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level. Right TMJ joint appears a little bit normal in architecture and disc position. The condyle may also be postured forward slightly, but there is no evidence of disc displacement on that side.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs displaced at the lateral aspect of the joints with a rotational displacement of the discs. Anterior open bite of 3 mm. Class I cuspid-molar relationship.
Reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch. Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. TMJ pain. Headaches. Myofascial pain.
Chronic clenching and bruxism.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Medication: Klonopin 1-mg tablet, 1 tablet q.h.s. to control clenching and bruxism.
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies if necessary. Align and level mandibular arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make to room for interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth to retract them slightly. Surgery. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. Anterior mandibular subapical osteotomy to elevate the lower incisors approximately 3 mm. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry.

B194 MRI AGE: 27/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condylar head that is quite bright. The condyle, however, appears to have fairly good morphology. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 1-2 mm and is actually fairly flat. Joint space appears fairly well balanced. Joint space may be slightly increased at the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology and fairly bright. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 2-3 mm. Disc appears to be medially displaced. Joint space appears reasonably well balanced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears quite flattened at the lateral aspect of the joint on the anterior aspect where there is some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced and actually acting as a wedge displacing the condyle posteriorly. More medially, the disc is in better position. There is some fluid in both superior and inferior joint space. On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyle and disc, and the disc appeared in a reduced position. It appears that the disc is rotated anteriorly at the lateral aspect of the joint, but in reasonable position on the medial aspect.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite flat at the lateral aspect of the joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There is some anterior beaking present. Disc appears to be in a vertical orientation within the joint. More medially, the disc is in better position, but out laterally it is anteriorly displaced. There is some fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. On opening, there is early reduction of the disc and good translation of the condyle and disc with the disc in a reduced position. It appears that the disc is rotated anteriorly at the lateral aspect of the joint, but in reasonable position on the medial aspect.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ advanced arthritis and articular discs rotationally displaced anteriorly at the lateral aspect of the joint, but in good position at the medial aspect of the joint.

