B195
B195 is 42 years old and referred by Drs. XXXX and XXXX.
Patient History
B195's problems began 3 years ago when she was getting out of her car and a handicapped van with no one in it popped into reverse with the engine running and ran into the back of her car, and her face hit the side of the steering wheel. She had severe neck pain after the accident. She has had some rehab therapy on her neck, and it did not improve her situation at all. She saw several doctors and finally a chiropractor, Dr. XXXX, diagnosed the fact that she had a TMJ problem. She then went to see Dr. XXXX, who made a splint for B195 that has helped her significantly in reference to reducing her pain.

In the accident, B195 did sustain a fracture to her nose. Apparently she had some significant airway obstruction as well as the fractured nose problems. She had surgery done on her nose to correct the air breathing problems. She had the turbinates reduced. Since that time, the nasal tip is shifted off toward the left side. After the accident, probably associated with nasal fractures, she developed some airway problems and was diagnosed as having asthma and bronchitis. The nasal surgery has essentially corrected those problems in addition because of the improved airway and improved oxygenation.

B195 has no particular earache problems but has continuous tinnitus, no vertigo, and no hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her neck where she has some bulging discs at C4-C5 and C5-C6. Not aware of clenching and bruxism, although she does wake up with headaches frequently. She rates her headaches on an average day at about a level of 5 that affect the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. About two times a month she gets migraines that can escalate to 10, and they can last for five days at a time. That is when she uses her Imitrex. She has continuous TMJ pain at a level of 3, but it can go up to a level of 8. Her overall facial pain on an average day is about a level of 3. B195 rates her jaw function at 7, diet at 8, and disability at 6.

Patient Concerns
Headaches TMJ pain
Difficulty eating and chewing
Can't bite most foods
The teeth are out of alignment and are moving
The teeth are shifting and wearing
Abnormal curvature to her nose

Current Medications
1. Testosterone 4 mg per day
Imitrex for migraines usually a couple of times a month
Loomocaine topical anesthetic she places over her TMJs to help with pain relief
Phenergan occasionally

She doesn't take any pain medicines because it can cause her some GI problems.
Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B195 has fairly good facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.

In profile view, she may have some slight AP maxillary deficiency and some AP mandibular deficiency. She has a lot of fullness in the submental area.
Intraorally, B195 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some significant crowding, lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship. She had an overjet of probably about 3 to 4 mm and a vertical overbite of about 3 mm. Oropharynx is clear, and soft palate and uvula look relatively normal in shape.

Intranasally, she appears to have a good airway bilaterally. A little bit of deviation of the septum off toward the right side but not too significantly. To palpation, she has high moderate tenderness over the TMJs and moderate tenderness over the temporalis, masseters, medial pteryoidgoids, mild tenderness over the styloids and SCMs. Maximal incisal opening is 35 mm. Opening without significant pain 25 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 5 mm and to the left 10 mm. On jaw function, she has crepitus present in both joints, and she says it is getting louder for her. Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows a little bit of cloudiness in the left sinus compared to the right sinus. Nasal airway on the left side doesn't appear quite as patent as the right side. Missing all four third molars. Has root canals on the maxillary left second bicuspid, second molar, and right second molar. Condyles look relatively normal in size and shape.

Waters view shows that the left nasal airway looks fairly good. Right appears that there are some areas where the turbinate is a little bit large, and it looks like there is a septal spur present maybe more posteriorly positioned. Sinuses look pretty much equal in lucency bilaterally.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has reasonably good morphology although a little bit small. Fossa has a moderate inclination of the articular eminence. Joint space appears a little bit decreased vertically between the condyle and the fossa, although the posterior joint space looks reasonably good.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking present. Appears to have a decreased vertical joint space particularly at the anterosuperior aspect of the condyle to fossa interrelationship. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

On opening, there is moderate translation of both condyles.
Cephalometrically, B195 has a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm at the soft palate level and about 6 mm at the base of the tongue. Appears to have an increased high occlusal plane angle. B195 has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction
AP mandibular deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
High occlusal plane angle
Class II occlusion
Significant crowding, lower anterior arch
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway space
TMJ pain
Headaches Myofascial pain
Continuous tinnitus
Cervical problems involving C4-C5 and C5-C6 with bulging discs

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the tooth-size discrepancy

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it and downgraft it posteriorly to decrease the occlusal plane angle

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

