B196
B196 is 26 years old. He was referred by Dr. XXXX. The orthodontist will be Dr. XXXX.
B196's TMJ problems began when he was about 20 years old to the best of his recollection. He developed an infected tooth that was infected for some time and was on antibiotics long term and ended up having root canals done twice on it. He had a crown placed on it that at one point was too high and it was redone and then it was too low.

Primary concerns that B196 has at this time include the following:
TMJ pain.
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints.
Tension in the face. Pain down through the neck.
Uncomfortable chewing.
Jaws and bite do not fit together right. Difficulties chewing.
Daily pain.
Jaw, mouth and neck often inflamed.
Stress and anxiety created by the jaw problem.

B196 gets headaches about 4 times a week, but only at about a level of 2 and they occur predominantly in the posterior head area. He rates his TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 6, diet at 5, disability at 7. The only medication he takes is Tylenol occasionally for his headaches. He gets occasional earaches but no tinnitus, no vertigo and no hearing loss. Other joints that bother him include his left shoulder, knees, and he is beginning to develop some pain in his feet which sounds more like plantar fasciitis. He does have allergies to probably environmental things, but he is not aware of clenching or bruxing. He usually feels best in the morning when he wakes up.

B196 was in splint therapy for the past three years until a few months ago. With the splint in place, he could chew a little bit easier, but then when he would take it out his bite seemed even more unnatural.

In frontal view, B196 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as are the mandibular incisors. The chin may be just slightly off to the left side about 2 mm. In profile, he is maybe just slightly AP deficient in the maxilla by about 3 or 4 mm. The chin may be retruded about 8 to 10 mm. Intraorally, B196 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars, but has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch. The left cuspid may be about 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid. In the upper arch, B196 has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has a Class III end-on occlusion being probably at least 5 mm Class III on the right side and 5 mm Class III and he has an end-on incisor relationship due to some lingual inclination of the lower incisors. He has a zero over bite relationship. He has an anterior cross bite relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the left side. The left turbinate appears somewhat enlarged and appears to almost touch against the septum. On the right side, the septum appears more normal in size and there appears to be an adequate airway on the right side. To palpation, he has mild to moderate pain over the masseters, TMJs, SCMs, shoulders, left retromandibular area and milder tenderness over the posterior neck and temporalis muscles. On opening, he had a little bit of a glitch on wide opening in the left joint, but the right side seemed to function reasonably smoothly. The maximal incisal opening is 53 mm and excursion movements to the right is 4 mm and to the left 7 mm. He seems to be a little bit more full in the right ramus area by about 3 to 4 mm compared to the left side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of mandibular third molars, but the presence of impacted third molars. He has a root canal on the maxillary left first molar. Sinuses appear elastic clear. Condylar heads and necks appear somewhat elongated.

Coronal view shows at least back in the bony septum it is reasonably straight and the turbinates appear enlarged, more so on the right side than the left side. Sinuses appear clear.

Axial view shows that the septum appears reasonably straight at this particular cut and turbinates are moderate in size. The sinuses appear relatively clear. Clinically, the nasal septum is deviated off towards the left side.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a fairly good morphology and there appears to be relatively normal joint space, although somewhat decreased at the lateral aspect of the joint. At the lateral aspect, there is some flattening on the head of the condyle. The articular eminence is relatively shallow.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good morphology and just slightly narrow anteroposteriorly. The joint space is a little bit more constricted on this side than the opposite side. The articular eminence is relatively shallow.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good shape and there appears to be reasonably good joint space except there is somewhat of a decrease at the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have pretty good size to it. The joint space seems a little bit more confined than the opposite side. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a skeletal Class III occlusion. Oropharyngeal airway actually looks fairly good. He has a slight high occlusal plane angulation. He has some AP microgenia relative to the AP position of the lower incisors.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Left TMJ medial displacement of the articular disc.
Right TMJ medial and posterior displacement of the articular disc.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia, posterior vertical hypoplasia, but transverse hyperplasia.
Mandibular prognathism.
High occlusal plane angle of 16 degrees (normal 8 degrees).
Impacted maxillary third molars.
Deviated nasal septum off to the left side.
Class III occlusion.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.4 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Try to transversely expand the mandibular posterior teeth. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for a tooth size discrepancy and to keep from flaring the lower incisors too far forward.
2. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, down graft it posteriorly and correct the transverse discrepancy. d.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x2. e.	Nasal septoplasty.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B196 MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is fairly large and completely fills the fossa. The disc may be very thin and appears to be medially displaced. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite large and fills the fossa. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. Difficult to identify discal tissue. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm. The disc may be in place but is thin.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good shape to it, although the condylar head appears elongated. The disc appears to be in position, but not as obviously seen at the lateral aspect of the joint as medial. The articular eminence has a mild to moderate inclination. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc with the disc in a reduced position. The condyle does not come down all the way beneath the articular eminence.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology, although it appears elongated in length. It appears that the disc may be in position, although it is quite thin. The articular eminence has just a moderate inclination. Right TMJ open view shows that there is restriction of translation. The disc appears to be in position with the translation, but it is quite restricted in its translatory movements.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ medially displaced articular disc. Right TMJ flattening of the condylar head and restricted translation but with a disc that appears to be in position.

On reevaluation of the MRI, it appears that the discs may be posteriorly displaced in the right TMJ and in the left joint it appears that it is medially displaced.

