B199
B199 is 25 years old. B199 was referred here by Dr. XXXX. B199 has been aware of having TMJ problems since about the age of 10 years old. It did not really become a significant issue until she was about 20 years old when her pain levels began to escalate fairly significantly. Primary concerns B199 has at this time include the following:

TMJ pain. Headaches. Myofascial pain. Difficulties eating and chewing. Difficulties breathing through the nose creating predominantly mouth breathing. Teeth and jaws do not fit together.
She does at times get twitching of her facial muscles.

B199's initial problems began at the age of 10 and could have been induced by a lot of stress that she was under at that time or other factors. Following the escalation of her pain and headaches at the age of 20, she has undergone some significant treatment attempts. This includes the following:

Upper and lower jaw splint devices that I have not seen before that she wore for 1 year. Since age 22, she has had 4 additional splints. She basically wears through them and then requires new ones to be made. Acupuncture last year for a few months.
She has seen 2 different chiropractic doctors between ages 21 and 23 for treatments without any successful improvement. She had physical therapy for the past year, again without any significant improvement.

B199 rates her headaches at a level of 6 throughout her head area that is fairly constant and can exacerbate to a level of 8 to 9. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 5, diet at 5, and disability at 8. The only medication she currently takes is Motrin, although she has tried Vicodin and pain medications with codeine that have been ineffectual for her. She gets earaches occasionally, no tinnitus, but vertigo with no hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her knees, hips, ankles, and possibly her neck vertebrae. She is aware of clenching her teeth at night time and also during the day.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B199 has fairly good facial symmetry in the upper and lower third face, and there may be some slight asymmetry in the mandible. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 5 mm. The maxillary dental midline is just slightly off to the right side about 1 mm. The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the right side, and the chin is probably 2 to 3 mm off to the right side. B199 has about 12 mm of lip incompetence. In profile view, B199 has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3-4 mm. The chin is retruded by about 18 mm. Lower third face appears elongated. She has a high occlusal plane angle mandibular morphology. Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Lower molars are tipped lingually along the right bicuspid slightly. She has a transverse and narrow lower arch. She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch, but has good attached gingiva. There is a slight accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a slight reverse curve of Wilson present. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal in structure and in health. Intranasally, as best I could see, the septum appears reasonably straight. The turbinates appear moderate in size particularly on the left side. The right one is not quite as large as the left one. B199 has a Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally by probably 3 mm or so. She has an anterior open bite. She has an end-on incisor AP relationship and posteriorly it appears that the maxillary and mandibular posterior teeth are tipped lingually. Her Class III occlusion appears to be splint induced. She does have a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 1 to 1.5 mm lower than the left side. The mandibular left cuspid is about 1 or 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. To palpation, she has moderate to high moderate pain throughout the head and neck area with the worse being in the TMJ area and the shoulder area. On opening, she does have a click in the right joint at about 30 mm of opening and a closing click at 15 mm. The left side functions reasonably smoothly, although she feels sort of like a rubbing kind of noise on the left side. On opening, the mandible does shift off towards the right side about 3-4 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of all teeth actually erupted in including the third molars. Sinuses look relatively clear. It is difficult to evaluate the TMJ joints. Styloid processes are moderately long. Coronal view shows that she does have enlarged turbinates that fill most of the nasal cavity with the right side being worse than the left side. Septum appears reasonably straight and sinuses appear relatively clear. Axial view also shows that anteriorly the turbinates have been reduced particularly on the left side, but posteriorly the turbinates are quite large particularly on the right side. Sinuses are clear. Left TMJ coronal view shows condyle that appears to have a reasonable shape to it. It may be a little bit narrow mediolaterally. Joint space vertically is reasonable except at the lateral rim of the fossa where it is a little bit narrow. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears slightly smaller than the opposite side. Joint space appears fairly well balance. There is a little bit decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint perhaps in one view. Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa in some of the views. Articular eminence has a moderate inclination. A little sclerosis on the head of the condyle. There may be a little flattening of the condyle in the superior aspect towards the lateral aspect of the joint.
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a pseudocyst in the head. There is some anterior beaking present, and there actually appears to be a decreased anterior joint space between the articular eminence and the condyle. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B199 has a moderately high occlusal plane angle, a Class III occlusion with a Class II skeletal relationship. She has anterior vertical maxillary excess and AP mandibular deficiency. The airway space appears somewhat constricted with it being about 10 mm at the soft palate and at the base of the tongue measures about 8 mm down to less than 4 mm of airway space. She has a significant lip incompetence with anterior vertical maxillary excess. Maximal incisal opening is 46 mm, opening without discomfort 28 mm. Excursion movement to the right 7 mm, to the left 6 mm.

Basic diagnoses for B199 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction on the right side and without reduction on the left side. AP vertical maxillary hyperplasia, but AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia, but anterior vertical hyperplasia.
Anterior open bite. Class III occlusion. High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm at the base of the tongue (normal dimension 11 mm).
TMJ pain. Myofascial pain. Headaches. Hypertrophied turbinates creating nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
MRI of left and right TMJ. Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies if they are necessary. Align and level mandibular arch. Try to expand the arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing no more than 2 mm to correct for a 1.5 to 2 mm tooth size discrepancy. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgical option 1. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. Bilateral coronoidotomies. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Anterior mandibular ostectomy to advance the chin forward and reduce it vertically. Consider removing the third molars.
Surgical option 2.
Bilateral TMJ disc repositioning and stabilization with Mitek anchors. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.
Bilateral turbinectomies.
Consider possible removal of third molars. Anterior mandibular ostectomy to advance the chin forward and reduce it vertically. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B199 MRI AGE: 25/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There appears to be discal tissue in the joint area with some what appears to be lateral disc displacement. It is difficult to tell whether it is anterior or posteriorly. There is good condylar width. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle is just slightly smaller than the left side. There appears to be discal tissue displaced laterally, but also it appears that there may be some tissue medially as well. Joint space appears reasonably good. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. A little sclerosis on the top. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and significantly degenerated and deformed. It is quite short anteroposteriorly. The posterior band is quite thickened. Intermediate zone is extremely short. There is fluid in the superior joint space. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. On opening, this side seems to have moderately good translation with the disc in position. The disc appears to move with the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have some arthritic changes with some areas that appear like small erosive areas on the anterior and superior head of the condyle. It appears that there is discal tissue that is degenerated, but in position. What appears to be the posterior band is of relatively normal thickness. Intermediate zone appears to be degenerated as does the posterior disc. Anterior band appears fairly dense. There is some fluid in the superior joint space. The right TMJ appears to have anteriorly displaced disc that is nonreducing, although there is reasonably good translation of the condyle. The disc remains thickened, deformed, and degenerated.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with significant deformation and nonreducing. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc that may be laterally displaced, but otherwise appears to be in position, although somewhat degenerated.

