B200
B200 is 26 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. He has had previous septoplasty, rhinoplasty, turbinectomy, chin implant, and wisdom teeth removal. He has allergies, asthma, and sleep apnea. Primary concerns B200 has include the following:

Obstructive sleep apnea. Jaw hurts and feels tensed up.
Difficult to chew.
Jaws have become more retruded.
He takes basically no medications except for some vitamins and herbal supplements. He also has been diagnosed as having hypothyroidism. He had his previous internal and external nasal surgery 5 years ago. He had previous orthodontics from ages 15 to 20. B200 gets headaches at about a level of 5 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head and on the top of the head, but this occurs only about once a week. He rates his TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 6, jaw function and diet at 6, disability at 4. He gets earaches and also his ears get clogged. He has ringing in his ears and frequent vertigo. He feels he has some hearing loss. No other joints bother him.

B200's TMJ problems began when he was about 14 years old when he woke up one morning and had pain and discomfort in the left jaw joint with unknown etiology. He did go through orthodontics from ages 15 to 20 with extraction of four first bicuspids. He did wear a splint about 6 months. He takes no medications except for some vitamins and some herbal supplements. He had a chin implant placed in 15 months ago.

In frontal view, B200 has got reasonably good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 2 mm. The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are fairly well aligned with each other. In profile view, he has probably about a 6 to 8 mm AP deficiency in the maxilla. The chin is retruded by about 25 to 28 mm. The chin neckline is extremely short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. Intraorally, he is missing the lower and upper first bicuspids. He has a slight Class II cuspid relationship bilaterally by about 4 mm on the left side and probably 3 on the right side. The mandibular dental midline may be about 1 mm to the left. He has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1.5 mm higher than right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy, but he does have a hyperplastic uvula. The soft palate, fascial pillars, and tonsils appear relatively normal. He does give a history of at least moderate snoring and moderate daytime somnolence and at least moderate sleep apnea. He does not sleep well at night and tosses and turns a lot. He is predominantly a mouth breather at night and also during the day. Intranasally, he has a large septal spur at the base of the septum into the right side that blocks off most of the airway. Most of the left turbinate has been removed, but there is a posterior turbinate that may be clocking the airway. On the right side, it is difficult to see the turbinate as well, but anteriorly it appears to be more normal size, but could not evaluate the posterior aspect. He has a deep bite of about 0.5 mm. To palpation, he has moderate pain bilaterally over the retromandibular area and shoulders and mild to moderate over the right TMJ. Joints function reasonably smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is 42 mm, excursion movement to the right 7 mm, to the left 8 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four first bicuspids and all four third molars except there is a root tip that appears left in the right third molar area. The turbinates appear enlarged. TMJs appear arthritic.

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has evidence of loss of vertical as well as anteroposterior volume. The decreased superior joint space. The top of the condyle is sclerotic and has a little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence has a relatively normal inclination, although out laterally it appears a little bit more flat. There is decreased vertical joint space.

Right TMJ shows a condyle that is arthritic but not as severe as the opposite side. There is anterior beaking present. The articular eminence is a little bit longer in length and slightly steeper than the opposite side. It appears there may be some degenerative changes in the fossa itself. There is a little bit of sclerosis on the top of the condyle. There is decrease joint space between the condyle and the articular eminence.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that looks almost like a mushroom head as it is reasonably broad mediolaterally. There is decreased joint space and the lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. There may be some degenerative changes in the fossa. The superior joint space is very narrow.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost some vertical volume and has a mushroom shape to it as well. There is decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 2 mm.

Coronal view shows that the bony septum is reasonably straight. The turbinates are moderately enlarged. The sinuses look relatively clear with just a little bit of thickening of the sinus membrane in the floor of the maxilla on the left side.

Axial radiograph shows that the sinuses are clear and the bony septum is fairly straight. Turbinates are enlarged, particularly at the right side posteriorly.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B200 has got a retruded maxilla and mandible with a high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway space measures about 6 to 7 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue.

Basic diagnoses for B200 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ advanced arthritis and articular discs dislocated without reduction with severe deformation and degeneration.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia. Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle of 15 degrees, normal 8 degrees.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm. Hypertrophied turbinates.
Deviated nasal septum.
Hypertrophied uvula.
AP microgenia but previously placed Medpor implant is present.
Class II end-on occlusion being 3 mm on the right side and 4 mm on the left side. Missing maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Maintain mesial angulation of the maxillary lateral incisors and distal angulation of the cuspids in case interdental osteotomies are necessary. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing about 1 mm or 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward.
2. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3. Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies. e.	Removal of previously placed Medpor chin implant. f.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin. g.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. h.	Nasal septoplasty. i.	Uvulectomy.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B200 , MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is narrow mediolaterally and appears to have lost vertical volume. There is no disc tissue in the joint space. There is disc tissue that is medially and anteriorly displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with a downward curvature of only 1 to 2 mm. There is decreased lateral joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit broader in width than the opposite side, but it appears to have lost vertical volume. There appears to be discal tissue medial anterior to the condyle. The joint space may be a little bit narrow, but it is better than the opposite side.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is small in size with loss of vertical dimension. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present. The disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is short anteroposterior with loss of the intermediate zone. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. There appears to be amorphous tissue within the joint space. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint space, but not too significant. On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyle, but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction and with severe deformation.

Right joint shows a condyle that is a little bit larger, but also appears to have lost some vertical volume. There is a little bit of anterior beaking. The disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is quite short anteroposteriorly, particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. There is some amorphous tissue within the joint spaces. There is a little bit of fluid in the inferior joint space. On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyle, but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction and with severe deformation.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction with severe deformation. Right TMJ arthritis with articular disc dislocation without reduction and with significant deformation.

