B202
B202 is 52 years old, referred by XXXX. B202 was diagnosed with Hodgkin's lymphoma i6 years ago. She has had chemotherapy and radiation therapy and everything is under control at this time. She had a hysterectomy at age 37 and has had two foot surgeries at age 35 and 48.

B202's TMJ problems began when she was about 21 years old. Thirty years ago, she had surgery for the TMJ problems, but this included a LeForte I maxillary osteotomy and what appeared to be bilateral vertical oblique osteotomies in the mandible. This did resolve her situation. She did well until about 9 months ago when she began developing problems again. Her primary concerns at this time are as follows:

Pain and discomfort in the jaws and jaw joints. Feels as though the lower jaw is jutting forward.
Bites only on two rear teeth.
Feels pressure and discomfort at the joints bilaterally.

Previous treatment also included orthodontics done 30 years ago for the surgery. Currently, she is wearing some whitening trays on her teeth and this helps reduce her headache and pain problems. She was given a retainer, or possibly it might have been a bite splint of some type, but she only used it one time because it caused her significant pain in her jaws and increased headaches.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B202 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about zero. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline may be just slightly to the right. The chin appears to be probably about 3 to 4 mm to the right. In profile view, she has fairly good facial balance. The chin may be just slightly AP deficient by maybe 4 mm or so, but otherwise she has good facial balance. Chin neckline is reasonable in length, although the chin neck angle is not real clearly defined. Intraorally, she is missing mandibular probably first bicuspids. Posterior teeth appear to be in significant lingual inclination. She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she is also missing probably the first bicuspids. She has all of her teeth in both arches back through the third molars. She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has about a 1 mm vertical overbite relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues looks healthy. She does have a hyperplastic uvula which may account for some of her snoring. Otherwise, the soft palate looks relatively normal in length and there appears to be space between it and the posterior pharyngeal wall. Intranasally, the turbinates appear quite large. The septum, at least the part I can see, appears reasonably straight. She is aware of clenching at nighttime, at least she has been told she does that by the dentist, but she does not believe she does that during the day. Her headaches she gets are inconsistent and at about a level of 6 in the frontal and temporal area and on the top of the head. She may get headaches every day for 4 or 5 days and then may go for a time without getting any. She does rate her headaches at about a level 6 on the frontal, temporal, and up on top of the head. TMJ pain is at 4, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 2, diet at 0, disability at 2. She basically takes vitamins and Estroven. To palpation, she has some very mild tenderness over the TMJs and retromandibular area. B202 does wear whitening trays on her teeth. It is likely these whitening trays cause excessive pressure on the posterior molar teeth and may make them a little bit sensitive if she is clenching at night. This may be why she has the feeling that those teeth hit first. Her symptoms are quite mild, and she may be able to be managed and treated conservatively.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Left TMJ arthritis and anteriorly displaced articular disc with questionable reduction. Right TMJ arthritis and medial displacement of the articular disc.
Headaches.
Bilateral TMJ discomfort.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Hypertrophied uvula.

I recommend the following treatment:
Discontinue splints. Medication: Klonopin 1 mg q.h.s. May decrease to 0.5 mg if this works well. If medication resolves the TMJ jaw issues, then the patient may be able to control her situation well with periodic use of Klonopin. I gave her a prescription for Klonopin 1-mg tablets, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x5.

B202 MRI AGE: 52/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. Lateral rim of the fossa appears to curve inferiorly at least 5 mm. There is significantly decreased joint space vertically, but particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The disc may be anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 4 mm. There is decreased joint space superiorly as well as laterally. Discal tissue may be anteriorly displaced. There does not appear to be any discal tissue covering the lateral pole of the condyle on the right side.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little flattening on the anterior head and a little arthritic changes on top of the condyle with perhaps a little osteophyte type formation off the top of the condyle. There is significantly decreased superior joint space. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. Articular eminence has a moderate inclination. There is slight fluid in the superior joint space. Disc is anteriorly displaced, but appears thin. In the left TMJ, the disc may partially reduce, but appears as though it almost fold on itself. On opening, there is actually moderately good translation.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the head. Joint space appears a little bit better. Disc may anteriorly displaced sitting beneath the articular eminence. Right TMJ shows that it is possible that the disc may be in position. On the right side on opening, the disc does reduce. On the right side, the disc may be medially displaced.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with possible partial reduction, but with significant extension of the lateral rim of the fossa inferiorly. The lateral rim is overlapping the condyle about 4 to 5 mm. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc perhaps medially displaced, but with reduction on opening. Lateral rim curves inferiorly about 4 mm.

B202 I-CAT
Panorex shows she is missing lower probably first bicuspids and maxillary probably first bicuspids with the third molars erupted in and in place. Sinuses appear reasonably clear. There are interosseus wires in the maxilla, in the piriform area, and in the buttress area indicative of previous orthognathic surgery.

Coronal view shows sinuses appear relatively clear except for some thickening of the mucosa anteriorly and the sinus floor bilaterally. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged. Septum is reasonably straight. There is a little bending actually of the septum over towards the left side towards the anterior aspect of the nose.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly morphology. There is maybe a little bit of extraosseus off the superior aspect of the condyle. Joint space towards the lateral aspect of the joint appears constricted, but appears more so towards the medial side of the joint. Articular eminence is moderate in inclination. Sinuses appear reasonably clear. Oropharyngeal airway appears perhaps slightly constricted at the soft palate level, but maybe within normal range. The AP width at the soft palate level is 7.8 mm and down towards the base of the tongue approximately 8.4 mm.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic. There is significantly decreased lateral joint space and vertical joint space with the lateral space being worse than the superior. There is almost bone-on-bone contact. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 4 or 5 mm and overlaps almost the entire lateral pole of the condyle.

Right TMJ coronal view shows decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 4 mm, but is not quite as sharply angled vertically as the opposite side. Right sinus appears relatively clear. Right TMJ appears to have reasonably good morphology. Joint space looks a little bit better, although somewhat thin.

Axial view shows that the septum anteriorly is deviated off towards the left side up high, but a little bit straighter down than the inferior aspect. Turbinates appears fairly large. The wires are seen in the piriform rim area as well as in the bicuspid area. Sinuses appear reasonably clear.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis with the left side being worse than the right side. Septum deviated off towards the left side. Hypertrophied turbinates. Sinuses reasonably clear. Missing probably first bicuspids in all 4 quadrants, but the 3rd molars are erupted in. Oropharyngeal airway dimension of 7.8 mm at the soft palate level and 8.4 mm at the base of the tongue.

