B204
B204 is 48 years old. She was referred by Dr. XXXX.
B204's joint problems began to the best of her knowledge when she was about 28 years old. She developed TMJ problems and this began about 20 years ago. About 3 or 4 years ago, she developed significant problems in her joints and she became aware that her lower jaw became more retruded.

Primary concerns that B204 has at this time include the following:
TMJ problems.
Open bite.
Destroying her back teeth and crowns since only her back teeth touch.
Her smile has changed significantly. Jaw joint deterioration.
Jaw bone deterioration. Difficulties eating and chewing.
Headaches.
Jaw pain.
Adverse changes in her speech.

B204's joint problems began when she was 20 years old. The etiology is unknown. She hit her chin on a see-saw cutting it open and requiring stitches at about age 14. She hit her head on the diving board when she was on diving team at age 17. The treatment she has had to date began about 20 years ago when she was treated by Dr. XXXX with splint therapy, diet modification, and medications. She did fairly well on that routine and then about 4 years her problems became worse. She saw Dr. XXXX who revised the previous splint that she had. She also has received physical therapy, massage therapy, and chiropractic treatment. She gets massage therapy almost weekly now to try to maintain her pain.

B204 takes the following medications:
Mobic p.r.n. Claritin p.r.n. Aleve p.r.n. Sudafed p.r.n.
Midrin p.r.n. Iron supplement occasionally.
She has no earaches, but occasional tinnitus and vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her knees, ankles, and finger. She has been told she has a mild autoimmune disorder, but is not sure what it is. She also has problems with anemia. She is aware of clenching at nighttime and may also do this in the daytime. Her speech has been affected and her smile has changed significantly as well.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B204 has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 1 mm. She has just slight increased fullness in the right masseter area compared to the left side. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular midline and chin. The nasal tip is just slightly to the right side 1-2 mm. In profile, B204 demonstrates some AP maxillary deficiency of probably 4-5 mm. The mandible is retruded about 18 mm. The chin neckline is not defined. She has some lip incompetence of about 5-6 mm. Intraorally, B204 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. It appears she has crowns on most of the posterior teeth from the bicuspids on posteriorly. She has some mild moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch. She appears to have adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars. She has crowns it appears on her left molars. She occludes only on the right second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion. She has an anterior open bite of 4-5 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues all look relatively normal. Intranasally, right turbinate is mildly enlarged, the left one is relatively normal. Septum appears reasonably straight. There does not appear to be any major nasal airway obstruction. To palpation, B204 has some mild discomfort over the TMJs and retromandibular area. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is 40 mm and opening without discomfort about 30 mm. Excursion movements are 6 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. The rest of the teeth are present. She has root canals on the mandibular first molars and right lateral incisor. She has enlarged turbinates. Sinuses look reasonably clear. Axial view shows that the turbinates are quite large. Sinuses are clear. Septum appears reasonably straight in this view. Coronal view shows that the turbinates are excessively large and appear to block most of the nasal airway. Sinuses are clear except for a little bit of increased thickening of the sinus membranes in the left floor of the sinus. Septum is deviated in the bony area off towards the left side contributing to some airway obstruction there. Left TMJ tomogram shows severe arthritis and loss of volume of the condyle where most of the head of the condyle appears to have resorbed away. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There appears to be increased joint space and she likely was not in the centric relation when the x-ray was taken. Right TMJ lateral tomogram shows a condyle with severe arthritis, although there is some residual condylar head at the left compared to the opposite side. There is anterior beaking present. Articular eminence appears a little bit more shallow on this side than the opposite, but not by much. Left TMJ coronal view shows severe arthritic changes of the condyle with it appears almost like a sickle shape. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 4 mm or so. There is severe destruction of the condylar head on this side. Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has significantly more volume than the opposite side, although still there is evidence of significant condylar resorption. There is significantly decreased lateral joint space where it appears that there could be almost bone-on-bone contact. There are erosions on the head of the condyle present. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B204 has a retruded maxilla and mandible with a significantly high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 3.5 mm at the base of the tongue and perhaps 3.5-4 mm at the soft palate level.

Basic diagnoses for B204 would be as follows:
Connective tissue autoimmune disease.
Bilateral TMJ severe condylar resorption.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP, posterior vertical, and transverse hypoplasia.
Anterior open bite of 4-5 mm.
Class II end-on occlusion. Occluding only on the mandibular right second molar.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction. Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway of an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 11 mm).
Sleep apnea symptoms.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid root distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. Place brackets or bands on all second molars, but do not engage the second molars in the arch wire at this time. Stop the arch wire at the first molars.
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction, advancing the chin point 18 mm, using TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction approximately 6 mm at the incisal edge and down grafting it posteriorly about 6 mm. Bilateral coronoidotomies.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry if indicated to complete the occlusion.

B204 MRI AGE: 48/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is severely degenerated. There is decreased lateral joint space. The condyle may be postured somewhat forward in the fossa. The entire head of the condyle that can be seen appears quite sclerotic.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost vertical volume. There is significantly decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is severely arthritic and sclerotic. The condyle is postured forward in the fossa, what is left of it. There is significant loss of volume. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is about the size of a peanut, rolled up in a ball, severely deformed, and sitting beneath the articular eminence. There appears to be inflammation in the bilaminar tissues. On opening, there is restricted translation of the condyle. There appears to be degenerative changes on the articular eminence.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is severely degenerated. There is anterior beaking with some sclerosis on the head, but not like the opposite side. There appears to be significant loss of volume. Articular eminence is moderately steep. It is difficult to identify discal tissue, although there may be a small remnant beneath the articular eminence. On opening, there is restricted translation. This condyle is a little bit better centered in the fossa, although still postured forward.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ severe and advanced arthritis with the disc anteriorly displaced, severely deformed, degenerated, and non-salvageable. Right TMJ severe and advanced arthritis with articular disc anteriorly displaced and severely degenerated.
The patient is a candidate for bilateral total joint prostheses.

