B205
B205 is 42 years old, referred by Dr. XXXX.
PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Throbbing and numbing on the right side of the jaw.
Severe pain in the right TMJ area.
Snoring.

B205 has no trouble with headaches. He says his TMJ pain can easily escalate to a 10. His pain is worse in the evenings. Average daily pain is about a 9 although he does not have it every single day but when he gets the pain it is at that level. He rates his jaw function and diet at 3 and disability at 7. B205 gets occasional numbness in the lower right lip, cheek and chin area.

B205's problems began two years ago of no known reason. It started with a ringing of the ear and then proceeded in the more severe pain mode that he now gets. The only medication he takes is Aleve. He says he has had no other treatment for it. He does not have any trouble with earaches but gets occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo. The only other joint that is a little bit bothersome is his right shoulder. He is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime and also during the day. He had an adverse reaction to etodolac.

In frontal view, B205 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 28 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is -4. Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline. In profile view, B205 has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose. Chin appears significantly retruded by probably about 20 mm. Chin-neckline flows directly into the neckline. Intraorally, B205 has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Transverse width of the lower arch appears narrow. He has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch. He has good attached gingiva present. Slight accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch. In the upper arch, B205 has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has basically a Class I cuspid relationship with just a slight Class II tendency. He has tendency towards a cross bite on one side but it is not in a full crossbite. He has a slight reverse curve of Wilson particularly in the bicuspid areas. The transverse occlusal plane is fairly level. He has an anterior open bite of 2 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues appear relatively normal and healthy. The uvula is moderate to severe hyperplastic. The soft palate is moderately elongated. Faucial pillars are mildly constricted. Tonsils look relatively normal. Difficult to evaluate the turbinates but they may be somewhat enlarged. The septum appears reasonably straight. Holding the nostril open on the right side significantly improved B205's ability to breathe through that side of the nose. On the left side it helps some but not as significantly as the right side. There maybe some constricture of the luminal valve particularly on the right side of the nose. To palpation, he has some high moderate pain over the TMJs and mild pain over the right masseter, right styloid and right SCM. The joint seems to function reasonably smoothly. Incisal opening is about 49 mm. Excursive movements are about 11 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the presence of impacted maxillary right third molar. The other third molars are absent. Sinuses look relatively clear. The right condyle appears to have a little bump on it. There may be a little flattening on the anterior aspect. The left condyle appears a little bit smaller than the right side.

Waters view shows that the turbinates appear fairly large. The sinuses appear relatively clear. He has huge frontal sinuses that appear clear.
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology and there is a significant joint space present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space looks very well balanced.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also has fairly good morphology. Articular eminence on this side appears significantly steeper than the opposite and a little bit longer in length. The joint space likewise looks very well balanced. On opening, there is some fairly good translation of the condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B205 has some AP mandibular deficiency, posterior vertical maxillary deficiency, high occlusal plane angle with significant overjet of about 4 mm with an open bite of probably at least 3 mm. Oropharyngeal airway looks suprisingly large with AP dimension at the soft palate level of about 12 mm and at the base of the tongue about 14 mm or so. He has a head postured forward neck position.

Dental model analysis shows that there is significant crowding in the lower anterior arch and some mild crowding of upper anterior arch. There is an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. The lower arch is a little bit more flat. There is a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship of about 2 mm. Transverse width of the arch is quite constricted.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: Slight AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Slight Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior open bite.
High occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations.
TMJ pain, right side worse than the left side.
Myofascial pain. Hypertrophied turbinates. Partial nasal airway obstruction. Impacted maxillary left third molar. Hyperplastic uvula. Severe snoring. Nocturnal clenching and bruxism not controlled by splint therapy.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications.
Klonopin 1 mg q.h.s. to help control chronic clenching and bruxism.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch. Try to expand the lower arch somewhat to keep from flaring the incisors too far forward. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing no more than 2 mm of tooth structure.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect, expand and advance slightly. Bilateral partial turbinectomies. Uvulectomy.
Surgical removal of impacted maxillary left third molar.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B205 MRI Age: 42
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. The lateral pole is positioned higher than the medial pole. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm. There appears to be discal tissue anterior to the condyle and also medially positioned. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. A little sclerosis on the head of the condyle.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle where the lateral pole is higher than the medial pole. The disc appears to be medially displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm. A little sclerosis on the head of the condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced about the 10 o'clock position. It has a vertical inclination within the fossa. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, the disc reduces early. There is good translation of the condyle and the disc.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit flattening on the anterior head. A little bit of sclerosis on the head. Articular eminence is fairly steep. The articular disc appears to be in position except possibly at the most lateral aspect of the joint it could be anteriorly displaced. There is fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. The condyle appears a little bit more arthritic than the opposite side in some of the views. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with early reduction. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc that may be anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint.

