B209
B209 is 19 years old, referred by Dr. XXXX and by her father, Dr. XXXX. She is currently a college student at the University of North Florida. B209 is in good health with no major medical problems. Since about the age of two, her dad was aware that she had an open bite. She had orthodontics from the age of 10 years to 15 years. Then she had upper first bicuspids and lower second bicuspids removed to facilitate the orthodontic treatment. She currently takes no medications. She has no earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. Although she has had problems wm osteotomy of her joints, at the current moment, she does not have any significant problems. She was a gymnast and a dancer for about 12 years. B209 has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain. She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability at zero.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B209 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry, a little bit more fullness in the right ramus area as compared to the left side of probably 2 to 3 mm. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. So is the mandibular dental midline and the chin. In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is about at least 2 mm posterior to subnasale. The maxilla is retruded at least 6 mm and perhaps 8 mm. The chin appears to be retruded 20 to 24 mm. Chin neckline is extremely short, although the chin neck angle is relatively well defined. The lower two-thirds of the lower face appears elongated. Intraorally, B209 is missing the lower second bicuspids, but has the rest of her teeth back through the third molars. The teeth are reasonably well aligned and leveled. The lower incisors appear that they may be almost in a little bit of a lingual inclination. In the upper arch, B209 is missing probably the first bicuspids. She has the rest of the teeth back through third molars present. B209 has an anterior open bite of about 4 mm. She has a Class II end-on occlusion being about 3 to 4 mm Class II. She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and appears to have just a slight curve of Spee in the lower arch. There is a slightly increased curve of Wilson in both arches. Oropharyngeal airway looks normal relative to architecture and anatomy. Intranasally, the septum appears to deviate a little bit off towards the right side. The turbinates are quite large, being moderate to severe in size. They block off a major portion of the nasal airway. Columella is wide and the nostrils are somewhat narrow. To palpation, B209 has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm. Excursion movement to the right 8 mm, to the left 10 mm. Dental model analysis confirms that she has a reverse of curve of Spee in the lower arch and a accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. The lower second bicuspids are missing and the maxillary likely first bicuspids appear to be gone. All third molars are present. There is a slight transverse width discrepancy in the Class I cuspid position. Maximal opening is a little bit narrow transversely. Also, manipulating the models into the best fit reduces the open bite to about 2.5 mm. The reverse and accentuated curves of Spee are really evident. B209 demonstrates no discrepancies in the sizes of her maxillary and mandibular teeth

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates are quite large. The septum appears reasonably straight, at least in the bony section. Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear, but the turbinates are quite large, although the septum looks reasonably straight. Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular second bicuspids and maxillary possibly second bicuspids as well. All four third molars are erupted and into occlusion. The septum looks reasonably straight. Turbinates appear moderate in size, but the airway appears obstructed. The condyles appear a little arthritic and the condylar heads and necks appear somewhat short. Right TMJ tomograms show that the joint space looks a little bit decreased and narrowed. The cortical bone appears to be intact. Left TMJ tomogram coronal view likewise shows a condyle that appears fairly large for it size. Joint space appears perhaps a little bit narrow. Right TMJ tomograms show a condyle with fairly good morphology and some slight anterior beaking. Joint space actually looks reasonably well.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that looks a little bit flattened on the posterior head and also on the anterior head with a little bit of anterior beaking.

Lateral cephalogram shows that B209 has a retruded mandible, retruded maxilla, anterior open bite, high occlusal plane angle, and bilaterally elongated mandibular vertical height, etc. Oropharyngeal airway appears to be adequate and measuring about 7 to 8 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of tongue decreases to about 5 mm.

Basic diagnoses for B209 would be as follows:
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
AP microgenia. Class II end-on occlusion. Anterior open bite of 4 mm.
High occlusal plane angle of 26 degrees (normal 8 degrees). Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. Reversed curve of Spee in the lower arch. Hypertrophied turbinates. Malaligned third molars. Rule out bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Place appliances back to the second molars, but do not include the second molars in the arch wire. Place a step in the maxillary arch wire between the cuspids and lateral incisors to align the 4 incisors and elevated occlusal plane level and to slightly extrude the cuspids to align them vertically with the posterior teeth. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. Try to extrude the mandible four incisors approximately 1 mm. Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect, advance the maxilla forward 6 mm at the incisal edges, and level of occlusal plane angle. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the chin and decrease the vertical height of the mandible. Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
Possible TMJ surgery if Baylor radiologist confirms that the discs are displaced in the TMJs.

B209 MRI AGE: 19/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. Joint space may be somewhat decreased. It appears that there is discal tissue displaced anterior and medial. Cortical bone appears to be intact. There may be some evidence of loss of vertical volume.

Right TMJ coronal view shows fairly good morphology with perhaps some slight loss of vertical volume. Joint space appears somewhat narrow. There appears to be discal tissue anterior and slightly medial to the condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the posterior head and a little bit of sclerosis on the anterior aspect. Some slight anterior beaking is present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The disc is anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect, but more medially it appears the disc may be in reasonable position. On opening, it does appear to reduce relatively early on.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle appears a little bit larger than the opposite side. There is some flattening on the posterior head and also on the anterior aspect. There may be some slight anterior beaking, but not too significant. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced particular at the lateral aspect of the joint and appears in a little bit better position medially. There may be a little bit of fluid in the joint spaces. On opening, there is early reduction with fairly good translation of the condyle and disc.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint with early reduction. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint with early reduction.

