B214
MRI
AGE: 23/M
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width, and, in fact, extends almost beyond the lateral rim of the fossa with a lateral extension of the lateral pole. There appears to be discal tissue in position, however. Lateral pole is significantly lower than the medial pole.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. The condyle has a lateral pole significantly lower than the medial pole. It appears there may be some medially displaced discal tissue and decreased lateral joint space.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good morphology. Articular disc appears to be in relatively normal position. The disc is thin in the intermediate zone and anterior band area. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There is some very minimal fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc and the disc remains in a normal position. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic and appears very narrow anteroposteriorly at the top. There is a little anterior beaking and an osteophyte that extends superiorly off the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting almost beneath the articular eminence. There is a little bit of inflammatory response within the joint tissues. On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle, but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION:
1. Left TMJ slightly enlarged condyle but with normal disc position.
2. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction.

B214
B214 is 23 years old. Primary concerns B214 has include the following:
1. Jaws click, particularly when eating.
2. Sometimes he has pain in the jaw joint.
3. Open bite.

B214 believes his joint problems began when he was about 17 of unknown etiology. He had previously had orthodontics from the age of 9 to 13. He says that the braces were taken off early because the orthodontist got fed up with him not wearing the elastics. He takes no medications. He has no earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. He has no headache problems. He rates his TMJ pain at 2, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 1, diet at 0, and disability at 3. He is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time and also during the day. He does believe that his lower jaw is shifting towards the right side and also his bite is opening.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B214 has good facial symmetry in the middle and third face. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 2 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is about almost 2 mm to the right. The mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other. In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 3 mm and chin is retruded by probably 8-10 mm. Chin neckline is somewhat short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined. When B214 holds his lower jaw forward, it improves his profile some particularly with filling out of the upper lip. Intraorally, B214 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. He has some mild crowding. He has some increased curve of Wilson extending from the bicuspids through the second molars. He does have a 3 x 3 retainer on the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He is about 5 mm Class III on the left side and probably about 1-2 mm Class III on the right side. He has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm. He has a cross bite on the right side anteriorly. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged. Septum appears reasonably straight. There is probably some mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction. To palpation, he has no real significant pain around the head and neck area. On opening and closing, the left joint function fairly smoothly. On the right side, he could generate a click by moving his jaw in a certain manner. He could do it with two different methods. One included basically posturing the posterior lower jaw forward. Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm and excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction. However, shifting the mandible towards the left side causes greater discomfort.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. The rest of the teeth are all present. He has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch. Sinuses look full. Hard to evaluate the condyles. Coronal view shows that the presence of hypertrophied turbinates. The septum is deviated off towards the left side. Sinuses appear full. The right-sided cross bite is quite evident. Axial view shows that the turbinates are quite large. There is deviation of the septum off towards the left side. Sinuses are almost completely full of fluid and material.

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condylar head and neck that is elongated. There is a hockey stick shape to the condyle. Joint space actually looks reasonably good. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that is very narrow anteroposteriorly, particularly on the middle portion of the condyle. The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is relatively shallow, but the anterior joint space is increased. The condylar head and neck do appear elongated.. Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has some unusual shape to it with a lateral extension toward, but not quite beyond, the lateral rim of the fossa. The lateral pole is significantly lower than the medial pole. In some views, the lateral joint space appears narrowed. Right TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There is decreased medial joint space as well as some slight diffuse lateral joint space. The lateral pole of the condyle is lower than the medial pole. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a skeletal Class I but an occlusal Class III relationship. The oropharyngeal airway is quite constricted with an airway dimension of only about 5 mm at the base of the tongue and about 5 mm at the soft palate level as well. There appears to be fluid within the sinuses. Occlusal plane is moderately steep.

Basic diagnoses for B214 would be as follows:
1. Left TMJ condylar hyperplasia.
2. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction.
3. Mandibular deviated prognathism.
4. Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia.
5. Hypertrophied turbinates.
6. TMJ pain.
7. Periodontal defects lower anterior arch.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Perio surgery to repair gingival clefts lower anterior arch.
2. Presurgical orthodontics. a. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b. Align and level mandibular arch. Expand the bicuspids and molars slightly to decrease the accentuated curve of Wilson.
3. Surgery. a. Left TMJ high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning with ligament repair. b. Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair. c. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to correct the facial asymmetry and to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. d. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and expand posteriorly. e. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies to open the nasal airway.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

