B215
B215 is 55 years old, referred by Dr. XXXX.
B215 believes that her jaw problems began about 3 years ago when she had some dental work and was held open for a while and maybe slightly over extended. She developed popping in the right joint at that time. The popping initially was quite loud where it could be heard across the room, but with subsequent treatment the clicking and popping has stopped. Her dentist who is now treating her is Dr. XXXX. Dr. XXXX referred B215 to see Dr. XXXX who made the splint for her. This helped eliminate the clicking and popping. B215 gets headaches about every 2 weeks at about a level of 4 in the frontal and temporal areas and perhaps up to the top of her head as well. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 5, diet at 5, disability at 2.

Medications she takes include the following:
1. Flexeril occasionally.
2. Evamist--hormone spray.
3. Triamaterene (water pill).
4. Excedrin Tension.
She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her right wrist (she had surgery on her right wrist 8 months ago). She has some perforated disks in her neck that could be somewhat contributory. She is allergic to surgical iodine, but has no other allergies that she is aware of including no food allergies and no reaction to jewelry. She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.

In frontal view, B215 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 0. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. It may be just about 1 mm to the right. The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the left as is the chin. In profile, B215 has fairly good facial balance vertically and anteroposterior. She does appear to have some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 mm and chin appears retruded by approximately 12 mm. Intraorally, B215 is missing mandibular right first molar and has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. The third molars are missing. She has crowns on the left first and second molars. She has mild crowding of the lower anterior arch, but has good attached gingiva. Lower right second molar is in significant mesial inclination. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has crowns in most all of the posterior teeth. She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has about a 2 mm vertical overbite. She has a cross bite with the right lateral incisor and cuspid. She has had her wisdom teeth removed. Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderate in size. Luminal valves appear a little bit constricted. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the right TMJ and milder pain over the right masseter and left SCM. On opening, there is crepitation in both joints, but she was so much more aware of it on the right side along with the pain and discomfort on that side. The maximal incisal opening is 43 mm, opening without discomfort 35 mm. The excursion movements are B215

2
about 8 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. She is also missing mandibular right first molar. The sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged. Joints appear arthritic particularly on the right side.

Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight at this particular bone cut. The turbinates are fairly large and appear to obliterate a good part of the airway. The sinuses appear relatively clear except there is a little something in the left ethmoid sinuses.

Axial view shows that the septum is deviated slightly. Turbinates are quite large and probably obliterate most of the airway. The sinuses look relatively clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. There is anterior beaking. There is significant flattening on the head of the condyle and sclerosis present. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. There actually appears to be some fairly degenerated and rough bone on the articular eminence. There is decreased posterior joint space.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has severe arthritis associated with it. Joint space actually however looks better. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. There appears to be degenerative changes along the posterior slope of the articular eminence and there appears to be a little osteophyte sticking up off the condyle. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is somewhat flattened. There is loss of vertical height. Mediolateral width appears reasonable. There is decreased lateral joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe degenerative changes with areas of erosion. There is a lateral osteophyte sticking off from the lateral pole that appears to have bone-on-bone contact. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly only about 2 to 3 mm. There is significant degeneration in the head of the condyle.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that jaws appear to be somewhat retruded. Her oropharyngeal airway is quite constricted with an airway dimension of only about 3 or 4 mm. She has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.

Basic diagnoses for B215 would be as follows:
1. Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
2. Mandibular AP hypoplasia. B215
3
3. Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
4. Hypertrophied turbinates.
5. Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
6. High occlusal plane angle.
7. Cross bite on the right side involving the maxillary lateral incisor and cuspid.
8. Missing mandibular right first molar and all four third molars.
9. Mesial tilt and inclination of the second molar.
10. TMJ pain.
11. Headaches.
12. Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics.
a. Align and level maxillary arch. Correct cross bite of the lateral incisor and

cuspid. Open up 1 mm of space mesial and 1 mm of space distal to the
lateral incisor to correct for the significant tooth size discrepancy.
2. Surgery.

a. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
Concepts total joint prostheses.
b. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise

direction.
c. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
d. Bilateral coronoidotomies.
e. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomy.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
4. Restorative dentistry to replace the missing mandibular right first molar and to

bond, veneer, or crown the maxillary lateral incisor.
B215
MRI
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. There appears to be some significant flattening on the head of the condyle indicative of perhaps some condylar resorption. There appears there may be some discal tissue in position, but also an indication that there is discal tissue displaced medial and perhaps anterior. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with a downward curvature of 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with significant flattening on the head of the condyle and with apparent loss of volume perhaps even more so than the opposite side. There is discal tissue displaced medially and anteriorly. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with a downward curvature of less than 2 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic. There is flattening on the head of the condyle and sclerosis on the top of the condyle with anterior beaking. The B215

4
disc appears to be anteriorly displaced, severely deformed. The articular eminence laterally is fairly flat, but more medially has a moderate inclination. There appears to be a little fluid in the superior joint space above the significantly deformed articular disc. On opening, there is restricted translation of the condyle and the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. There does appear to be some compressed tissue up in the depth of the fossa.

Right TMJ sagittal view is of poor quality There is significant flattening on the head of the condyle and some increased vertical joint space. There appears to be a little bit of inflammation present. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced without reduction. There is significant inflammation in the bilaminar tissues surrounding the top and anterior aspect of the head and to a lesser degree the posterior head. There appears to be fluid around the lateral aspect of the condyle as well. Right TMJ opening view shows that there is restricted translation and the articular disc that is severely deformed remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. There is increased vertical joint space present in the closed view.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs anteriorly displaced without reduction with significant inflammation present in the right joint.

