B216
B216 is 25 years old.
Patient Concerns
1. Neck and shoulder pain
2. Headaches
Patient History
B216's problems began about 1-1/2 years ago related to an MVA. Someone ran into the side of her car. She was a passenger, and the other automobile hit on the passenger side and rolled the car over 3/4 of the way. The day after the accident, she had rather severe head and neck pain. She has had CAT scans and MRIs of the neck and head area. She was told that in her neck she had some discs that were swollen some, but that the bone structures were in good condition. They did a brain CAT scan, and it was negative. She has had some extensive chiropractic and physical therapy treatment for the past 1-1/2 years. For the first year, she had treatments three days per week. Now she gets it when the pain gets bad, and that is about once a month. She has been under orthodontic treatment for the past two months with Dr. XXXX. B216 has had previous orthodontics when she was about 10 years old for about 9 months.

She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her left shoulder and her hips occasionally. Has seasonal allergies. There are SOME ANTI-INFLAMMATORY MEDICATIONS that she can have a reaction to. She is not aware of having any problems wearing jewelry. She gets headaches at about a level of 4 daily in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally. However, these headaches can get up to a 6 or a 7. She rates her TMJ pain at 0, average daily pain at 4, jaw function and diet at 3, and disability at 5.

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B216 has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 6.5 mm. She has lip incompetence of almost 9 mm.

In profile view, B216 has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 2 to 3 mm. She is probably about 10 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is a little bit short, although the chin-neck angle is reasonably well-defined.

Intraorally, B216 has all her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth are fairly well aligned . Adequate attached gingiva lower anterior arch although a little bit thin in the cuspid area. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She is a little bit Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally. She has small upper lateral incisors and probably has a tooth-size discrepancy that accounts for the drift in the occlusion. She is about 2 mm Class II. She has probably about 2 to 3 mm of vertical overlap. Transversely, she has a slight cant in the occlusal plane with about 0.5 mm vertical difference with the right side being lower than the left side. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula, soft palate, and faucial pillars appear relatively normal.

Intranasally, the septum is deviated off toward the right side. Turbinates are moderately enlarged with fairly good obstruction in the right side. The left side, although the turbinate is enlarged, does not appear to be as obstructive.

To palpation, she has moderate pain over the styloid area and mild pain over the TMJS and masseter muscles. Maximal incisal opening is 48 mm, but she could open to 38 without discomfort. Excursive movements are about 9 mm in each direction. Joints actually function reasonably smoothly.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars with all the other teeth present. Right turbinate appears enlarged. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Condyles appears a little bit arthritic with some flattening on the anterior head of the condyles.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. She has huge frontal sinuses. Nasal septum appears relatively straight, but this is the bony septum and not the cartilaginous which clinically is deviated. Right turbinate is enlarged whereas the left appears more normal in size.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the superior aspect; otherwise it looks reasonably good. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Superior and posterior joint space may be slightly decreased but not a lot.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the superior head. Could have decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately shallow.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles with the left one being a little bit greater than the right one.
Left cephalometric radiograph shows there is good oropharyngeal airway. She has an anterior open bite. Appears to have vertical maxillary excess. Mandible also appears long vertically.

Basic Diagnoses
1. Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction (pre-click reduction)
2. Vertical maxillary excess
3. AP mandibular deficiency
4. AP microgenia
5. Anterior mandibular vertical excess
6. Class II end-on occlusion
7. Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 to 3 mm secondary to small upper lateral incisors
8. High occlusal plane angle
9. Overangulation of lower incisors
10. Hypertrophied turbinates
11. Nasal septal deviation
12. Nasal airway obstruction
13. Headaches
14. TMJ pain
15. Myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment
1. Presurgical orthodontics A. Continue to align and level maxillary arch B. Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and close spaces
2. Surgery A. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors B. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly C. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction D. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies E. Nasal septoplasty F. Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance and vertically shorten the chin
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

B216
Meeting Notes
:
Date of Acquisition: Date of Reading:
MEETING WITH DR. XXXX:
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a fairly wide condyle. Could be a little bit of decreased superior joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. Decreased joint space vertically at the lateral aspect of the joint. The disc bilaterally may be anteriorly and medially displaced.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows the disc is not readily seen at the lateral aspect of the joint. Appears to be a little bit anteriorly displaced. There is a little flattening on the anterior head of the condyle and some anterior beaking present. A little osteophyte extending superiorly off the head of the condyle. The disc is a little bit better positioned toward the medial aspect of the joint. No significant fluid seen in the joint space.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc with early reduction of the disc.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows some anterior beaking and a little osteophyte off the superior head of the condyle. Disc is anteriorly displaced and not seen very well at the lateral aspect of the joint. Some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. No particular fluid seen in the joint space.

On opening, there is early reduction and good translation of the condyle and the articular disc.
Impression:
1. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction
2. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction

B216
MRI Scan Evaluation
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Reading:
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. There appear to be some degenerative changes on the superior surface of the condyle. There may have been some previous resorption. Lateral rim of the fossa is quite flat with very minimal downward curvature. Lateral pole of the condyle actually extends out to maybe just slightly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Appears to be discal tissue anterior to the head of the condyle. Superior joint space appears decreased.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Appear to be less arthritic changes on the superior surface as compared to the opposite side. Fossa is fairly flat with very minimal downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. Decreased superior joint space. Appears to be discal tissue anterior to the condylar head.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that appears to be a little bit postured forward. Some flattening on the anterior head. A little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. There may be some compressed tissue up in the depth of the fossa or perhaps some discal tissue there. The condyle appears to be functioning on the bilaminar tissues posterior to the disc. Some arthritic changes on the superior surface of the condyle. A little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint space but not too significantly. Disc appears to have fairly good morphology.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle, and the articular disc does reduce and appears to translate fairly well with the condyle.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has flattening on the superior head. A little bit of anterior beaking is present, but it doesn't appear to be as significant as the opposite side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. Condylar head appears to be functioning on the bilaminar tissues. Disc appears to have fairly good morphology. Could be a little bit of fluid in the inferior joint space but not much.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle, and the disc is reduced and appears to translate well with the condyle.
Impression:
1. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction
2. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with probable early reduction
3. Both discs are salvageable
4. Patient would probably benefit from bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors and any orthognathic procedures indicated from clinical, cephalometric, and dental model analysis

