B217
B217 is 52 years old, referred by Dr. XXXX. B217 was apparently asymptomatic until about 10 years ago. She was involved in a motor vehicle accident where she was struck from behind and struck her head on the headrest. Apparently, something got dislocated in her jaw and she underwent a manipulation to try to reset the mandible. This was about 10 years ago. She was referred to a pain clinic where this manipulation was probably done. The pain clinic also did injections into the back of her head and her neck area and jaw area which helped some. In fact, she still gets injections periodically. She also has been through acupressure and she has had several years of physical therapy without resolution of the problems. Ten years ago, she also underwent dental work to try to alleviate her pain and problems. Last year, orthodontics was initiated and this has improved her bite some, but she still continues to have significant functional and pain problems. She takes the following medications:
1. Celebrex 100 mg p.r.n.
2. Premarin.
3. TriCor.
4. Ambien.

B217 does not have any problems with headaches, but her TMJ pain frequently gets to a level of 9 and average daily pain is at 7. She rates her jaw function at 8, diet at 8, and disability at 8. Primary concerns that B217 has includes the following:
1. Severe pain.
2. Muscle spasms.
3. Bite continues to change.
4. Difficulties eating and chewing.
5. Difficulties sleeping.
6. Teeth and jaws do not align properly.
7. Diet is significantly affected with ability to eat soft foods.
8. Clenching and grinding of the teeth at night and during the day.
9. Unstable jaw relationship.
10. Speech problems at times.

Treatment goals that B217 has would be:
1. Reduce or eliminate the pain.
2. Stabilize the jaws.
3. Reduce pain in the neck and shoulder area.
4. Align the teeth and bite.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
: In frontal view, B217 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm. The maxillary dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right is as the mandibular dental midline, but the chin is about 2 mm to the left. In profile view, she has AP deficiency in the point A area. The chin appears to be retruded about 15 mm or so. Chin neckline is extremely short and there is an abscess at the chin neck angle. Intraorally, B217 is missing the left first bicuspid and she has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. The lower right cuspid is about 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. The lateral incisors appear a little bit small. In centric relation, B217 occludes only on her left second molar. All other teeth are out of occlusion. She has a 1 mm open bite at the incisors and about at least 2 mm open bite in the left cuspid area. In her centric relation, the maxillary midline is off to the right side about 2 mm, and the mandibular dental midline and chin are off towards to the left side about 2 mm. She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side. The incisor teeth are tipped slightly towards the left side at the incisal edges. The lower dental midline and chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other. The nasal tip may be deviated just off to the right side about 1 to 2 mm. The uvula is excessively enlarged and elongated, but the rest of the structures appear relatively normal. The turbinates appear moderate in size, but the septum appears relatively normal. It is difficult to tell if there is any significant airway obstruction. To palpation, B217 has moderate to severe pain over the TMJs and retromandibular area, and mild pain over the masseters, medial pterygoids, and shoulders. Maximal incisal opening is 42 mm, opening without severe pain 30 mm. Excursion movement to the right 10 mm and to the left 7 mm, but very painful for her to do those manipulations.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary third molars, mandibular right third molar, but the retainment of the mandibular left third molar. She is also missing the mandibular left second bicuspid with the posterior teeth brought forward. Sinuses appear relatively clear. She has significant arthritis in both TMJs, but being worse on the right side. She has crowns on the mandibular left first and second molars and right first molar. Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. There may be a deviated septum off towards the left side that appears to block a good part of the airway. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. Not good airway evidenced on the left side and the right side is relatively narrow. Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a decreased posterior and superior joint space with an increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There are some degenerative changes of the condyle. Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears smaller than the opposite side with a lot of sclerosis on the head on the condyle and some anterior beaking. Joint space appears actually a little bit larger than the opposite, at least with the two cuts performed here. Articular eminence is not as steep in this side as it is in the other side. On opening, there is normal translation of the left condyle, but there is restriction of the translation of the right condyle. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B217 has a retruded mandible. She has a skeletal and occlusal Class II bite relationship. She has a high occlusal plane angle. She has a severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of about 2 mm at the soft palate level and about 3.5 mm at the base of the tongue. She does toss and turn a lot at night. There is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm and is even accentuated beyond that because the lower incisors are over angulated.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
1. Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis (right side worse than left side).
2. AP mandibular hypoplasia.
3. Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
4. Class II occlusion.
5. Occludes only on the mandibular left second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion.
6. Anterior and bilateral posterior open bites except for the left second molars.
7. High occlusal plane angle.
8. Severely reduced oropharyngeal airway of 2 to 3 mm (normal dimension 11 mm).
9. Severe TMJ pain.
10. Severe myofascial pain.
11. Sleep apnea syndrome.
12. Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.
13. Transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side 2 mm higher than the left side.
14. Hypertrophied turbinates with partial nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a. Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b. Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2.5 mm of tooth structure and retract to correct for tooth size discrepancy as well as to decrease the over angulated lower incisors.
2. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3. Surgery. a. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect and level transversely. c. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d. Bilateral coronoidotomies. e. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B217
MRI
AGE: DOB:
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation:
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes with what appears to be loss of vertical height. There is significant decreased joint space present. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. It is difficult to identify discal tissue.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little bit better morphology. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably just a couple of millimeters. There appears to be distal tissue anteriorly and laterally displaced.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle appears arthritic. There is significant anterior beaking present. There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is actually quite steep. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and appears fairly degenerative. The discal tissue appears to be sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc appears to be shorter in anteroposterior dimension. The disc is extremely foreshortened and quite thickened, particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint. There appears to be some sclerosis on the head of the condyle. The disc significantly deformed and may be difficult to salvage. Open view shows that there is some restricted translation of the condyle with the condyle not quite coming down beneath the articular eminence. The articular eminence remains anteriorly displaced. The disc is severely deformed and questionable salvageability remains.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is somewhat arthritic. There is some superior peaking on the condylar head. There is sclerosis around the head. Articular eminence is quite steep. The articular discs are in much better condition as in the vertical orientation within the fossa. It could be in a pre-click displaced disc position. The disc does appear salvageable on this side. On opening, the left disc reduces and there is fairly good translation of the condyle and the disc.

IMPRESSION:
1. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated, but with reduction.
2. Right TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe degeneration and deformation with questionable salvageability.

