B218
B218 is 52 years old. The only previous surgery she has had has been for shoulder dislocation. The right shoulder was treated 18 years ago, left shoulder 2 years ago. As far as she can remember her lower jaw has always been retruded. She does not believe it is getting any worse. She has a history of hepatitis B and C and she has that chronically. She had meningitis and encephalitis when she was 5 years old.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
1. Teeth do not fit together.
2. Difficult to eat and chew.
3. Lower jaw is retruded.
B218 does not have any TMJ pain. She gets headaches occasionally at a level 3 in the temple area. On the average day she has discomfort around the jaws at about a level of 3. She rates her jaw function at 0, diet at 8, disability at 3. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

As far as she knows her lower jaw has always been retruded. She began orthodontic treatment approximately 15 months ago to try and get the arches aligned and leveled.

B218 has had previous orthodontics approximately 41 years ago where 4 bicuspids were extracted and the spaces all closed.
In frontal view, B218 has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 26 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -2 to -3. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right and chin appears to be fairly close to being on the midline. Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly close to being aligned with each other. In profile, B218 has perhaps some slight AP maxillary deficiency. Chin is retruded by about 15 to 18 mm. Chin-neckline is short. Right chin-neck angle is fairly well defined. Lower lip is everted and is beyond the anterior projection of the chin. Intraorally, B218 appears to be missing the lower first bicuspids. The rest of the teeth are present back through the second molars. Bicuspids posteriorly are quite flat. She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. She currently has appliances on from second molar to second molar in the upper and lower arch. In the upper arch she is missing first bicuspids and also the right first molar. Posterior teeth are quite flat. She is missing all 4 first bicuspids and the maxillary right second molars as well as all 4 third molars. She has an end-on Class II occlusion bilaterally and about a 5 to 6 mm overjet. She occludes only on the second molars. All other teeth are out of occlusion. She has about 1 mm overbite. It is difficult to see the oropharynx because of the lower position of the palate. The uvula is mildly enlarged. Soft palate maybe mildly elongated. The faucial pillars may be mildly constricted. The tissues look healthy. She has had previous rhinoplasty on her nose. Intranasally, the turbinates appear somewhat constricted. The nasal tip appears to be turned upwards. The base of the cartilage appears to go towards the lateral aspect of the nose bilaterally. However, B218 is not aware of having any significant breathing problems through her nose. When she sleeps she breaths through her nose. She is not aware of snoring when she sleeps.

She has no daytime somnolence and has no sleep apnea symptoms. To palpation she has no tenderness around the head and neck area. On opening, joints seem to function relatively smooth. However, on excursive movements there were some popping noises in the joints. Excursive movements to the right about 10 mm, left 12 mm and maximal incisional opening is 45 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
: Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars. All 4 first bicuspids are absent as well as the maxillary right first molar. She has a severe root dilaceration on the mandibular right second bicuspid and she has root canal and deviated left second bicuspid. Sinuses look reasonably clear. Condyles appear as though she has undergone significant condylar resorption.

Waters view shows that she has a little bit of sinusitis in the left maxillary sinus but the rest of the sinuses look reasonably clear. Nasal septum looks relatively stable. Inferior turbinates may be a little bit enlarged.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that the fossa has fairly normal architecture with a moderately steep and elongated articular eminence. The condyle is quite small and arthritic and is sitting in the anterior aspect of the fossa with significant increased posterior joint space. The condyle appears to have lost significant volume but the fossa appears to remain basically the same.

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes with significant loss of condylar volume. The condyle is actually sitting quite forward in the fossa and along the posterior slope of the articular eminence. Joint looks quite arthritic. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyles bilaterally.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a very steep occlusal plane angle and mandibular plane angle. She has had a previous chin implant that has actually eroded back into the mandible quite significantly. Her oropharyngeal airway measures less than 4 mm at the base of the tongue and probably about 4 to 5 mm at the soft palate level. The tongue appears to fill most of the oral cavity. Lateral cephalometric radiograph between C3 and 4, there appears to be decreased joint space.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
1. Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
2. AP mandibular deficiency.
3. AP maxillary deficiency.
4. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
5. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
6. High occlusal plan angle.
7. Missing all 4 third molars, all 4 first bicuspids and maxillary right second molar.
8. Class II occlusion.
9. Occludes only on second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion.
10. Previously placed elastic chin implant that has eroded into the mandible.
11. Apertognathia.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
1. MRI of left and right TMJs.
2. CT scans of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
3. Presurgical orthodontics. a. Continue to align and level maxillary arch. b. Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Try to include the cuspids particularly on the left side as they are slightly elevated above the rest of the teeth.
4. Surgery. a. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to downgraft the maxilla and advance it slightly. c. Bilateral coronoidectomies. d. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen) e. Removal of silastic implant that has eroded into the anterior mandible with reconstruction with HA grafting.
5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
6. Restorative dentistry to replace the missing mandibular right first molar with an implant and crown versus a bridge as well as consideration for crowns on the molars to reestablish functional anatomy.

B218 MRI EVALUATION
Axial view shows that both condyles are arthritic. Maxillary sinuses and ethmoid sinuses appear relatively clear. The nasal septum is deviated towards the right side with the septal spur almost blocking out the right side just above the inferior turbinates. The inferior turbinates are moderately enlarged. Soft tissues along the inferior turbinates are quite thick. No other views are available.

