B220
MRI Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of Reading:
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with very good mediolateral width. In fact, the condyle may extend slightly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. Decreased vertical joint space. Appears to be discal tissue displaced anteriorly and medially. Cortical bone appears to be intact in both the fossa and on the condylar head.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has a little bit of unevenness on the cortical plane particularly toward the medial side. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly although slightly more than the opposite side but not too significantly. There is significant decreased lateral joint space. Lateral pole of the condyle make extend a little bit beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Discal tissue appears to be displaced anteriorly and medially.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. A little sclerosis on the tip of it and a little bit of flattening on the anterior head. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced sitting just in front of the condylar head. More medially, there is a little bit less displacement as compared to lateral. There is a slightly decreased posterior joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. Otherwise, the joint space doesn't look too bad. Does appear to be an increased anterior joint space. No significant inflammatory process is seen around the joint.

On opening, there appears to be an early reduction and good translation of the condylar head and disc.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is a little bit more degenerated than the opposite side. Toward the mid medial side, there is extremely narrowness anteroposteriorly to the condylar head and a lot of sclerosis in that area. Out laterally, the condyle is much wider than it is medially. Articular disc is moderately steep. Condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space particularly in the middle and medial aspect of the joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep but not quite as steep as the opposite side. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and significantly thickened at the posterior disc area. Disc is somewhat foreshortened in an anteroposterior dimension. May be a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space and perhaps a little inflammatory process posterior the head of the condyle.

On opening, the articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced without reduction. There is fairly good translation of the condyle with it coming just anterior to the articular eminence.

Impression:
1. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction
2. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with deformation and without reduction
3. Left disc is definitely salvageable; right disc is more questionable in its salvageability but can probably be salvaged yet

B220
B220 is 39 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX.
Patient History
B220 has been diagnosed with having an autoimmune disease, although it is not really clear what it is. She may have Reiter's syndrome.

B220's TMJ problems began about 12 years ago of unknown etiology. Her jaw on the right side began clicking and popping initially. Over the patient few years, she noticed that her lower jaw and bite have been changing, becoming more retruded and with problems with the way that the teeth fit together. She did have previous orthodontic treatment when she was about 13 or 14 years old for about two years. She had upper first bicuspids and lower second bicuspids extracted. Because of the shifting in her bite, she has had some extensive dental work done over the last few years. B220 rates her headaches that occur predominantly in the frontal area almost on a weekly basis and sometimes a couple times a week at about a level of 9. She occasionally will get headaches that affect the temporal, top of the head, and posterior head area at a level of 5. She rates her TMJ pain on an average day at about a level of 2 with the right side worse than the left side. Occasionally, however, the pain will escalate to an 8. On an average day, her overall facial pain is about a 1. She rates her jaw function at 7, diet at 3, and disability at 2. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her neck, shoulders, hands, fingers, hips, knees, toes, and feet. Of interest is she had a partial hysterectomy 2 years ago and two weeks after that began widespread involvement of her other joints. She does have an elevated ANA. She is currently seeing a rheumatologist, Dr. XXXX. She does have a slight problem with anemia, but she takes no medication for it currently.

Patient Concerns
1. TMJ pain with the right side greater than the left side
2. Headaches
3. Difficulties eating
4. Occasional open lock
5. Speech changes
6. Teeth and jaws don't fit together very well

Current Medications
1. Fluoxetine (a Prozac derivative)
2. Tylenol Sinus medication that she takes for headaches
Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B220 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. She has brachycephalic facial morphology. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline. Nasal tip is deviated slightly over toward the right side. Has a little bit of orbital dystopia with the left eye being about 2 mm higher than the right side. Actually, maxillary midline may be a millimeter off to the right side along with mandibular midline, and chin is probably about 2 to 3 mm off to the right. Nasal tip is probably 3 to 4 mm off to the right side.

In profile view, she probably has some slight AP maxillary deficiency, probably about 3 mm. Chin is retruded probably at least 10 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short. Chin is quite prominent compared to the projection of the lower lip. The lower lip appears retruded probably related to AP alveolar deficiency because of the previous extractions. As B220 postures her mandible forward, the upper lip is filled out some, and it does significantly improve her overall facial profile. As B220 postures her lower jaw forward, she comes straight forward and then for the last 2 or 3 mm she shifts the mandible off toward the right side.

Intraorally, B220 is missing the lower second bicuspids. She has crowns on the mandibular right first and second molar and on the left second molar. Teeth appear to be relatively well aligned and leveled. She appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids. She does have some residual space in the extraction areas in both arches. She has the rest of her teeth back through the first and second molars except for the absent first bicuspids. She has a Class II end-on cuspid molar relationship bilaterally being about 3 mm Class II. She has an overjet of about 4 mm and a vertical overbite of probably 5 to 6 mm. Maximal incisal opening is about 53 mm and about 35 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movements to the right are 9 mm and to the left 10 mm. To palpation, she has some mild to moderate discomfort over the TMJs but no other pain to palpation around the head and neck area.
On opening, she has definite clicks and pops in both TMJs that occur somewhere around 25 mm of opening and closing somewhere around 20 mm. When she does that, she has significantly greater discomfort and pain on the right side as compared to the left side. She feels the noise is more obvious on her right side than the left side. Oropharynx appears clear without evidence of any pathology. Uvula is thin and somewhat elongated but otherwise appears relatively healthy.

Intranasally, she has enlarged turbinates that may be blocking some of her airway. She says that when she sleeps she predominantly breathes through her mouth, and her husband, Joe, confirms that about______% of the time when she is asleep that she is breathing through her mouth.

Transverse occlusal plane appears relatively level with the eyes indicative of some asymmetry with the maxilla and mandible being shifted slightly toward the right side and particularly the nose is deviated about 3 or 4 mm off toward the right side. Holding the nose back toward the facial midline improves the facial symmetry. The vertical dystopia is less obvious with the occlusal plane orientation and with the jaws and the nose shifted toward that left side.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows that the sinuses appear clear. Nasal airway appears reasonable. She is missing the maxillary first bicuspids and mandibular second bicuspids as well as all four third molars. The condyles appear a little bit arthritic particularly on the right side where she appears to have a significant divot in the cortical bone. Articular eminences appear moderately steep. She has root canals on the two central incisors and has crowns on the mandibular right first and second molar, left second molar, and maxillary right first molar.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology as well as the morphology in the fossa is fairly good. Articular eminence is moderately steep and moderately long. Condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Increased anterior joint space which could go along with an anteriorly displaced articular disc. Cortical bone appears to be intact in this joint.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears more arthritic. There is some anterior beaking present. Condyle is positioned quite far posteriorly in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Anterior joint space is increased. Condyle does appear fairly arthritic. Depression is not as well seen on this side. There is a little pseudocyst in the right condyle.

On opening, there is moderate translation of both condyles. In the open view, the joint space appears fairly equal on the left and the right side.
Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear throughout the head area. Turbinates are a little bit enlarged with decreased airway. The right one appears larger than the left one and appears more obstructed.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship. Has about a 4-mm overbite relationship. Pogonion is strong relative to the AP position of the incisors, although both maxillary and mandibular incisors appear to have fairly normal angulation. Oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal. On the lateral cephalogram, however, B220's head is tipped up significantly which opens up the airway greater than it would be with a more normal head position.

Dental model analysis indicates that she is missing the upper first bicuspids. She has residual spacing between the cuspids, second bicuspids, and a little bit between the cuspids and lateral incisors. In the lower arch, she is missing the second bicuspids. She has a little residual space on the right side of only about 1 mm to 1.5 mm. On the left side, there is no space. However, she does have an enlarged crown on the mandibular right first molar, and the left first molar crown is quite a bit smaller. Positioning the models into a Class I cuspid position tends to create a posterior crossbite situation. She is also narrow in the cuspid areas slightly. There is a reverse tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of -2 mm.

Other Systems
The joints that bother her include her neck, shoulders, hands, fingers, hips, knees, feet, and toes. Two years ago, she had a partial hysterectomy. Since then, she has developed numerous symptoms. Prior to that, she didn't really have any significant medical problems. The reason for the hysterectomy is that within a year's time she developed a fairly large fibroid tumor on the uterus. She had a grandmother who had previously died from a similar kind of mass that turned into a sarcoid carcinoma. Following that, she had some further abdominal problem, and was readmitted to the hospital because she had a ruptured cyst in her abdomen that they felt may have been related to a rupture ovarian cyst. Urinary tract problems: Before, she may have had three previous urinary tract or bladder infections. Since the hysterectomy, she has had several urinary tract/bladder infections. Currently they seem to be under control. She drinks lots of water now to help minimize that. She does have polyuria, although she has no nocturia. Reproductive system: She had the total hysterectomy two years ago. She has two children, ages 14 and 15. She had one miscarriage. She has had previous ovarian cysts, fibroid tumors of the uterus, and fibrocystic breast disease or at least a painful fibrotic mass in one of her breasts. She has had no abnormal Pap smears. She has had an occasional vaginal yeast infection. In the past, she has had some gingivitis problems but nothing now. As a child, she probably had pink eye maybe a few times but has had no problems lately with that, although she will have occasional dry eyes but nothing that requires drops. She gets occasional sinus problems. She will occasionally get nausea with her bad headaches. She is not aware of having any Chlamydia infections. She does have problems with tiredness. She has been diagnosed with Reiter's syndrome. Growing up, when she was in junior high, her mother got some parakeets, and so she was exposed to these for about five years. The mother kept usually two at a time, and if one would die, it would be replaced, so while B220 was at home, she probably was exposed to four different birds. They did have an owl for about two weeks, and then they had a duck for about three or four years until it died. She has had cats all of her life, and some of those did catch birds and eat birds. She has had dogs all of her life but is not aware of any of them eating birds. No significant exposure to hoofed animals. She is not aware of any implants.

Basic Diagnoses
1. Right TMJ significant arthritis and articular disc dislocation with questionable reduction
2. Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction
3. AP mandibular deficiency
4. AP maxillary deficiency
5. Class II end-on occlusion
6. Anterior deep bite of 5 to 6 mm
7. Decreased angular of maxillary incisors
8. Reverse tooth-size discrepancy of 2 mm
9. Missing maxillary first bicuspids, mandibular second bicuspids, and all four third molars
10. Residual space around the cuspids and bicuspids in both arches
11. TMJ pain
12. Headaches
13. Myofascial pain
14. Hypertrophied turbinates
15. Nasal airway obstruction
16. Predominant mouth breather
17. Reiter's syndrome
18. Polyarthropathy (multiple joint problems)

Recommended Treatment
1. Test for Chlamydia and Mycoplasma antibodies
2. Presurgical orthodontics A. Align and level maxillary arch. Close upper spacing and do this peridontally by trying to move the posterior teeth forward so that the upper incisors are not retracted any further. This will require moving each of the posterior teeth, one on each side at a time, to maximize anchorage B. Align and level mandibular arch. Consider placing bonding on the mandibular left first molar to make it the same size as the right first molar and to minimize the possibility of creating some arch asymmetry by closing that space. Another alternative would be to move the mandibular left posterior teeth forward one tooth at a time
3. CT scan of TMJs and jaws if TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses are to be used for TMJ reconstruction
4. Surgery A. Treat TMJ and mandible problems with one of the following approaches: (1) Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors and bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible (2) Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses, bilateral coronoidectomies, and bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen) B. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it C. Bilateral inferior turbinectomies
5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

