B221
B221 is 28 years old, referred by Dr. XXXX and Dr. XXXX. B221 has had previous surgeries that included tonsillectomy, kidney stone removal and bilateral TMJ arthroscopy. B221 is in good health except for the jaw problems.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
1. Effexor XR 75 mg.
2. MiraLax.
3. Advil or similar that she takes p.r.n. for her headaches.
PRIMARY CONCERNS:
1. Jaw joint pain.
2. Headaches.
3. Difficulty eating and chewing.

B221's problems began about 8 years ago of unknown etiology. She began clicking and popping in her jaw joints. Following that, 8 years ago she underwent orthodontics at the age of 20 and wore appliances for about 2 years. Her pain problems at that time went away and she felt significantly better and requested the braces be removed although the orthodontist has suggested surgery. The surgery probably entailed advancing the mandible and not addressing the joint situation. The problems then began to get worse again. She began splint therapy about 2-1/2 to 3 years ago. She has had 5 splints to date and none of these have helped her. She reinitiated orthodontic treatment 11 months ago. She has had physical therapy x2 rounds without any improvement. She has had no improvement with the orthodontics either. Three months ago, Dr. XXXX performed a bilateral arthroscopy surgery in the joints. He reports that the left joint actually looked better than he thought but the right joint looked worse than he had anticipated. She had no improvement with the arthroscopy surgery either.

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is aware of clenching of her upper teeth at night and also during the day. She gets headaches about once a week at about a level of 7 that occur in the frontal and temple area and a little bit in the back of the head but also behind her eyes. She has constant TMJ pain at an average level of 5 but it can escalate to 10. Average daily pain is about a level of 5. She rates her jaw function at 8, diet at 5, disability at 4.

In frontal view, B221 has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. The nasal tip, maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline and chin are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline. In profile view, B221 has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose. The chin appears retruded by probably about 12 mm. Chin-neckline is short and she has some excessive fullness in the submental area. Chin-neck angle is positioned inferior though moderately well-defined. Intraorally, B221 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. The teeth appear to be nicely aligned and level. She appears to have adequate attached gingiva though quite thin around the left central incisor. A little bit of gingival hyperplasia present but not too significant. In the upper arch, B221 has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.

She has a Class II occlusion. She has an overjet of about 4 mm. She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm. B221 postures her lower jaw forward to a more normal overbite/overjet relationship. She has bilateral posterior open bites but appears to have good transverse width of the maxilla to accommodate the mandible. It appears that she would fit into a reasonably Class I position. B221 reports some moderate snoring problems. She is moderately tired during the day but is not aware of any sleep apnea symptoms. To palpation, B221 has no pain around the head and neck area. She has significant crepitation in both joints with the right side being more audible than the left side. Maximal incisal opening is about 45 mm and she can open to 38 without severe pain. Excursive movement to the right 6 mm, to left 5 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
: Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. All other teeth are present. Sinuses look relatively clear and the nasal airway looks as though it is passable. Joints appear somewhat arthritic with the left side looking worse than the right side.

Waters view shows that she has a hypertrophied turbinate on the right side and some nasal airway obstruction there. The left side looks wide open. The sinuses look relatively clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit sclerotic. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. The posterior joint space looks relatively normal. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has arthritic changes. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Decreased vertical and anterior joint space. On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. The left condyle shows a couple of small pseudocysts in the head and some significant anterior beaking present. The right condyle appears a little bit more sclerotic. The articular eminence on the left side on the open view appears to be more shallow and sloped than the right side.

Lateral cephalometric radiographic shows an occlusal Class II relationship. She has a significant decreased oropharyngeal airway with the airway dimension at the base of the tongue only about 3 mm and the soft palate a couple of mm. The occlusal models that are mounted on a SAM articulator appear to be more retruded than what I can achieve with clinical manipulation. Tooth size analysis reveals no significant tooth size discrepancy.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
1. Bilateral TMJ severe reactive arthritis.
2. AP mandibular deficiency.
3. AP maxillary deficiency.
4. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
5. High occlusal plane angle.
6. Class II occlusion.
7. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with airway dimension of 2 mm at the soft palate and 3 mm at the base of the tongue (normal AP measurements in these areas is 11 mm.)
8. TMJ pain.
9. Headaches.
10. Masticatory dysfunction.
11. Snoring.
12. Daytime somnolence.
13. Rule out sleep apnea.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
1. Medications. a. Klonopin 1 mg to be taken q.h.s. to eliminate clenching.
2. Presurgical orthodontics. a. Continue to align and level maxillary arch. b. Continue to align and level mandibular arch.
3. CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
4. Surgery. a. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with total joint prostheses. b. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly. c. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest fat from the abdomen.) d. Bilateral coronoidectomies.
5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B221
MRI Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic. There is some peaking and osteophytic formation on the top of the condyle. There is anterior beaking present. Decreased superior joint space. The disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting down towards the inferior aspect of the articular eminence. Moderate slope of the articular eminence and the slope is quite long in length. Increased posterior joint space perhaps indicative of longterm splint therapy. There may be some degenerative changes in the fossa as well. On some views it is very difficult to identify the disc. There is significant flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.

Right TMJ shows significant arthritic changes with superior peaking and osteophyte formation of the condyle, flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep and slightly steeper than the opposite side. Discal tissue is difficult to identify but it appears to be anteriorly displaced. There appears to be some fluid in the superior joint space. This disc is deformed and appears degenerated but in the T2 images the disc can be identified a little bit better sitting beneath the articular eminence. There are degenerative changes within the fossa particularly along the posterior aspect of the articular eminence with an osteophyte actually extending down off of the eminence itself. On the right side on the T2 images there is fluid in the superior joint space. Disc can be better appreciated and sitting beneath the articular eminence. There are significant degenerative changes and erosions in the condylar head and anterior and superior osteophytic developments as well as degenerative changes along the posterior aspect of the articular eminence.

There are no coronal or open views available.
IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis affecting condyle and fossa with articular disc dislocations and significant degeneration.

