B222
B222 is 33 years old and is referred by Dr. XXXX. She had a tonsillectomy 17 years ago. She takes no medications except occasional Advil for headaches.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
1. Obstructed airways.
2. Breathing problems.
3. Teeth do not fit together properly.
B222 has had clicking and popping in her jaw joints as long as she can remember of unknown etiology. She has had no treatment until just recently. Last month, she received a nightguard from her dentist to help control her clenching and bruxism. It seems to have helped stabilize her bite at least at this time. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo but may have some hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night but also during the day and she feels that she probably does it more during the day than at night. She gets headaches at about a level of 6 behind her ears, the top of her head and in the back of her head at about a level of 6. She rates her TMJ pain at 1, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 3, diet at 0, disability at 1.

In frontal view, B222 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0 on the left and maybe 1 mm on the right. The nasal tip is off to the right side about 2 to 3 mm. Maxillary dental midline is about 1 mm to the left. Mandibular dental midline is also about 1 mm to the left as is the chin. In profile view, she has probably about 2 to 3 mm of AP deficiency in the upper portion of the upper lip. Chin is retruded about 10 mm. Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not well defined. As B222 holds her lower jaw forward it improves her profile particularly with some filling out in the subnasal area. Intraorally, B222 is missing her lower first bicuspids from previous orthodontics. She is also missing the second molars and has the third molars in severe mesial inclination. In the upper arch she is missing probably the first bicuspids as well but has the rest of her teeth back through the third molars. She has Class II end-on cuspid relationship being about 3 mm Class II on the right side and 3 to 4 mm on the left side. She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm. The lower incisors appear to be in lingual inclination. She had her four bicuspids extracted when she was 15. She has a cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1 to 2 mm higher in the cuspid area as compared to the right side. There is asymmetry in both the maxillary and mandibular arches with the left cuspids being 2 mm posterior to the right cuspids with a little greater accentuation in the lower arches compared to the upper arch. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear relatively normal.

B222 has had three previous periodontal surgeries including some bone grafting to get her teeth and gums in good health for orthodontic treatment. Intranasally, the nasal septum is deviated significantly off to the right side. The turbinates are moderately hyperplastic. On the right side the inferior turbinates is touching against the septum. On the left side there may be more obstruction posteriorly. Anteriorly the septum is deviated off towards the right side of the columella.

The columella is moderately wide and the nostrils are somewhat narrow. She has history of mild snoring, moderate daytime somnolence but no overt sleep apnea factors. To palpation she has some very mild tenderness over temporalis muscles and right styloid area. On opening, the joint seems to function reasonably smoothly although she does translate out anterior to the articular eminence giving a type of pop noise. On excursive movements, however, she has significant clicking in both TMJs. Incisal opening is 62 mm. Excursive movements are 8 mm in reach direction. As she was going into excursions, on the right side she had a loud pop that was audible. In tooth size analysis she has a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm. It may be even greater than that because B222 has significant attrition of her incisal edges in both the lower incisors as well as the maxillary incisors. When manipulated towards a Class I occlusion, she ends up with posterior bilateral crossbites. She has tendency towards crossbites in the maxillary second molar and mandibular third molar area.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
: Panorex shows the absence of maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids. She has root canal in mandibular left cuspid. She is missing mandibular second molars bilaterally with significant medial inclination of the third molars. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Condyles look to be in fairly reasonable shape. The maxillary sinuses dip down quite low particularly on the right side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. There appears to be some decreased vertical and posterior joint space. Articular eminence has moderate inclination.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has flattening on the anterior head with a little bit of anterior beaking. Decreased vertical joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is good translation of both condyles and they actually extend and translate anterior to the articular eminences.

Waters view shows that there is a significant septal spur extruding off towards the right side. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. Sinuses look relatively clear.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some slight AP maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia. Oropharyngeal airway at the base of the soft palate measures about 5.5 mm. At the base of the tongue it measures about 8 mm. Occlusal plane may be slightly increased but not too significantly. Lower incisors are a little bit vertical in inclination but the maxillary incisors appear to have fairly good angulation.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
1. AP maxillary hypoplasia.
2. Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
3. Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
4. AP mandibular hypoplasia.
5. Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocations.
6. Class II end-on occlusion.
7. Missing all four first bicuspids and bilateral mandibular second molars with third molars in mesial inclination.
8. Arch asymmetries with the left cuspids being 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.
9. Hypertrophied turbinates.
10. Deviated nasal septum.
11. Nasal airway obstruction.
12. Headaches.
13. TMJ pain.
14. Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.
15. Sleep apnea symptoms.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a. Align and level maxillary arch. Open about 1 mm of space around each upper lateral incisor. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspids roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b. Align and level mandibular arch. Try to shift mandibular left cuspid forward 2 mm to try to upright the third molars. May need to use some Class II elastics on the left side to advance the mandibular left cuspid and posterior teeth.
2. Surgery. a. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, decrease the occlusal plane and correct transverse discrepancy. b. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. c. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. d. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. e. Nasoseptoplasty.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
4. Restorative dentistry to replace the mandibular second molars, consider osteointegrated implants and crowns and restore the maxillary and mandibular incisors.

B222
MRI EVALUATION
AGE: 33 DOB:
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. The fossa has slight downward curve of the lateral rim of about 2 mm at the most. It is actually fairly flat. Lateral pole of the condyle actually appears to extend slightly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. It appears that there may be discal tissue anteriorly and laterally positioned.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly approximately 2 mm. The lateral pole appears to extend beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. There appears to be discal tissue medial and anterior to the condyle. Vertical joint space is decreased moreso at the lateral aspect of the joint.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head. A little bit of anterior beaking and a little bit of vertical peaking in the joint. The disc is anteriorly displaced particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. More medially it is in a little bit better position. A very slight amount of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc is in a reduced position. Relatively normal inclination of the articular eminence.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with some flattening on the anterior superior head with a little sclerosis there. A little bit of peaking of the condyle and some very slight anterior beaking. Articular eminence is relatively normal in inclination. Vertical joint space appears to be decreased. Disc appears to be anteriorly displaced towards the lateral aspect of the joint. More medial the disc is in a little bit better position. I do not see fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc and the disc is in a reduced position.

IMPRESSION:
1. Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with early reduction.
2. Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint but with early reduction.

