B225
B225 is 14-1/2 years old. She is in good health with no major medical problems.
By history, three years ago she got kicked in the jaw by a horse. She had some upper teeth fractured and laceration on her chin area that did not require any closure. She was not knocked out but apparently got kicked away from the horse. It fractured some front teeth in the upper arch. It did not seem to create any problems for her relative to eating and chewing as long as she bit on her back teeth and she obviously could not chew very well with her front teeth for awhile. She has really had no other treatment.

In frontal view, B225 has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. There may be just some slight increased fullness on the right side as compared to the left wide. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much on the facial midline. Maxillary dental midline maybe about 1 mm off to the left side. In profile view, she has reasonably good facial balance. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch. She has adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the seconds molars. She has a reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch. Central incisors appear to be somewhat extruded. She has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship. She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm. Oropharynx appears healthy and uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are all within normal limits. Intranasally, turbinates look moderately enlarged but the transverse width of the nose is very good and it appears that she has adequate airway space. According to B225's mother, B225 does have some bruxism that occurs predominately at nighttime. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She takes no medications. It was about 3 years that she got kicked by a horse and it hit her in the chin but there were no significant problems with other areas since the injury. She is unaware of any soreness or pain that she may have had in the jaw joints at the time. She said she has had no treatment since that time. To palpation she has had very mild tenderness over the masseter muscles and left medial pterygoid muscle but no other pain to the head and neck area. On opening, she has a click in the left joint at 10 mm of opening and 10 mm of closing. Relative to the right joint there is an opening click of 15 and closing click of 10. Maximal incisal opening is about 28 mm. Excursive movement to the right 6 mm, left 5 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
: Panorex shows that she has impacted third molars in all 4 quadrants. Sinuses are clear. Nasal airway looks reasonably clear. Hard to evaluate the condyles on this view.

Waters view shows that she has huge frontal sinuses. The sinuses appear relatively clear. Right turbinate appears a little bit enlarged compared to the left side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is prominent. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. The condyle appears somewhat arthritic. Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good morphology. There appears to be a decreased joint space. Articular eminence is mildly steep. On opening, there is some restricted translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a good skeletal and possible an occlusal relationship with a slightly anterior deep bite. Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted with the airway margin of about 5 to 6 mm at the soft palate level and towards the base of the tongue hyoid area. There appears to be slightly anterior vertical maxillary excess. There appears to be a high occlusal plane angle.

Before moving here from Panama, B225 lived out in the country and they had a lot of chickens. B225 would play with the chickens for a good part of the day everyday until she was 7 years old and moved here. The mother remembers one episode when she was about 4 years old she developed a fever and apparently had significantly elevated white blood cells. She was told that she should go to the hospital but the mother nursed her at home and she got better. She was given some antibiotics and apparently this helped her. It is possible she could have been exposed to Chlamydia psittaci.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
1. Bilateral TMJ reactive arthritis with medial articular disc displacements.
2. Limited incisal opening of only 28 mm.
3. Crowding of lower anterior arch.
4. Mild crowding of upper anterior arch.
5. History of extensive exposure to birds (rule out Chlamydia psittaci infections in the TMJs.)

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
1. Conference with Dr. Gladstad and MRI radiology.
2. Consider the following blood tests. a. ANA. b. C-reactive protein. c. Rheumatoid factor. d. CBC. e. Chlamydia antibody titers. f. Sedimentation rate.
3. Orthodontics. a. Align and level maxillary arch. b. Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth as necessary to correct for the tooth size discrepancy (approximately 2 to 3 mm.)
4. TMJ surgery if indicated following blood tests and further assessments.

B225 MRI Evaluation
Age: 14/F DOB:
Date of Acquisition: Dat of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes. There is a significant depression in the mid part of the condyle with a medial osteophytic extension. Decreased lateral joint space. It appears that there is discal tissue medially displaced sitting about the mid condylar position. There is decreased lateral joint space. Moderately downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa of probably about 4 mm. There is almost a 4 mm vertical step from the lateral aspect of the condyle down towards the medial aspect.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has similar morphology to the opposite side except the step in the medial half of the condyle is not quite as deep as on the left side. Decreased lateral joint space. It appears that the disc is medially displaced and sitting into the depression in the condyle. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 3 mm. There may be some discal tissue anteriorly positioned. The condyle lights up significant to a much greater extent as compared to the left condyle which also lights up excessively.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows out laterally there appears to be decreased joint space. As the mid part of the condyle is approached, the anterior band of the articular disc can be seen. As we get further into the joint space, the posterior band can be seen sitting a little bit forward on the condyle. At the step area, there is a significant arthritic appearance with some superior peaking of the condyle and very large appearing erosion on the anterior aspect of the condyle. More medially, there appears to be a thickened, somewhat deformed disc that may be in position. No particular inflammatory process seen but the condyle certainly has major arthritic changes associated with. Articular eminence is moderately steep. In the open views, the cuts appear to be done more on the medial side of the mandible and on the lateral aspect it is excluded. On opening, there is fair translation of the condyle and the articular disc appears to be in a reduced position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows out laterally the condyle actually looks fairly reasonable in shape. There is some discal tissue towards the lateral aspect of the joint but not all the way out to the lateral aspect. Articular eminence is moderately steep. As the medial aspect of the joint is approached there is an erosion in the condylar head and the disc appears to be in a little bit better position towards the medial aspect of the joint. There is a hot spot in the head of the condyle actually through most of the condyle probably compatible with cystic formation within the condyle. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space but not too much. In T2 films, the head of the condyle really lights up in some areas. At least at the levels of the cut the disc appears to be in position.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ loss of medial condylar bone with medial displacement of the articular discs that could be anterior bony cysts in the right condyle.

