B227
B227 is 42 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX.
Patient History
She has had previous surgeries 20 years ago, breast augmentation 20 years ago, and Lasik surgery 10 years ago. She does have asthma occasionally, and it is usually seasonal. She doesn't get it every year, but she will get some wheezing. She does get some sinus problems and stuffy nose usually related to allergy problems.

B227's problems began when she was in Germany with orthodontics at about the age of 9. She came back to the States here, her parents decided to discontinue treatment. When she was 14, she was attacked by a dog that bit her face and bit off part of her left breast. She had over 200 stitches in her face. The dog also hit her jaw, and this is when her jaw problems initially began. By the age of 18, her jaw would lock. She had loud audible clicking in the right jaw joint and associated ear pain. She had chiropractic treatment at the age of 18. She received an appliance at about the age of 22 that she wore at night. This may have helped some but didn't fix the program. She was diagnosed with having bruxism at that time. She then took her son to see a pediatric dentist, and he put some bonding on her molars to open her bite up, and this did help relieve her symptoms somewhat, but those buildups finally wore down. She began orthodontics again at about the age of 30 and had four bicuspid extractions performed and apparently was put into the Begg technique, and she has developed constant TMJ problems with that treatment. After about two years, she had the braces removed. Apparent with the treatment, it was causing the roots of her maxillary incisors to actually become displaced out through the buccal cortical plate of the maxillary alveolus. She was talked into going back into ortho again at about the age of 33 and had them on for another year, but her joint problems on the right side got worse, and so she again discontinued treatment.

B227 gets headaches a couple of times a month, and they occur primarily in the frontal area and probably unrelated to the jaw joint. TMJ pain she rates at about a level of 6, but it can escalate at times to a level of 10. She gets sharp, piercing kind of pains. She really has no pain elsewhere in the head and neck area except on that right side around the joint area that is a level of 6. Jaw function is at 4, diet at 4, disability at 2. She gets right earaches, occasional tinnitus, and occasional vertigo. Sometimes stretching the right ear can be very painful. No other joints tend to bother her.

She has allergies to pollens, grasses, things like that. She has no problems with jewelry that she is aware of. No nocturnal clenching or bruxism.
Current Medications

Currently she takes no medications.
Clinical Evaluation
In frontal view, B227 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary dental midline is about a millimeter off to the left as is the mandibular dental midline. Chin may also be just slightly off to the left side.

In profile view, she has fairly good shape of the nasal dorsum. She has a very obtuse nasolabial angle. Upper lip supralabrally is about 4 to 5 mm posterior to subnasale. Upper lip is probably about 6 mm AP retrusive. Chin is probably at least 15 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is short and submental areas full. Chin-neck angle, however, is reasonably well defined.

Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids. Some very minimal crowding, lower anterior arch. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. Transverse width of the lower arch appears somewhat narrow. In the upper arch, she is also missing first bicuspids. She has mild crowding in the upper arch. Significantly reversed curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Lower arch is fairly level. Has a Class II, division II, type of occlusal pattern. She is probably about 4 mm Class II on the right side and 2 mm Class II on the left side. Anterior deep bite of about 5 mm. Oropharynx appears clear. She reports no problems with snoring and no sleep apnea symptoms. Intranasally, turbinates appear fairly large, particularly on the left side. It appears that the left one is almost touching against the nasal septum. However, B227 claims no difficulties breathing through the nose. Base of the columella is also somewhat wide.

To palpation, she has only some mild tenderness around the right styloid area. No tenderness directly over the joint. On jaw function, she has severe audible crepitation in the right TMJ. Left joint seems to function relatively smoothly. Incisal opening without significant pain was about 35 mm. Maximum opening is 45 mm, but that was with some significant pain problems. Excursive movement to the right 10 mm, to the left about 7 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex demonstrates the absence of four first bicuspids and all four third molars. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Nasal airway actually looks reasonably good. Right joint appears arthritic with a little sclerosis on it and a little flattening of the anterior head. Left joint appears to have a little divot on the top of the condyle. Roots of the incisors appear somewhat short probably due to the extensive previous orthodontics. She also has a root canal on the maxillary right second bicuspid and first molar.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. Turbinate on the right side actually looks larger than the left side. It appears there could be a bony spur sticking out on the left side of the nasal septum.

Right TMJ tomogram shows severe arthritis within the joint. Anterior beaking is present. Loss of vertical height of the condyle is evident. It appears that there may be some bone extruding down from the fossa area. Condyle appears small vertically as well as anteroposteriorly.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head. Articular eminence is quite steep on this side and significantly steeper than the opposite side, which has a relatively normal slope. In the left joint, the posterior aspect of the eminence is almost probably at an 80-degree angle relative to the horizontal plane. Some flattening on the anterior head and some mild superior peaking of the condyle. Joint space appears reasonably well balanced.

On opening, there is good translation of both joints with it being better on the left side as compared to the right side. There appears to be a small osteophytic projection extending up from the right condyle on this view.

Cephalometrically, she has AP maxillary and mandibular retrusion. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 8 mm, and at the base of the tongue, the posterior pharyngeal wall about 10 mm. Upper incisors are in lingual inclination. Lower incisors appear to have reasonable angulation compared to the rest of the lower teeth. It appears that the upper incisors have a negative angulation relative to the basal bone.

Basic Diagnoses
1. Right TMJ severe resorptive arthritis with articular disc dislocation, severe deformation, and with perforations.
2. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with significant deformation.
3. AP maxillary deficiency.
4. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
5. AP mandibular deficiency.
6. Class II end-on occlusion, being worse on the right side as compared to the left side.
7. Class II division II malocclusion.
8. Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars.
9. Reverse curve of Spee, upper arch.
10. Lingual inclination of maxillary incisors.
11. Severe TMJ pain.
12. Headaches.
13. Myofascial pain.
14. Earaches.
15. Tinnitus and vertigo.
16. Mild crowding, upper anterior arch.
17. Significant tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.
18. Short roots particularly on the maxillary incisors.

Recommended Treatment
1. Presurgical orthodontics A. Align and level maxillary arch. Open up 1.5 mm of spacing around each upper lateral incisor. Increase labial torquing of the maxillary central incisors. Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to be sure there is adequate room for interdental osteotomies. B. Align and level the mandibular arch.
2. CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol) to aid in the construction of total joint prostheses
3. Surgery A. Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. B. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and downgraft it posteriorly. C. Bilateral coronoidectomies. D. Bilateral fat grafts to TMJ (harvest from abdomen).
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
5. Restorative dentistry to build up the crowns on the maxillary lateral incisors

B227
MRI Evaluation
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with moderate to lateral width. Condyle appears a little bit short vertically. Decreased joint space vertically. Maybe some discal tissue over medially. A little decreased joint space out laterally, but more anteriorly the joint appears to be more decreased vertically.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with rather severe arthritic changes. Loss of vertical height and mediolateral width is present. Difficult to determine where the disc is located. Decreased vertical joint space. May be a little downward bone growth at the mid lateral aspect of the fossa. Condyle appears quite arthritic.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has sort of a hockey stick shape to it. Flattening of the posterior head and also on the anterior head. Some superior beaking is present. Articular eminence is relatively steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting almost directly beneath the articular eminence. Disc appears significantly deformed and short anteroposteriorly. Appears to be decreased anterior joint space and significant anterior beaking present in some of the views. There could be a little bit of inflammatory process around that joint but not too significantly.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, demonstrates a condyle with rather severe arthritis associated with it. Almost total loss of joint space between the anterior aspect of the condylar head and the articular eminence. Decreased superior and posterior joint spaces. Appear to be some significant degenerative changes also on the articular eminence as well as significant degenerative changes within the condyle itself. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and severely degenerated and deformed. Fluid in the superior joint space and also inflammation posterior and inferior to the condyle.

Impression:
1. Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe deformation, non-reducing and with perforations.
2. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with significant deformation.
3. Both the discs are probably non-salvageable.

