B228
B228 is 15 years old and is referred by Dr. XXXX. B228 is in good health with no major medical problems. She takes Lexapro 20 mg daily. B228 gets occasional headaches at about level of 3 in the temple area. She gets some TMJ pain at about a level of 3, average daily pain gets to about 3, jaw function is 4, diet at 3, disability at 2. She has no trouble with earaches or tinnitus. She gets mild problems with vertigo. She has some slight hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is unaware of clenching or bruxism. She also takes Tylenol and ibuprofen for her jaw pain. B228 became aware of her jaw problems when she was about 12 or 13 while she was having orthodontics done. She had braces on from age 11 until age 12. During this time Dr. XXXX recognized that her bite was changing and informed B228 and her parents that he could not correct the bite strictly by orthodontic means. She did wear rubber bands for a time to try and help with the bite but that was unsuccessful. The elastics did cause quite a bit of pain for her and so that treatment was interrupted and Dr. XXXX elected to remove the braces.

B228 has moderate problems with snoring, mild daytime somnolence and mild sleep disorder.
In frontal view, B228 and fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Nasal tip may be just slightly to the right side 1 to 2 mm. Mandibular dental midline is off to the right side probably about 3 mm. Chin may be off to the right side by a couple of mm. Chin and lower dental midline are fairly close to being aligned with each other. In profile view, upper lip is retruded about 2 to 3 mm. Chin is retruded about 18 mm. Chin neckline is not defined and the chin-neck angle is absent. The lower third face appears elongated. Intraorally, B228 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled. She has a weakened attached gingiva particularly around the two central incisors. Roots are almost penetrating out through the buccal plate. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has small upper lateral incisors and probably has a tooth size discrepancy. In central occlusion she occludes only on her second molars. She hits on her second molars only bilaterally. B228's anterior open bite is almost 7 mm. She has almost a full Class II occlusal relationship on the right side and about 5 mm Class II on the left side. Uvula is moderately elongated. Soft palate is relatively normal in length except for the uvula. Faucial pillars are significantly constricted because she has significantly hypertrophied tonsils. They cause some distortion of the faucial pillars. Turbinates are in the high moderate end of enlargement with the right side being larger than the left side. Septum is relatively normal. There is at least moderate nasal airway obstruction. The luminal valves may be somewhat constricted. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the temporalis, masseters, TMJs and styloid areas. She has a glitch in the right TMJ on opening probably about 15 mm. The left side seems to function reasonably smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is about 47 mm and she can open 21 mm without discomfort. Excursive movement to the right 8 mm, left 8 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
: Panorex shows the presence of 4 impacted third molars. She has an anterior open bite. Sinuses look relatively clear. Condyles appear as though they have undergone resorptive changes. Articular eminences are quite long.

Waters view shows the sinuses are clear. The septum is reasonably straight. Turbinates appear enlarged.
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is postured down and forward in the fossa by probably a good 3 to 4 mm. Articular eminence is quite long and moderately steep. Increased superior and posterior joint spaces are present.

Left TMJ tomograms likewise show a condyle postured down and forward in the fossa by 3 to 4 mm. Articular eminence is fairly steep and elongated. There is an increased superior and posterior joint space. On opening there is fairly good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph is not in centric relation and she is postured forward but it still shows there is anterior vertical maxillary excess, AP mandibular deficiency, high occlusal plane angle of the mandibular occlusion, enlarged adenoid mass in the nasal pharynx and significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway. B228 has a tooth side discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
1. Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption.
2. Vertical maxillary hyperplasia.
3. AP mandibular hypoplasia.
4. Anterior open bite of 7 mm.
5. Class II occlusion.
6. High occlusal plane angle.
7. Hypertrophied nasal turbinates.
8. Hypertrophied tonsils.
9. Hypertrophied nasal pharyngeal adenoid tissue.
10. Impacted third molars x4.
11. Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.
12. Pain.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a. Align and level maxillary arch. Open up 1 mm of space between the maxillary lateral incisors and cuspids. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b. Align and level mandibular arch.
2. Surgery. a. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. b. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly. c. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. d. Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4. e. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. f. Nasal pharyngeal adenoidectomy. g. Bilateral tonsillectomy (by Dr. XXXX.)
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B228
I-CAT
Joint spaces look reasonably good. Mitek anchors are in place. It appears that she has remained stable relative to her lateral ceph evaluation. Oropharyngeal airway looks good. Sinuses look relatively clear. There is some fatty tissue that extrudes into the posterolateral wall bilaterally, but I do not see any signs of gross infection. All other sinuses appear relatively clear. It appears that her appliances are off. She seems to be doing well radiographically. Relatively normal I-
CAT for postsurgical evaluation.

B228
MRI EVALUATION
AGE: 15/F
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is postured significantly down from the roof of the fossa. There appears to be evidence of condylar resorption present. The condyle is a little bit narrow mediolaterally. It appears that there is discal tissue anteriorly displaced. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 3 to 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears smaller in size that the opposite slightly. Again there is increased vertical joint space. There may be some discal tissue up in the joint space but difficult to tell. It appears that there is discal tissue anteriorly displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa cures inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm at little bit sharper angle than the opposite side. Evidence of significant condylar resorption on this side as well.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have undergone some resorption. There is some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is extremely steep and elongated. Significantly increased vertical joint space. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is significantly foreshortened anteroposteriorly and thickened. There is questionable salvageability of this disc because of its small size. There is some increased fluid in the bilaminar tissues. There is also some fluid in the anterior aspect of the superior joint space. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle where is comes out just anterior to the articular eminence but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have undergone resorption. There is some anterior beaking present. Significantly increased vertical and posterior joint spaces. Articular eminence is steep and elongated. The articular disc is sitting beneath the articular eminence but is quite short anteroposteriorly and thickened. The disc appears it may be a little bit more degenerated on this side and the opposite side. A little bit of increased fluid in the bilaminar tissue and there is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle where it comes beneath the articular eminence but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction and appears severely deformed.

IMPRESSION:
1. Left TMJ resorptive arthritis and anterior disc anteriorly dislocated without reduction and with severe deformation.
2. Right TMJ resorptive arthritis and anterior disc anteriorly dislocated without reduction and with severe deformation.
3. Probable AICR.
4. Questionable salvageability of the discs.

