B229
B229 is 41 years old, referred by Dr. XXXX. She apparently has a heart condition that she did not specify. She has had previous C-section and vaginal hysterectomy. She takes multiple vitamins and minerals.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
1. Jaw pain.
2. Chronic temple and neck stiffness.
3. Jaw joint popping.
4. Locking and squishing in her jaw joints.
5. Teeth movement and malalignment of her teeth.
6. Discoloration of the teeth.
7. No comfortable bite relationship.

PREVIOUS TREATMENTS:
1. Orthodontics ages 27-31.
2. Bite plate (age 31.)
3. Steroid cream ages 31 - 33.
4. Orthodontic retainers age 34.
She has been aware of having her TMJ problems for quite a few years. More recently her symptoms have been getting worse although she is seeking treatment management for her situation. She tends to posture her lower jaw forward to where she has almost an end-on incisor relationship. She does this because it feels better. She is uncomfortable when she tries to bite her posterior teeth together.

She gets headaches at a level of 6 in the temple. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 3, diet at 5, disability at 7. She gets frequent earaches on the right side and has moderate occurrence of tinnitus. No vertigo. No other joints bother her. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime and also during the day. She is not aware of snoring. She has no daytime somnolence and no sleep apnea symptoms.

In frontal view, B229 has good facial balance in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary midline is a little bit off to the left 1 mm. Mandibular dental midline is 1 mm off towards the right side. The chin is about 3 mm off to the left side. In profile view, B229 has problems with the nasal dorsum with a little bit of hump in it. Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably 2 to 3 mm. The maxilla is probably retruded by a good 6 to 7 mm. Chin is retruded by approximately 12 mm. Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not well defined. Intraorally, B229 is missing lower second bicuspids and has the rest of her teeth. Moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch she is missing probably the first bicuspid. She is Class II end-on on the right side by probably 3 to 4 mm. Oropharynx area looks relatively normal. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged. The transverse width of the nose appears somewhat narrow. Columella is somewhat wide. The septum has a little deviation here and there but for the most part is relatively normal. There may be some moderate nasal airway obstruction. B229 has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
: Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars, upper first bicuspids and lower second bicuspids. The right condyle has relatively normal architecture, in fact it could be slightly large. However, the left condyle is extremely resorbed and small in size. Vertical height of the mandibular body on the left side is short compared to the right side. Difficult to evaluate the sinuses and the nasal airway.

Waters view shows that the bony nasal septum at least appears reasonably straight. The turbinates appear enlarged and she appears to have a constricted nasal airway. Sinuses look relatively clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows the condyle is postured quite a ways forward in the fossa by probably 3 to 4 mm. There is some anterior beaking and some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. Articular eminence is relatively normal in steepness. However, the condyle is postured down forward and she has a posterior open bite.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite small and also has a small cystic area in the top. There is loss of significant vertical and anteroposterior volume. Articular eminence is flatter on this side than the opposite side. There seems to be increased posterior joint space to some degree and perhaps in the superior joint space as well. This could be indicative of forward posturing of the jaw structures. On opening, there is good translation of the condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a retruded maxilla and mandible and a slight skeletal Class II jaw and occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal with oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level of about 11 mm and at the base of the tongue about 10 mm. There is definite difference in the vertical height of the mandible body with the left side being significantly shorter than the right side at the inferior border by almost 7 mm. There is a little vertical discrepancy at the occlusal plane level but not to extend at the inferior. Nose appears quite prominent. Chin appears strong compared to the AP position of the mandible.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
1. Left TMJ severe resorptive arthritis and articular disc dislocation with significant deformation and degereration.
2. Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
3. AP maxillary deficiency.
4. AP mandibular deficiency.
5. Class II end-on occlusion.
6. Missing mandibular second bicuspids and upper first bicuspids and all 4 third molars.
7. TMJ pain.
8. Headaches.
9. Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 1to 2 mm.
10. Earaches.
11. Hypertrophied turbinates and partial nasal airway obstruction.
12. External nasal deformity.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a. Align and level maxillary arch. Open up 1 mm of space around each of the upper lateral incisors to correct for the tooth size discrepancy and increase the angulation in the upper incisors. b. Align and level mandibular arch.
2. Surgery. a. Left TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis. b. Right TMJ articular disc repositioning ligament repair with Mitek anchor. c. Right mandibular ramus osteotomy to advance the mandible. d. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla. e. Left coronoidectomy. f. Fat graft to left TMJ (harvest from the abdomen). g. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. h. External rhinoplasty.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
4. Restorative dentistry to build up the lateral incisors and eliminate spacing for correction of the tooth size discrepancy.

B229
MRI EVALUATION
Age: 41/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears narrow mediolaterally. It may be medially and anteriorly displaced. A little sclerosis on the top of the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. Sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little bit larger. There is almost increased joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Articular disc appears to be laterally displaced.
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite small anteroposteriorly with obvious evidence of significant condylar resorption vertically anteroposteriorly and mediolaterally. Articular eminence has moderate inclination and less than the opposite side. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. There is increased soft tissue in the joint space. The disc is deformed and is quite short anteroposteriorly and thickened. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the mandible but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. A little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint space. Articular eminence is fairly steep. A little bit of beaking in the condyle more towards the lateral aspect of the joint. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc appears to translate well with the condyle anterior to the articular disc.

IMPRESSION:
1. Right TMJ relatively normal architecture of the joint but laterally displaced disc.
2. Left TMJ severe resorptive arthritis, anterior displacement of the articular disc with significant deformation and non-reducing.

