B230
MRI Scan Evaluation
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Reading:
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is narrow mediolaterally and probably less than half of normal width. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa of probably about 3 mm or so. Decreased vertical joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint. Appears to be discal tissue over medially. Also appears to be some discal tissue anteriorly. Cortical bone appears to be intact across the small condylar head.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa of probably about 3 mm. Condyle has better width on this side as compared to the opposite side. May be some decreased joint space medially in a vertical direction. Disc appears to be in fairly good position.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly and better extended at the medial aspect of the joint. Articular eminence has a long, rather shallow slope to it. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting completely in front of the condyle. The disc is short in anteroposterior dimension. Joint space appears decreased at the medial aspect of the joint and perhaps at the lateral aspect. At the mid part of the remaining condyle, joint space appears to be a little bit more normal in thickness. There is a large anterior beak extending forward from the condyle in the midportion of the condyle. Disc is somewhat foreshortened and a little bit thickened. There appears to be soft tissue surrounding the disc. The disc may still be salvageable. A little bit of fluid in the inferior joint space.

On opening, there is some restricted translation of the condyle, and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that appears much larger than the opposite side. More medially, there is a little bit of peaking of the condylar head. Some anterior beaking also appears to be present. Articular eminence is somewhat shallow and long but not quite as shallow as the opposite side. It appears that the articular disc is in position. No inflammatory process is seen, and no fluid is seen in the joint spaces.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle, and the disc is in good position on opening.
Impression:
1. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with significant deformation and nonreducing
2. Right TMJ arthritis but articular disc appears to be in position, and the joint translates well

B230
B230 is 13 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX.
Patient History
B230 is in good health with no major medical problems. She takes Zyrtec 10 mg daily for allergies. B230's problems began in the summer two years ago when her jaw and jaw joints began to bother her. There was no known etiology. Previous to that, she had had some orthodontic treatment for about 8 or 9 months to align the maxillary incisors and close some spacing. A permanent retainer was placed on the upper incisors, and this was done by Dr. XXXX. They last saw Dr. XXXX in August, and he had noticed that the bite was starting to change. Over the last several months, B230 and her parents have noted a continued change in her bite relationship. Dr. XXXX did refer them here at that time. Since then, they have seen Dr. XXXX in December, and he also concurred that there was something going on with the jaw joints and recommended they come here.

B230 has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. Does have some back problems, but this may be related to her heavy backpack. She is not aware of clenching or grinding of her teeth. She has some seasonal allergies and is allergic to pecans. No known allergy to jewelry. No problems with headaches. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 4, diet at 2, and disability at 0. Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B230 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 1.5 mm to 2 mm to the left. Chin is shifted about 4 to 5 mm to the left.

In profile view, B230 has good facial symmetry and balance. Chin-neckline is relatively normal. Chin-
neck angle is fairly well-defined. Vertical dimensions are in fairly good balance.

Intraorally, B230 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some spacing around the bicuspids and cuspid on the left side and to a lesser extent on the right side. Has good attached gingiva. Lower incisors appear a little bit lingually inclined. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars except the right second molar is not quite erupted in all the way. B230 has basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the left side and has a tendency now to be shifting into a crossbite there. On the right side, she is shifting into a buccal crossbite and has an open bite. It is hard for her to get her teeth together on the right side. However, she is fairly close to being Class I on that side. There is a cant in the lower arch with the right cuspid being lower with a vertical discrepancy of about 2 to 3 mm. Transverse cant in the maxillary occlusion with the right side being about a millimeter to a 1.5 mm lower than the left side. Has about a 1 mm anterior overbite relationship. Oropharynx appears clear, and uvula and soft palate are pretty much normal. She does have some moderately hypertrophied tonsils.

Intranasally, the septum looks fairly straight. The turbinates are hyperplastic and appear to be inflamed as one would expect with allergy problems. She also has an upper respiratory problem going on at this time, and this could perhaps contribute to that some also.

To palpation, B230 has some mild to moderate tenderness over the styloid areas but otherwise no pain around the head and neck area. Maximal opening is 48 mm, and she could open to about 28 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movements to the right are 7 mm and to the left 6 mm.

On opening, the right joint seemed to function reasonably smoothly. On the left side there appeared like there was a soft click maybe around 10 or 15 mm and a closing soft click at 10, but difficult to consistently find that.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth back through the second molars. Third molars are developing with only small portions of the coronal aspects at this time. Sinuses look relatively clear. Left sinus appears smaller in size than the right side. Turbinates appear somewhat small particularly on the left side. Length of the right condylar head and neck appears longer than the left side. The ramus on the right side appears longer than the left side. Vertical height of the mandibular body might be just a touch longer on the right side as compared to the left side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit flattened on top. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. May be a slight decreased posterior joint space, and it appears that the anterior joint space may be a little bit decreased as well.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit better shape on this side but may have a little bit of peaking at the superior aspect. Joint space looks a little bit more balanced, although the disc may be a little bit thin on this side. Articular eminence is relatively shallow.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles.
Waters view shows that the sinuses are a little bit full in the maxillary sinus area. This could be related to the allergies. Turbinates are enlarged particularly on the left side and does not appear to be much airway available. Frontal sinuses are fairly large as are the ethmoids and appear clear. The right side of the maxilla and mandible appear elongated vertically as compared to the left side. There is a greater cant in the mandible as compared to the maxilla.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph showed that there may be just a slightly increased occlusal plane angulation. Oropharyngeal airway looks good. Tonsils appear quite large. There is a vertical discrepancy at the occlusal plane angle and at the inferior border of the mandible with the right side being about 5 mm to 6 mm longer vertically in the mandibular ramus posterior body area, and coming forward to the cuspid area, there is probably about a 2-mm vertical difference. At the occlusal surface, particularly in the mandibular arch, there appears to be about a 3-mm vertical difference.

Basic Diagnoses
1. Right TMJ osteochondroma/osteoma
2. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
3. Deviate mandibular prognathism
4. Maxillary right-sided vertical hyperplasia and asymmetry
5. TMJ pain
6. Myofascial pain
7. Right-sided open bite
8. Developing crossbite on the left side, buccal crossbite on the right side
9. Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars
10. Spacing in the lower arch between the bicuspids, cuspids, and lateral incisors
11. Spacing around the upper lateral incisors and cuspids as well as the bicuspids
12. Slight lingual inclination of lower incisors
13. Hypertrophied turbinates
14. Nasal airway obstruction
15. Transverse cant in the occlusion with the maxillary right side being 1.5 mm lower than the left side in the mandibular arch and the right side being about 2 to 3 mm lower than the left side
16. Mandibular dental midline shifted 1.5 to 2 mm off to the left and chin shifted 4 to 5 mm off to the left

Recommended Treatment
1. Presurgical orthodontics A. Align and level maxillary arch. Maintain spacing between the upper laterals and cuspids. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies if they are required B. Align and level mandibular arch. Close the spacing in the lower arch by moving the posterior teeth forward. This may require moving them one at a time. This will be important. Otherwise the lower incisors will end up in a more severe lingual inclination than they already are C. Consider the use of Class II elastics to help move the mandibular posterior teeth forward to close the spacing
2. Surgery (Would best be done in the summer of next year) A. Right mandibular high versus low condylectomy (this will depend on the pathological process present) B. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors C. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the maxilla D. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back onto the facial midline and into proper occlusion with the maxilla E. Removal of impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4 F. Partial turbinectomies
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

