B231
B231 is 51 years old. She has had previous surgery for her retina 5 years ago, gallbladder surgery 5 years ago, hysterectomy 5 years ago, and fibroid surgery 25 years ago.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
1. Synthroid 0.137 mg per day.
2. Natural progesterone.
She has an allergy to penicillin. She had papillary carcinoma in her thyroid gland necessitating the previous surgery. She is otherwise in good health except for her problems associated with the head and neck area.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
1. Breathing problems.
2. Muscle problems particularly affecting her neck and shoulders.
3. Ear ringing.
4. Sleep disorder.
5. Digestive problems.
6. Dental problems.

B231's problems began probably around 20 years ago or longer of unknown etiology. She developed muscle spasms in her neck and shoulders. She even developed numbness in her hands and fingers. She has had cervical workup done. Apparently they did find some problem with her cervical vertebrae but her physical therapist, XXXX, felt it was more related to B231's bite problems. ___-saw B231 in 2003. She was able to give B231 treatments that seemed to help. She then saw Dr. XXXX. He was the first to suggest that she have some jaw surgery to fix her bite relationship that could not be done strictly orthodontically. She saw Dr. XXXX about having the surgery. She subsequently moved to Dallas. She moved into this area 3 years ago. She has seen Dr. XXXX who placed her in braces 10 months ago. Up to this time, B231 has had the following treatments:
1. Physical therapy.
2. Medications.
3. Massages.
4. Five years ago, splint therapy by Dr. XXXX.
5. Orthodontics beginning in 10 months ago by Dr. XXXX.

She has also done regiments of exercises and massages that seemed to have helped her.
She has no problems with earaches but gets tinnitus but no vertigo or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is aware of clenching and bruxing of her teeth at night. She really does not have any significant headache problems. She rates her TMJ pain at 1, average daily pain at 4 which involves primarily the neck and shoulder areas. Jaw function and diet are about a level of 1 and disability is at 0.

B231 does feel that she has a posture problem and has a head postured forward type of stature. She does report problems with snoring but does not feel that she has actual sleep apnea problems. She has had a sleep study done. Sleep study showed that she had some snoring problems but the O2 sats were good and her apnea-hypopnea index was 0.6 events per hour. Sleep study impression:
1. Primary snoring disorder versus upper airway resistance syndrome.
2. Sleep maintenance insomnia with endorsement of psychological variables.

The sleep study was done 9 months ago. In frontal view, B231 has fairly good facial symmetry except there is some asymmetry in the nose. Lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 0. Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline. Nasal tip is deviated by at least 2 mm off towards the left side. In profile view, B231 has fairly good balance in the upper lip, cheeks and nose. Chin appears retruded by probably 10 to 12 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely shortened and there is essentially no chin-neck angle. She does have a head postured forward neck position. As B231 postures her mandible forward, it significantly improves her facial balance. She is essentially in an end-on incisor relationship but overall profile is significantly improved although the chin-neck angle is still not well defined. Still somewhat deficient with a little bit of apparent AP maxillary deficiency of perhaps 2 to 3 mm. B231 is currently in braces back through the first molars. Teeth appear to be reasonably aligned and leveled. She has attrition on her lower incisors. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars and has appliances there. She has a slight reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch. She has a Class II end-on occlusion being about at least 5 mm Class II. She has about a 3 mm overjet. She has about a 2.5 mm vertical overbite. As she slides forward, it eliminates the overjet. She still is at least 3 mm Class II. She has a slight cant in the mandibular occlusal plane with the left cuspid being probably 1 to 1.5 mm but maxilla appears relatively level. In the oropharynx the tissues look healthy. Uvula is mild to moderate in size. The soft palate may be slightly elongated but more important is that the faucial pillars show significant constricture with a very narrow space between the posterior faucial pillars. They are positioned quite medially in the oropharynx. Nasally, B231 has constricted nostrils particularly on the left side. The alar feet are wide and are somewhat obstructed particularly on the left side. B231 has an inward collapse of the upper and lower lateral cartilages in the nose which is the primary factor causing the constricture of the nostril and the luminal valve area. Also, she has a wide columella base with the feet extending laterally out into the nares again contributing significantly to occlusion. Using the nasal speculum and just holding open the nares significantly improved her abilities to breathe through both sides of her nose. Even though the nasal septum is deviated somewhat off towards the right side, her major airway obstruction is anterior at the nostril area and luminal valve area and not so much posteriorly in the turbinate and septal area. To palpation, she had no tenderness around the head and neck area. Joint seems to function relatively smoothly although she felt a little tension on the right side in wide opening. Maximal incisal opening is about 49 mm. Excursive movements are about 9 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
: Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars and all the rest of the teeth are present. She has root canals on the maxillary right first bicuspid second molar. Sinuses look relatively clear. Condyles appear to be a little bit flattened anteriorly and there maybe a little bit of sclerosis associated with them. The condyles appear large.

Waters view shows a little bit of cloudiness in the left sinus. Nasal septum has some significant deviation to it in the bony area particularly at the superior aspect. The turbinates appear moderate in size. Left TMJ tomogram shows that there appears to be slight increase in posterior joint space and a little bit decreased anterior joint space. The joint space does appear quite narrow anteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. I do not now if the joint space is compatible with the disc being in position.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears somewhat large with a little flattening on the anterior head. It seems to be postured forward slightly in the mandible which could mean that it was not in central relation at the time of the imaging. Anterior joint space appears quite narrow and perhaps moderately decreased. On opening, there is good translation of the condyles and there appears to be adequate joint space between the condyle and articular eminences. Flattening on the anterior head and there is mild sclerosis as well as anterior beaking can be seen.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B231 has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology Class II position of the mandible. The oropharyngeal airway actually looks quite good and better than anticipated. Airway dimension from soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 10 mm and from the base of the tongue the posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 9 mm. Class II occlusion is present. She has a Bolton's difference of 3.75 to 4 mm. She has relatively short crown lengths on the upper anterior teeth with the incisors being only 7 to 8 mm in vertical length. Part of this is due to attrition of the teeth. She did start out as a Class II division II malocclusion.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
1. AP mandibular deficiency.
2. AP maxillary deficiency.
3. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
4. High occlusal plane angle.
5. Class II occlusion.
6. Rule out TMJ pathology.
7. Significant attrition on the anterior teeth.
8. Significant constricture of the faucial pillars.
9. Significant constricture of the nasal valves.
10. Wide columella base.
11. Constricture of the nostrils.
12. Nasal airway obstruction.
13. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
14. Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of approximately 4 mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
1. MRI of left and right TMJ.
2. Presurgical orthodontics. a. Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Open up spacing between the upper lateral incisors and cuspids of 1 mm on each side to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b. Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
3. Surgery. a. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. b. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly. c. Reconstruct nasal valves with bone grafting (harvest bone from posterior maxillary wall and/or from septum.) d. Reconstruct nasal columella. e. Palatoplasty. f. Bilateral TMJ surgery if indicated, but will depend on MRI findings.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
5. Restorative dentistry to rebuild the anterior teeth.

B231
MRI EVALUATION
Age: 51/F
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation: 
Axial view shows the presence of bilateral maxillary sinusitis. The nasal septum is deviated off towards the right side. There is fluid in both sinuses. The condyles have good mediolateral and anteroposterior width. In the left maxillary sinus there may be a mucous retention cyst. Ethmoid and frontal sinuses look relatively clear.

Coronal view shows the presence of fluid in both sinuses. The turbinates appear moderate in size. The nasal septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side. It appears there is a passable airway. Ethmoid sinuses look relatively clear as do the frontal sinuses.

The left TMJ shows the condyle is a little bit arthritic. There is some sclerosis on the head of the head of the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. Vertical joint space looks reasonably well balance.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has an area of sclerosis on top of it. The lateral rim of the fossa appears inferiorly about 2 mm. There appears to be some decreased joint space vertically particularly towards the medial side of the joint.

IMPRESSION:
1. Bilateral TMJ arthritis.
2. Bilateral maxillary sinusitis with fluid levels.
B231
CT EVALUATION

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little arthritic. There appears to be reasonable joint space vertically. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Some decreased joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. The nasal septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side. Turbinates are moderate in size with the left one being larger than the right one. There is a fluid level or thickening of the sinus wall on the left side. On the right side anteriorly it is fairly clear but posteriorly almost the entire sinus is full of material. Axial view shows that the left sinus is full with the floor and the right sinus is full of material more at the posterior aspect of it with anterior part reasonably clear although there is a little bit of thickening of mucosa in some areas. Closer to the orbit the left sinus is fairly clear but the right sinus is fairly full along the posterior aspect. Other sinuses appear relatively clear.

IMPRESSION:
1. Bilateral TMJ arthritis.

