B232
B232 is 52 years old and is referred by Dr. XXXX. She has had previous surgery on her uterus and then she had two C-sections and an ovarian cyst removed. She currently takes Climara patch and Prometrium, both are hormone replacements. She has had adverse reactions to sulfa drugs and penicillin.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
1. Sleep apnea.
2. Restricted airway.
3. Teeth clenching.
4. Headaches.
B232 reports that she has severe snoring, moderate daytime somnolence and moderate sleep apnea syndrome. B232 currently is on CPAP machine but has difficulties getting use to it and she swallows a lot of air when it is being administered.

In frontal view, Brook has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 to 3 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline. The chin might be just slightly to the left about 2 to 3 mm. In profile view, upper lip length is probably about 3 to 4 mm AP deficient. Chin is probably 10 to 12 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not well defined. Intraorally, B232 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a good Class I cuspid molar relationship with anterior vertical overbite of about 2.5 to 3 mm. The left side of the occlusion is about 1 to 2 mm higher than the right side. The left eye is slightly elevated compared to the right eye by 1 to 2 mm. The uvula and soft palate are mildly elongated but not too significant. Faucial pillars are moderately constricted with the insertion of posterior faucial pillar in the posterior pharyngeal wall. Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side. The turbinates are moderately enlarged with the left one being significantly larger than the right side. The airway may be constricted. To palpation she has some mild tenderness over the shoulders and there is very minimal tenderness over the styloid areas. Joints function relatively smoothly. B232 does state that about 30 years ago she remembers having some clenching and popping in her joints but that went away. Incisal opening is 47 mm. Excursive movements are 8 mm to the right and 9 mm to the left.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
: Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Sinuses look relatively clear. The condyles have a little bit of a shape change to them.

Waters view shows that B232 has a significantly deviated nasal septum at least back in the bony area with septal spur extending off towards the right side. The turbinates are moderately enlarged. The airway seems constricted. Slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane and mandibular plane can be visualized.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit of sclerosis on the top. There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is relatively shallow.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some anterior beaking. Joint space looks a little bit better balanced on this side. Articular eminence is moderate in inclination. On opening there is good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some maxillary and mandibular AP deficiency. Moderately high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal at the soft palate level measures about 4 mm and at the base of the tongue measures closer to about 9 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
1. AP maxillary deficiency.
2. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
3. AP mandibular deficiency.
4. Class I occlusion.
5. Transverse cant occlusion with the left side being 1 to 2 mm higher than the right side.
6. Elongated soft palate and constricture of the faucial pillars.
7. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.
8. Hypertrophied turbinates.
9. Deviated nasal septum with spurring.
10. Nasal airway obstruction.
11. Sleep apnea syndrome.
12. Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
13. Headaches and pain.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a. Maintain current alignment of the maxillary arch. b. Maintain current alignment of the mandibular arch.
2. Surgery. a. Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 3 to 4 mm and downgraft it posteriorly approximately 3 to 4 mm. b. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible 8 to 10 mm. c. Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty. d. Bilateral inferior partial turbinectomies. e. Nasoseptoplasty. f. TMJ surgery as indicated by the MRI to be taken later today. g. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis. h. Bilateral coronoidotomies and bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B232
MRI EVALUATION
AGE: 52/F DOB:
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There is decreased vertical joint space. There appears to be discal tissue medial to the condyle. The cortical bone appears to be intact. Downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa of about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There is decreased vertical joint space. There is downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa of about 2 mm. There may be some discal tissue over medially.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone some significant arthritic changes particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. There is flattening and some significant anterior beaking as well as some sclerosis. More medial the condyle has a little bit better shape but there is some significant anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. There is significantly decreased vertical and posterior joint space. The disc is anteriorly displaced sitting almost beneath the articular eminence but appears significantly degenerated. Slight fluid in the superior joint space but not too significant. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction with significant degenerative and morphological changes.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to be in a little bit better shape than the opposite side. There is some anterior beaking present. Decreased superior and posterior and posterior joint space is present. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced. On opening, however, it appears that it does reduce and there is fairly good translation of the condyle with some restriction in translation of the disc itself.

IMPRESSION:
1. Left TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated with significant degenerative changes and nonreducing.
2. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated but with reduction although probable some adhesions to the articular eminence. Disc may also be medially displaced.

B232 I-CAT EVALUATION
AGE: 52/F DOB:
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation:
AP view shows that she has enlarged turbinates. Nasal septum is deviated off towards the right side significantly in the bony area. There is a septal spur sticking off into the right side. It appears that she has some nasal airway obstruction. She has some thickening of the sinus lining on the floor of nose bilaterally being a little bit greater on the left side than the right side. This could be a small mucus retention cyst. Otherwise, the sinuses appeared clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic. There is significantly decreased vertical joint space. Minimal downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. There appears to be some erosions in the head of the condyle. Right TMJ likewise shows a condyle that is arthritic, although perhaps a little bit better condition than the left side. Joint space is a little bit better on the right side as compared to the left side. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly at about 1-2 mm. In both joints, it appears there are areas where there could be bone-on-bone contact.

Sagittal view shows the inferior turbinate is large in the vertical dimension and extends posterior to the palate. The sinus shows that there is thickening of the mucosa on the floor of the sinus extending from the front wall to the posterior wall. Oropharyngeal airway is quite narrow and appears to measure maybe 4-5 mm with the soft palate and base of the tongue a little superior. Right maxillary sinus has some minimal thickening of the mucosa on the floor of the sinus, but not nearly as significant as the opposite side. Right turbinate is large vertically and extends posterior to the posterior aspect of the palate by probably a good 5-6 mm. Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. There is significantly decreased joint space vertically and posteriorly. Some anterior beaking is present and there is sort of a cystic formation at the head of the condyle. Articular eminence has moderate inclination. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a little bit increased joint space. There is anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Axial view shows that the turbinate appears quite large. There is deviation of the septum and spurring of the septum off towards the right side. The superior part of the sinuses are fairly clear. The left sinus shows what may be a mucous retention cyst on the lateral aspect of the sinus extending from the anterior wall to the posterior wall. There may be a little bit of increased tissue thickness on the right side along the lateral aspect of the sinus floor.

IMPRESSION:
1. Bilateral TMJ arthritis with the left side worse than the right side.
2. Hypertrophied turbinates.
3. Deviated nasal septum and spurring off towards the right side.
4. Probable mucous retention cyst in the maxillary left sinus and some mucosal thickening on the floor of the sinus on the right side.
5. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

