B234
B234 is 37 years old and referred by ______, DDS, .
Patient History
B234 is in good health except for some TMJ problems. She has had previous surgery that included the following: (1) Arthroscopy to the left knee 17 years ago; (2) Left TMJ arthroscopy in 13 years ago; (3) Left TMJ open joint procedure with debridement and discectomy in 12 years ago; (4) C-section in 9 years ago.

She currently takes Levora (BCP) and Tylenol with codeine as necessary, and usually takes 1-1/2 tablets at a time. She states that VICODIN makes her hyper, and she prefers not to take that medication.

B234's TMJ problems began 14 years ago. She and her husband were involved in a motor vehicle accident and may have actually hit their heads together. He suffered a severely fractured, displaced right zygomatic orbital complex and a head injury. They didn't expect her husband to live at first, but he has made a remarkable recovery and is now teaching school, although his speech is affected some but otherwise is doing very well. As previously stated, 13 years ago, she had left TMJ arthroscopy by Dr. ____. 12 years ago, she had debridement and discectomy of the left TMJ with a temporary silastic implant placed by Dr. ___. 12 years ago, left TMJ surgery was performed to remove the temporary silastic implant that had been placed. For a while after the second surgery, she had some physical therapy but has had none since then. She has had no other treatment at this time for her condition.

She gets occasional earaches, no tinnitus, but more recently has been getting some vertigo but has no hearing loss. The only other joints that really bother her at all are her knees. She has no problems wearing cheap jewelry. She is aware that she probably does some clenching of her teeth at night because she does wake up sometimes sore and achy in the morning. She gets a headache maybe once a week, and they are predominantly in the left temporal and perhaps in the frontal area at about a level of 3. She rates her TMJ pain, which is fairly constant, at about a level of 8. On an average day, her pain levels are at 7. She rates her jaw function at 7, diet at 5, and disability at 6.

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B234 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. A little bit more fullness in the left masseter area. There is actually some increased muscle mass on the left side. The masseteric hyperplasia on the left side that B234 demonstrates is a direct result of the fact that she always chews on the left side and doesn't new on the right side at all.

Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned with each other.

In profile view, she has good facial symmetry and balance. Some slight nasal dorsum prominence but not too significant. Chin-neckline looks fairly well-balanced. Slight obtuse nasolabial angle.

Intraorally, B234 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled. She has thin attached gingiva around the lower incisors and could probably do a little graft in that area. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She basically has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship and an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.

To palpation, B234 has some mild to moderate tenderness over the left masseter and left styloid area. No tenderness over either TMJ.
On opening, she has significant crepitation in the left TMJ. In the right joint, she has a very soft opening click at about 20 mm and closing clicking at probably about 10 to 15 mm. B234 has been pretty much unaware of any noises on the right side. Maximal incisal opening is 58 mm but without significant pain 36 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 4.5 mm and to the left 10 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. All of the rest of the teeth are present. Nasal airway looks good. Sinuses look reasonably clear. Left joint looks quite arthritic with some unusual architecture within it. Right condyle appears large and is postured forward a little bit relative to the fossa.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Nasal airway looks reasonably clear. Septum looks reasonably straight. Left angle of the mandible looks a little bit more prominent in a lateral direction as compared to the right side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little arthritic and sclerotic on the head. Very minimal vertical joint space. Posterior joint space, however, looks good. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Certain fuzziness around the joint. Joint looks fairly arthritic.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some anterior beaking present. Significantly decreased vertical and posterior joint space and an increased anterior joint space. Articular disc is moderately steep but out laterally is much steeper. Articular disc is probably in a vertical orientation within that joint but displaced anteriorly.

Opening view shows restricted translation of the left TMJ, but the right TMJ comes completely out of the fossa and translates well anterior to the articular eminence. Left joint appears to have just some reactive bone up in the fossa area that makes the fossa not as distinct-appearing.

Cephalometrically, she has nice facial balance and a skeletal and occlusal Class I jaw relationship. Oropharyngeal airway looks good.
Basic Diagnoses
Left TMJ severe arthritis
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction
Headaches TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Vertigo
Masticatory dysfunction

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch
Align and level mandibular arch CT scan to include bilateral TMJs and jaw structures (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Left TMJ total joint prosthesis
Surgical management of right TMJ by one of the following methods:
Total joint prosthesis
Consider right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor and right mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)PLEASE CONFIRM THIS

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
I gave B234 two prescriptions:
Klonopin 0.5 mg, disp. 90 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s. (90-day supply)
Celebrex 200 mg tablets, disp. 90, 1 tablet q.d. (90-day supply)

B234 MRI Evaluation
Date of Acquisition:	
Date of Reading: 
There do not appear to be any coronal views.
Left TMJ, sagittal view, demonstrates severe osteoarthritic changes on the condyle and in the fossa in this joint. There are osteophytic projections extending from the anterior aspect of the condyle toward the lateral aspect of the joint. Condyle is very narrow anteroposteriorly in the lateral to mid part of the condyle. More medially there is a wider condylar head. There is a severely decreased vertical joint space. Some areas of bones may actually be touching. Articular eminence is fairly steep out laterally but appear relatively shallow toward the medial aspect of the joint. Bone on bone contact toward the most medial aspect of the joint. There is a little bit of fluid in the joint space. Articular eminence is really not identifiable. There may be some remnant sitting beneath the articular eminence but otherwise no discernible discal tissue seen. The patient may have had previous surgery in this joint and could have had a discectomy performed. Translation is quite restricted. A significant amount of roughness on the head of the condyle.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has much better features compared to the opposite side. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting along the ascending aspect of the eminence. Some anterior beaking is present on the condyle. Some flattening on the head of the condyle is also present. Vertical joint space and posterior joint spaces are significantly decreased. The disc appears foreshortened anteroposteriorly.

On opening, it appears that the disc does reduce, and there is good translation of the condyle and the disc.
Impression:
Left TMJ severe arthritis with no evidence of discal tissue
Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation but with reduction
Right disc is salvageable; left disc is nonsalvageable

B234 MRI Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of Reading: 
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears to have an osteophytic growth off the lateral aspect of the condyle. There is bone on bone contact between the condyle and the fossa in the mid part of the joint. Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. Do not see any evidence of discal tissue. Bone in the fossa appears is a little bit rough in some areas as well indicating arthritis affecting both condyle and fossa.

In the open coronal views, it appears that she has osteophytic downgrowths from the fossa area. The lateral pole of the condyle extends out to and perhaps just slightly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Some major degenerative changes within this joint.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. Significantly decreased joint space, however, vertically. Minimal downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. Difficult to identify the disc in the closed views. However, on the open views, the disc does appear to be in position. Condyle appears to have reasonably good shape.

Impression:
Left TMJ severe arthritis and no evidence of discal tissue with reactive/heterotopic bone off the condyle and from within the fossa
Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction

