B236
B236 is 18 years old, date of birth , referred by Dr. _____. B236's jaw joint problems began when she was about 12 years old when she began to have clicking and popping in her joints. She feels it was related to the orthodontics performed at that time. She had orthodontics from the age of 10 to 12, and then the braces were removed. They were placed on about 6 months later and she wore them again from about the age of 12 to 13. Dr. Carter Hatton was the original orthodontist. She has recently had braces put back on 18 years of age by Dr. _____.

B236 gets headaches at a level of 8 almost on a daily basis predominantly in the frontal and temporal area. She gets TMJ pain at a level of 8, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 6, diet and disability at 6. She currently takes Synthroid and was diagnosed with hypothyroidism 2 years ago. She also takes citalopram and takes Advil for pain.

She gets occasional earaches, but no tinnitus, vertigo, nor hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night time, and she is aware of clenching during the day.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B236 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is shifted off to the right side almost 2 mm, and the chin is also off to the right side about 2 mm. In profile, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of about 2-3 mm, and chin is retruded by about 8-10 mm. Chin neckline is not well defined. She has a significantly head postured forward neck position. With having B236 position her head and neck up over the shoulders more, it shows that she has a greater AP deficiency in the maxillary of maybe 5-6 mm and then the chin would be probably 10-12 mm. Intraorally, B236 has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She appears to have an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch. There is real thin attached tissue on the anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm. She is basically a Class I cuspid on the left side and Class II end-on cuspid on the right side. The maxillary left cuspid may be about 1 or 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. The lower arch appears fairly symmetric. Transversely, the right cuspid may be a little bit higher than the left one. Uvula and soft palate appear relatively normal. Fascial pillars may be mild to moderately constricted. Tonsils are mild to moderate in size. Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderately enlarged. The septum appears reasonably straight, at least anteriorly. Columella and nostrils appear normal. She has had her wisdom teeth removed. To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters, shoulders, moderate pain over the TMJs, retromandibular area, and milder pain over the SCMs. Maximal incisal opening is 53 mm, and she could open to about 40 without significant pain. Excursion movements are 8 mm in each direction. On opening, she had a soft click in the right joint about 5 to 10 mm, but the left joint seemed to function reasonably smoothly. On excursion movement, she had a definitely palpable pop in the right joint predominantly.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but the presence of all the rest of the teeth. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Right condyle appears larger than the left condyle. Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have undergone some resorption. The condyle appears narrow mediolaterally. The lateral pole of the condyle is significantly medially positioned within the fossa with a large distance between the remaining lateral pole of the condyle and lateral rim of the fossa. Joint space is somewhat decreased. Right TMJ coronal view shows condyle that is a little bit larger, but also it appears it may have undergone some resorption. It is a little bit narrow. It also is confined well within the lateral rim of the fossa. Vertical joint space is a little bit wider than the opposite side. Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that does appear to have lost vertical volume. Joint space in some areas appear a little bit thicker than others. Articular eminence has a moderate inclination. There is some anterior beaking present on the condyle. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears actually a little bit larger than the opposite side, but also appears to have lost some vertical volume. There is anterior beaking present. The joint space appears just a little bit thicker in some areas. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Axial view shows that the turbinates appears moderately enlarged, particularly on the left side. Sinuses appear clear. The septum appears reasonably straight in the single cut available. Coronal skull view shows that the sinuses are clear. The septum deviates just slightly off to the left side. Turbinates are fairly large, and particularly on the left side it appears to obliterate most of the airway. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that her head is postured a little upwards and forwards. She has a little bit of a head postured forward neck position. There appears to be some AP maxillary deficiency hypoplasia. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5-6 mm at the soft palate level and about 6 mm at the base of the tongue. She does have an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch. The vertical height of the mandible may be somewhat decreased.

Dental model analysis shows that there is a 's difference of 1.5 mm.
Basic diagnoses for B236 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR).
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
AP maxillary hypoplasia. Anterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia. Anterior mandibular vertical hypoplasia. Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion on the right side, but Class I on the left side.
Mandibular dental midline and chin shifted to the right 2 mm.
Slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 mm higher than the left side. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.
Tooth size discrepancy with a 's difference of 1.5 mm. Thin attached gingiva lower anterior arch.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Periodontal evaluation with possible grafting of the lower anterior arch. Presurgical orthodontics. Consider placing turbos on the maxillary incisors and on the mandibular second molars to open the bite.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower incisors removing about 1.5 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy. Surgery. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward about 4 mm and down graft it 2 to 3 mm posteriorly. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to vertically lengthen the anterior mandible. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B236 AVARY MRI AGE: 18/F
DOB:
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat small in size. It may have lost some vertical volume. There appears to be increased joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. There may be discal tissue anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is small in size and appears to have lost some volume. Joint space actually appears increased. There may be discal tissue anteriorly displaced. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost some volume. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting down along the inferior aspect of the articular eminence. Joint space seems a little bit thick. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. There is good translation of the condyle and reduction of the disc on opening. The disc appears to reduce moderately early on opening.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit larger compared to the opposite side. The disc is anteriorly displaced, but not quite as far as the opposite side. Articular eminence is a little bit less steep than the opposite side. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On the right side on opening, there is reduction of the disc and there is good translation of the condyle and the disc. The disc appears to reduce fairly early on in opening.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ possible condylar resorption with anteriorly displaced discs with reduction.

