B237 MRI Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of :
Left TMJ, sagittal view, closed position, reveals out laterally there is some flattening of the head of the condyle with some beaking present. The disc is not really seen toward the lateral aspect but is more visible toward the medial aspect of the joint. Medially the disc appears to be in reasonable position. Out laterally, it could be anteriorly displaced and possibly medially displaced as well. The lateral aspect of the condyle seems to have fairly good form. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There is some flattening of the head of the condyle over medially.

On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyle, and the articular disc is in position. At the most lateral aspect the disc is not as readily identifiable as it is medially.

In one view, it appears the disc does move some as compared to the right side.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has more of a hockey stick shape to it than the opposite side. A little bit of flattening on the anterior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Decreased posterior joint space. Articular disc out laterally is anteriorly displaced. In one area it appears it may be acting as a wedge pushing the condyle posteriorly. More medially, the disc may be in a little bit better position. Out laterally, it appears to be in a little bit more of a vertical position and may be pushing the condyle posteriorly as there is a slightly decreased joint space posteriorly.

On opening, there is moderate translation, but the condyle appears to move significantly better than the disc does. The disc may be adhesed to the articular eminence. There is also a bit of anterior beaking on the condylar head.

Impression:
Left TMJ mild arthritis and perhaps anterior dislocation of the disc at the most lateral aspect and possibly medial dislocation
Left TMJ moderate arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction but with adhesions of the disc to the articular eminence

B237 is 28 years old and referred by Dr. _______.
Patient Concerns
Severe headaches Clicking and popping in the jaw joints
Patient History

The only previous surgery has had is on his left wrist. is in good health except for a headache everyday. He takes Lortab 10. He generally takes 3 in the morning and 3 at night, and this keeps him out of the severe pain cycles. He also takes Elavil 50 mg, he takes 1 at night, Depakote 250 mg, 2 tablets in the morning and 2 tablets at night. has had an allergic reaction to CLEOCIN.

B237's headaches are worse in the evenings, and he generally feels better in the mornings. He is not aware of any problems and bruxism. He gets no earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, no vertigo, and no hearing loss. Other joints that bother him include his left wrist, which he injured and required surgery from a motorcycle accident. Also, his knees bother him at times. gets headaches that are primarily in the frontal and temporal area, but they can cover the entire head at times. The average intensity is about a level of 6, but they can escalate almost everyday to a level of 10. He is not aware of any specific pain in the TMJ area with normal daily activity. His average daily pain is about a level of 6. He rates his jaw function at 3, diet at 2, and disability at 9. B237's problems began about five years ago. Actually, about a year prior to that he had a motorcycle accident where he had a concussion and was knocked out. Five years ago he had his third molars removed in the morning and went out riding his motorcycle that afternoon and had another wreck and knocked himself out again. He was taken to the hospital, and they performed a CAT scan at that time. estimates that the time of unconsciousness was about 10 to 12 seconds. His helmet was cracked in the second accident. About three days after that accident is when his headaches began. He woke up three days later with a fairly significant headache and essentially has been there since that time. Since that time, he has been evaluated by a neurologist, Dr. _____, and he has had CAT scans and MRIs 5 years ago and last year. The only thing they found was an enlarged pituitary gland but didn't feel that it was of any significance. They found nothing else. He has had acupuncture x six treatments (no help), biofeedback x 30 treatments (no help), chiropractic treatment (no help), left and right occipital nerve blocks and facet blocks (no help), massage therapy (no help), exercise (no help), and bite splint for one year (no help). He has been on lots of medications including Wellbutrin, Toradol, Paxil, beta blockers, etc. None of these has been effective in eliminating 's problems. He has even been on Elavil and Depakote for about three years I believe and became ineffective for him. He has only been on Lortab 10 for about the last three months. He has been having to go to the ER to get his medications. I will go ahead and give him medication. I did tell him that I am not a long-term pain management doctor and that I will take care of him for a little while here, but then if we have no resolution or if decides not to proceed on with treatment, will refer him to Dr. ____for pain management. Gave a prescription for Lortab 10, disp. 60 tablets, 3 tablets in the a.m., 3 tablets in the p.m. with no refills.

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, has good facial symmetry and balance. He has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. A little bit of malalignment of his anterior upper teeth and some mild crowding, lower anterior teeth. He has about 2 to 3 mm of overbite.

To palpation, has moderate pain over the temporalis muscles, TMJs, and milder discomfort over the styloid areas, SCMs, posterior neck, shoulders, and very minimal tenderness over the masseter muscles. On opening, he has a loud audible pop in the right joint at 30 mm of opening and a closing click at 10 mm which is also audible. On excursive movements, he has an audible and palpable click in the right joint. The left joint seems to function reasonably smoothly. The disc may be in a pre-click position. is not aware of ever having his jaw joints injected.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars with all the rest of the teeth being present. Sinuses look clear. Turbinates look relatively normal in size. Styloid processes appear fairly long on both sides and relatively thin. They appear to overlap the posterior border of the mandible. Condyles both look a little bit flat on the anterior aspect but otherwise look pretty much okay.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear to be clear. Nasal airway appears very good. Some slight deviation of the nasal septum but not too significantly. No other significant findings.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a slight hockey stick shape to it. Joint space appears fairly well-balanced. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is hard to see the top of and appears quite flattened across the top. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Appears to be an increased vertical joint space.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles with the right one exhibiting a little bit better translation than the left side.
Cephalometrically, has a good Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway looks good.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction
Severe headaches TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Relative mandibular hyperplasia

Recommended Treatment
Bilateral TMJ injections with Marcaine
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies with bone screw stabilization
Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars

