B240
B240 is 14 years old and referred by Dr. _____. She takes no medications. She has had an adverse reaction to Zithromax. She otherwise is in good health. I have reviewed some of B240's records particularly an i- evaluation. B240 is congenitally missing some permanent teeth including the maxillary left and right lateral incisors. In the lower arch she has all of her teeth. The primary concerns that B240 has are that she would like to have her teeth aligned and all of them are present and also the upper and lower are retruded.

In frontal view, B240 has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 0. Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline and chin. The nasal tip is about 3 mm off towards the right side. Intraorally, B240  has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. She has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch she is missing the lateral incisors. She has spacing around the cuspid and centrals bilaterally. She has basically a Class I molar but Class II end-on cuspid relationship. She has an anterior vertical overbite of about 2 mm. To palpation, she has some moderate tenderness over the masseters muscles, TMJs and styloid areas. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is 45 mm. Excursive movements are about 8 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary lateral incisors. There are four bony impacted third molars. The sinuses look relatively clear.

Waters view shows the sinuses look relatively clear. The septum appears fairly straight except there may be an osteophyte off to the left side. The turbinates appear moderate in size.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a little flattening on top of the condyle and a little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence has moderate inclination.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has little bit of a hockey stick shape to it. Joint space seems to be fairly adequate. A little bit narrow between the anterior aspect of the condyle and the articular eminence. On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are retruded but the nose is quite prominent. I believe there is probably a dysmorphic shape to the septal cartilage that has created a very obtuse nasolabial angle. Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted with less than 5 mm airway space at the soft palate level although at the base of the tongue that measures about 8.5 mm. A little bit of adenoid mass is still present in the nasopharynx. Turbinates appear moderate in size. B240 claims no difficulties breathing through her nose day or night.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II cuspid relationship but basically a Class I molar relationship.
Missing maxillary lateral incisors bilaterally. Multiple spacing between the upper arch between the bicuspids, cuspids and central incisors. Hypertrophied turbinates. Large septal spur off to the left side.
Nasal airway obstruction. Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm (normal 11 mm.) Impacted third molars x4. External nasal deformity.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Retract the first bicuspids and cuspids maximizing posterior anchorage and consolidating the spacing to the lateral incisor area. Moving one tooth at a time, i.e., first the first bicuspids and then later the cuspids may help maximize posterior anchorage. Increased angulation of upper incisors slightly. Align and level mandibular arch. Surgery.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 7 mm. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible 7 mm. Partial turbinectomies. Nasoseptoplasty. Removal of impacted third molars x4.
External rhinoplasty. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to replace missing maxillary lateral incisors with implants and crowns.

B240 MRI
: 14/F
DOB:
Date of Acquisition: .
Date of Interpretation: .
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. The condyle may be somewhat enlarged. The lateral rim of the fossa has a relatively minimal downward curvature. Difficult to identify any discal tissue.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears be of fairly good size. The lateral rim of the fossa is quite flat. There appears to be significantly decreased joint space. Difficult to identify discal tissue.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is fairy long although moderate in inclination. The discal tissue appears to be in position. There could be some slight posterior displacement of the disc. There is good translation of the condyle and the disc appears to be in good position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it. Some anterior beaking is present. Articular eminence is moderately elongated. Medially the disc may be posteriorly displaced but out laterally it appears to be perhaps posteriorly displaced. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is good translation and the disc appears to be in a reduced position.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ with mild arthritic changes and articular disc may be moderately posteriorly displaced but reduces on opening. Condylar head and neck appear excessively elongated.
Right TMJ moderate arthritis and the disc may be posteriorly displaced towards the medial aspect of the joint. Condylar head and neck appear excessively elongated.
Possible bilateral condylar hyperplasia.

B240 I-
Coronal view shows relatively large inferior turbinates. She has a mucocele in the right maxillary sinus in the anterior medial aspect of the floor. She has a large septal spur off the left side that goes all the way up against the left side of the nose. TMJs look reasonable although the joint space may be somewhat decreased.

Sagittal view shows that the right TMJ is a little flattened on the posterior aspect. A little bit of anterior beaking may be present. Joint space could be slightly decreased vertically but difficult to tell on this view. Articular eminence has average steepness. Oropharyngeal airway appears reasonable although her head is tilted upwards. The left TMJ appears a little flattened on the posterior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space could be slightly decreased but very difficult to tell.

Axial view shows that the frontal and ethmoid sinuses appear clear. Maxillary sinuses appear relatively clear. On the right side there is a mucocele in the anterior medial aspect of the sinus and on the left side there may be some slight mucosal thickening towards the bottom of the sinus. Turbinates appear quite large. Septal spur coming off the left side of the septum and the posterior aspect of the bony aspect that extends into the left nasal airway. This is just above the inferior turbinates.

TMJ films left coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. Joint space is fairly well balanced although just slightly decreased perhaps towards the lateral aspect of the joint. Cortical bone appears to be intact. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably equivalent of 3 to 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with very good morphology. Fairly balanced joint space across the top but decreased at the very medial aspect and it may be slightly decreased at the lateral aspect. The vertical joint space appears a little bit less than the opposite side in some views. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly less than the opposite side of only about 2 to 3 mm. Cortical bone for the most part appears to be intact.

Additional sagittal views: Left TMJ shows a little bit of anterior beaking on the condyle. The condyle may be slightly narrow anteroposteriorly but not too bad. There appears to be adequate superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence has average inclination. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint, the condyle appears a little bit degenerated with what appears to be some changes in the cortical bone.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a little bit of anterior beaking. Joint space appears fairly well balanced except one area appears a little bit narrow anteriorly. A little bit more of a hockey stick shape to this condyle as compared to the opposite side. Articular eminence has a relatively moderate slope to it.

On the Panorex, the patient is missing maxillary lateral incisors and has spacing between some of her teeth. She has 4 impacted third molars.
Examining her profile, she appears to be AP maxillary and mandibular deficient. She has a vertical overbite of about 2 mm and maxillary and mandibular incisors appear to fit together fairly well.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Rule out TMJ pathology.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II cuspid relationship and slight Class III molar relationship.
Missing maxillary lateral incisors.
Multiple spacing in the upper arch particularly around the cuspids. Hypertrophied turbinates.
Probable nasal airway obstruction.
Large septal spur off to the left side. Impacted third molars x4. External nasal deformity. Decreased oropharyngeal airway of approximately 5 mm (normal 11 mm.)

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: of left and right TMJs. Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up space for the lateral incisors by retracting the cuspids, expanding the arch some and rotating the central incisors forward slightly. Need to achieve a lateral incisor space of 6 mm on each side to accommodate the lower anterior 6 teeth. Maximize posterior anchorage to help keep from flaring the upper incisors too far forward.
Align and level mandibular arch. Allow lower incisors to tip forward. Surgery. Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 8 to 9 mm at the incisal edge.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible 10 mm. Partial inferior turbinectomies. Nasal septoplasty to remove large nasal septal spur.
Removal of 4 impacted third molars.
Consider external rhinoplasty. Consider TMJ surgery if pathology found on the evaluations. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to replace the missing maxillary lateral incisors by either implants or crowns or with bridgework.

