B242 MRI Evaluation 
Age: 40/F
Date of Birth: 
Date of MRI: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has some arthritic changes. There is some sclerosis. There appears to be some medial osteophytic development. Significantly decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly a moderate amount. It appears there may be loss of condylar volume although there is sclerosis on the top of the condyle. The condyle appears a little bit narrow mediolaterally. The articular disc appears to be anteriorly and laterally displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit narrow transversely. Significantly decreased vertical space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. Discal tissue appears to be anterior and slightly laterally displaced. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa probably about 3 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone some arthritic changes. There is a little osteophyte growing off the top of the condyle and mid portion of the joint. There is some flattening on the anterior head and sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and appears to be displaced laterally. There is decreased superior, posterior and anterior joint space. There could be some mild degenerative changes in the fossa but difficult to tell. The condyle is narrow as it really only shows up in 3 views. A little bit of fluid is present in the superior and inferior joint space but there does not appear to be any significant inflammatory process. On opening, there is probably early reduction and there is good translation of both the condyle and the articular disc.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is somewhat sclerotic and has some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There is decreased posterior joint space. Articular disc is anteriorly and laterally displaced. There is more fluid in the superior joint space on this side as compared to the opposite side. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and disc and the disc likely reduces early in the opening process.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anterolaterally displaced but with reduction on opening. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anterolaterally displaced with reduction. Radiologist, Dr. ____, reported a possible pituitary mass and recommends a dedicated pituitary MRI.

B242
B242 is 40 years old, referred by Dr. ____. B242 is in good health with no major medical problems.
PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Sleep apnea. Snoring.
Frequent awakenings at night.
Daytime tiredness.
Headaches.
Jaw joint discomfort.

B242's problems began about 7 to 10 years ago in reference to her jaw joints of unknown etiology. The clicking and popping just began and currently she has clicking and popping in the joints and sometimes it can be heard across the room. She started snoring about the same time and the snoring problems have gotten a lot worse as has the sleep apnea associated symptoms. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. She has been diagnosed with scoliosis and she also occasionally gets carpal tunnel symptoms associated with the right wrist and hand area. She has been told that she probably clenches and bruxes at night. B242 has no known allergies and no known problems with jewelry. B242 gets headaches about one time per week and they occur apparently most often in the temple and towards the back of the head at about a level of 6. She gets some pain and discomfort in the TMJ area at about a level of 3. On an average day she generally does not have much discomfort. She rates her jaw function at 1, diet at 0, disability at 0. She had orthodontics previously at the age of 32 for about 1-1/2 years. All the teeth were maintained at that time and the lower incisors were tipped forward and she had an end-on incisor relationship apparently. She saw Dr. ___about 14 months ago and began orthodontics again. She had a lower incisor extracted and had to have some gum surgery performed. Following completion of orthodontics there are plans to do some additional gum surgery to the upper arch. In frontal view, B242 has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline may be just slightly to the left as she only has 3 incisors. It appears she is missing the left central. She may be just slightly off to the right side 1 to 2 mm. In profile view, B242 and fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks and nose. The chin appears a little bit retruded. Chin-neckline is quite short and chin-neck angle is not well defined. If she postures her mandible forward it does improve her profile and the chin-neckline. The chin is probably retruded about 8 to 10 mm. To palpation B242 has no tenderness around the head and neck area. On opening, she has a click bilaterally at about 5 and no more than 10 mm of opening and this is consistent. She has a closing click about 5 mm. Intraorally, B242 is missing the mandibular probably the left central. She has the rest of her teeth all the way back through the third molars present. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the third molars. She has small upper lateral incisors. She has a Class I cuspid molar relationship bilaterally. She has about a 2 mm anterior overbite. She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1.5 to 2 mm higher than the left side. B242 Page 2

The inferior border of the mandible on the right side is probably up 2 to 3 mm compared to the left side. Some slight increased fullness in the cheek around the angle area on the side about 1 to 2 mm more prominent than the right side. Intraorally, the oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. The uvula may be a little bit large but not too significant. The soft palate might be a little bit elongated. The faucial pillars are mild to moderately constricted. Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side. The left turbinate appears somewhat enlarged and almost touches against the septum area. The right turbinate is moderately enlarged but there appears to be adequate airway in part due to the deviation of the nasal septum. Dental model analysis shows that the teeth are nicely aligned and leveled. The third molars are banded and a little bit out of alignment. She is missing one lower incisor and has a little bit of an overjet of probably 1 to 2 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except for the mandibular right lateral incisor that may be missing. All four third molars are present and are erupted in. She has fairly prominent styloid processes particularly on the right side. The sinuses look relatively clear. The nasal airway appears more constricted on the left side than the right side. The condyles appear a little bit flattened on the posterior aspect.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear fairly clear. There is a little bit of cloudiness in the right side towards the lateral aspect. The septum is deviated off towards the left side. The left turbinate appears to touch against the septum and there appears to be decreased nasal airway on the left side. Transverse cant in the occlusion can be seen.

Left TMJ tomograms show that the condyle is a little bit flattened anteriorly and a little bit on the back side. There is a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it. Decreased posterior and superior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has flattening at the superior aspect and the posterior joint space appears decreased. On opening there is good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiographic shows that B242 has a Class II skeletal relationship. She has an increased occlusal plane angulation. Oropharyngeal airway measurement is less than 4 mm at the base of the tongue and about 6 mm at the soft palate level. There is a little bit of an overjet of about 2 mm. Otherwise, basically a Class I. The incisors appear to have reasonably good angulation. There is some space between the superior aspect of the tongue and the hard palate of about 3 mm. The base of the anterior alveolus is about 6 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. B242 Page 3

AP mandibular deficiency. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of 4 mm (normal dimension is 11 mm) at the soft palate level and 4 mm at the base of the tongue. Hypertrophied soft palate and uvula. Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Severe snoring.
Sleep apnea syndrome.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Deviated nasal septum. Predominately a mouth breather particularly when sleeping.
Malaligned third molars.
Moderately high occlusal plane angulation.
Missing mandibular right central incisor. Transverse occlusal plan asymmetry with the right maxilla and mandible being 2 mm shorter vertically than the left side.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Tip the lateral incisor roots on the right side mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) with a modified inversion flap technique.
Extraction of four erupted third molars. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

