B244 MRI Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of :
Left TMJ, coronal view,
Right TMJ, coronal view,
Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that appears sclerotic throughout the head and neck area. Condyle appears narrow anteroposteriorly and probably small mediolaterally as it shows up in only a couple of views. Articular eminence is moderately steep. It is moderate in length. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced but also appears significantly degenerated. Joint space looks fairly well-balanced around the condyle, except there is some hyperplasia of the bilaminar tissues. Significant inflammation seen in the joint.

On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle coming down toward the articular eminence but not beneath it. Articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction and appears with greater deformation and degeneration in the open views compared to the closed view.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with severe degenerative changes and erosions in it. Significant anterior beaking on this condyle. Osteophytic growths off of it. Significantly decreased joint space particularly vertically and anteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle is much larger on this side than the opposite side. Condyle for the most part appears fairly sclerotic. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and severely deformed.

On opening, there is restricted translation similar to the opposite side with it coming part way down the articular eminence but not beneath it. Articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Impression:
Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with significant degenerative changes and nonreducing
Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
Discs are nonsalvageable bilaterally Patient is a candidate for total joint prostheses

B244
B244 is 45 years old, and she is referred by Dr.
Patient History
The only previous surgery she has had is a right breast biopsy. That turned out just to be some calcium deposits. She takes Amerge 2.5 mg p.r.n. severe headaches. She also takes Yasmin for birth control. B244's problems began about 4 years ago of unknown etiology. She began waking up with headaches and aching in her jaws. She was aware of having significant problems with clenching and bruxism at night. She has had splints since about 4 years ago and has had at least 7 to 8, and many of those have had multiple repairs. She has had physical therapy at least x 2, but this was of very minimal benefit. She gets earaches, tinnitus, some vertigo, but no hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her shoulders, elbows occasionally, right wrist, right hip occasionally, and ankles occasionally. More recently within the past year or so, her jaws have begun to lock open with significant facial aching, and this is beginning to occur on a more regular basis. She is very much aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime as well as daytime. She does get some occasional numbness in her right hand.

B244 does have an allergy to PENICILLIN. She does not wear earrings and does not have, therefore, pierced ears, and, therefore, doesn't know if she has any problems wearing earrings. Other jewelry, however, does not bother her.

Primary Concerns
Severe headaches Severe TMJ pain
Moderate shoulder muscular pain
Difficulties eating and chewing
Developed facial asymmetry
Clinical Examination

In frontal view, B244 appears to have fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Some asymmetry in the lower jaw but not too significantly. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm on the left and 1 mm on the right. Maxillary midline is shifted off to the left side about 2 mm as is the mandibular dental midline. Chin is probably about 4 mm off to the left side. In profile view, there may be just some slight AP maxillary deficiency of about 3 mm, and chin may be retruded probably 5 to 8 mm.
Intraorally, B244 is missing the lower first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. Some minimal crowding, lower anterior arch, with the left lateral incisor tipped lingually. In the upper arch, she also is missing the first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. She is fairly close to a Class I occlusion. Open bite on the right side extending from the cuspids posteriorly and a little bit on the left side but not quite as significantly as the right side. She has an anterior deep bite of probably about mm. Oropharynx looks clear. She does have a thin but significantly elongated uvula.

B244 is not aware of having any problems with snoring. B244 is not aware of having any breathing problems through her nose except maybe if she has some allergies. When she sleeps, she breathes predominantly through her nose. Intranasally, she has extremely small inferior turbinates, and middle turbinates are not very large either. She has significant deviation of the septum off toward the right side, but because of the extremely small turbinates, she has an excellent airway. Left mandibular cuspid is about 1.5 mm posterior to the right cuspid, and the upper left cuspid is 1 mm to 1.5 mm posterior to the right cuspid.

To palpation, she has some high moderate pain over her shoulders but no other pain to palpation around the head and neck area. Maximum incisal opening is about 44 mm, and she can open to about 30 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movements are about 6 mm in each direction. On opening, she had crepitus in both joints, right side being worse than the left side. With a stethoscope, the crepitation of both joints was very evident.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of all four first bicuspids and all four third molars. Left sinus appears a little bit cloudy. Turbinates appear quite small, but there is a deviated nasal septum, but the airway appears extremely good. She has extremely long roots on her teeth particularly in the molars. Both joints look quite arthritic. The patient has been in splint therapy for the last 15 years. Left tomogram shows significant arthritic changes in the joint with large anterior beaking and perhaps some loss of vertical height of the condylar. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There is reasonable joint space again most likely related to long-term splint therapy.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a severe arthritic condition with a large anterior beak and virtually no joint space between the condylar head and the articular eminence. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Vertical joint space is decreased. Posterior joint space is slightly decreased.

Opening shows that there is some restricted translation in the right joint and moderate translation of the left joint. In the open views, both condyles look quite arthritic. There is a slight joint space in the open views on the left side but not on the right side. There appears to be a large pseudocyst in the left condyle. Length of the condylar head and neck on the left side appears significantly shorter than the right side. This may account for some of the asymmetry that is present.

Waters view shows that she has a small frontal sinus on the left side but not on the right side. Severe deviation of the nasal septum is present, but turbinates appear quite small. Sinuses appear quite clear. Appears to have more septae in the left sinus than the right sinus. Vertical facial asymmetry is noted. Head is rotated a little bit, so it is not a true straight-on shot.

Cephalometrically, her head is tipped up some. Oropharyngeal airway looks adequate. She has her lips forced together. Upper lip is a little bit thin. Appears to be basically skeletal Class I. Vertical difference in the height at the inferior border of the mandible and at the occlusal level is obvious. At the inferior border of the mandible in the second molar area, there is about an 8-mm vertical difference, and back at the angle it is about a 9-mm vertical difference. There is a tooth-size discrepancy with a 's difference of 1.5 mm.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with perforations
AP maxillary deficiency and asymmetry
AP mandibular deficiency and asymmetry
Posterior open bite on the right side of 2 mm and on the left side of 1 mm
Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being a couple of millimeters higher than the right side
Maxillary dental midline and mandibular dental midline shifted off the left 2 mm, and chin shifted 4 mm off to the left
Inferior border of the mandible on the left side is elevated 4 to 6 mm compared to the right side
Tooth-size discrepancy with a 's difference of 1.5 mm
Masticatory dysfunction
Severe TMJ pain
Severe headaches Myofascial pain affecting predominantly the shoulders
Nocturnal and daytime clenching and bruxism
Earaches
Tinnitus
Vertigo
History of open lock

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing 1.5 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the tooth-size discrepancy

CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol)
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement as well as correcting the asymmetry with the TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the maxilla and advance it
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

