B248
B248 is 21 years old and is referred by __ who lives in and is a former patient. B248 is in good health. She has some problems with anemia that can be managed fairly well with iron supplements. She has had an adverse reaction to penicillin. B248 has previous orthognathic surgery . She had some preexisting TMJ problems but had double jaw surgery performed by Dr. ___. The mandible was advanced and the maxilla was repositioned. She has had pain since the surgery every day in her joints. Her pain continues to slowly increase in magnitude. She had orthodontics from about 3 to 13 years ago with only about a year break. She had double jaw surgery on .

She gets headaches about two to three times a week that range about a level of 7 in the frontal, temple and posterior head area. She gets real severe headaches about every couple of months or so where she gets extremely nauseated and vomiting as well. These are about a level of 10. She rates her TMJ pain on the average day of 6, average daily pain 3, jaw function and diet at 5, disability at 7. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo. She may have some hearing loss due to chronic ear infections when younger. No other joints bother her. She does clench her teeth during the day and at nighttime.

In frontal view B248 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm. Maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to the left side. The mandible is off about 2 to 3 mm towards the right side. Chin is about 3 mm or so off to the right side. In profile view, the upper lip may be retruded a couple of mm and the chin is retruded about 10 to 12 mm. Chin neckline is short. She has a head postured forward neck position. Intraorally, she is missing a first bicuspid on the right side and she has the rest of her lower teeth. She has a 3 x 3 retainer. She has a lower arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being about 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the left side and Class II end-on on the right side. She is probably at least 4 mm Class II on the right side. Maxillary arch, however, is fairly symmetric anteroposteriorly. She has about a 2 to 3 mm overjet but a 0 vertical overbite relationship. Transversely, she is suprisingly very level. The uvula and soft palate length are relatively normal. She has a significant constricture of the faucial pillars. The tonsils are moderate in size. Intranasally, the turbinates are quite large. The septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side towards the anterior aspect. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the TMJs, styloid areas and milder pain over the masseters, medial pterygoids and minimal discomfort over the posterior neck and shoulder area. On opening she had clicking noises in the right joint probably 25 to 30 mm of opening and closing multiple crackling noises in the right joint about 15 to 20 mm. The left joint is relatively smooth but she occasionally hears a crepitus kind of noise on the left side. Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm but only about 32 mm without significant pain and discomfort. Right excursive movement was about 5 mm and to the left 7 mm. Any significant jaw function really increases the pain significantly for B248

 Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and mandibular left first bicuspid. She has four bone plates in the maxilla with about 23 bone screws present. In the mandible she has two large bone plates comprised of about 11 bone screws. The sinuses look reasonably clear. Left mandibular condyle shows evidence of severe resorption. The right side shows arthritic changes but not nearly as severe as the left side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be arthritic but with some anterior beaking. Joint space appears decreased. Articular eminence is moderately shallow.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone severe resorption and is very narrow anteroposteriorly with significant loss of vertical volume. The condyle is actually postured somewhat forward in the fossa. The slope of the fossa is relatively shallow. On opening, there is moderate translation of both condyles.

Waters view shows that the septum in the bony area is deviated off to the left side. Turbinates appear significantly enlarged. The left maxillary sinus appears a little cloudy compared to the right side but the rest of the sinuses appear relatively clear.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a high occlusal plane angle and retruded maxilla and mandible. Suprisingly the oropharyngeal airway looks quite normal.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption. Anterior vertical maxillary excess. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency. Class II occlusion on the right side and Class I on the left side. Severe TMJ pain. Headaches. Myofascial pain. Missing mandibular right first bicuspid. Lower arch asymmetry with mandibular right cuspid being about 3 to 4 mm posterior to the left cuspid. High occlusal plane angle. Anterior open bite. Hypertrophied turbinates and partial nasal airway obstruction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.

B248 Page 3
Align and level mandibular arch. Tip cuspids mesially and the bicuspids distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. CT scans of jaw and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint protheses. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand, move the anterior maxilla upwards and posterior downwards to level the occlusal plane.
Anterior mandibular subapical osteotomy. Right mandibular body ostectomy.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B248 EVALUATION Age: 21/F
DOB:
Date of Acquisition: .
Date of Interpretation: .
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant resorption vertically as well as mediolaterally. The condyle appears somewhat sclerotic. There is decreased joint space vertically. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. There appears to be significant condylar destruction in this joint.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little bit more volume to it but still has lost considerable height and is narrow mediolaterally. The lateral rim of the fossa is more flat on this side with minimal downward curvature of only about 1 mm. Decreased superior joint space.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has lost a significant amount of vertical and anteroposterior volume. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced sitting beneath the articular eminence and significantly deformed and degenerated. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. The discs possibly could be salvageable but it is significantly degenerated and the condyle is extremely small.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has lost a considerable amount of volume but not as significant as the opposite side. Towards the medial side it has almost a knife-edge peaking on the condyle. The articular eminence is moderately shallow. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting almost beneath the articular eminence. It appears that there is a perforation intracranially towards the medial side of the fossa. There is decreased superior and posterior joint space. This is deformed and degenerated but not quite as severe as the opposite side. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle but the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ severe condylar resorption and articular disc dislocated with significant degenerative changes and non-reducing (compatible with AICR.)
Right TMJ severe condylar resorption and articular disc dislocated with significant degenerative changes and non-reducing (compatible with AICR) with an intercranial perforation.

