B250 
B250 is 12 years old and referred by Dr. ____.
Patient History
B250  had her tonsils and adenoids removed 6 ears ago. She does have problems with frequent sinus infections and seasonal allergies. She does have allergies to a number of antibiotics including CEFZIL, LORABID, AUGMENTIN, ZITHROMAX, BIAXIN.

Her sinus infection symptoms include stuffiness, sore throat, and headaches.
B250 has already had some orthodontic treatment and has had a palatal expander x 2 and also expansion on the lower arch. She is currently in mixed dentition and awaiting loss of her primary teeth and eruption of her permanent teeth before proceeding on to stage II orthodontics.

She gets her headaches apparently only when her sinuses act up. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo.
Current Medications
Singulair
Allegra
Nasacort

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B250 has a little bit more fullness in the left side of the face as compared to the right side. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 3 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted almost 3 mm to the left. Chin is shifted about 4 mm to the left.

In profile view, she has fairly good facial balance vertically and anteroposteriorly. Chin may be just slightly AP deficient by maybe 3 or 4 mm.
B250's mother relates that when B250 was quite young and in her very early years that her lower jaw was out in front of the upper jaw, and then sometime from kindergarten to second grade, the lower jaw apparently moved backward. Dr. ___ started his work when B250 was in the second grade. As B250 shifts her chin toward the right side and lines up her midline, it significantly improves her facial symmetry.

Intraorally, she has retained C, D, and E on the lower right side but has first and second molars already erupted in. On the left side, she has C, D, and E and has the first molar erupted in and the second molar partially erupted in. D and E on the left side are in significant lingual inclination, whereas E on the right side is in significant buccal inclination. She has a full Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and just slight Class III on the left side by maybe 1 to 2 mm. She has a crossbite on the left side and also on the right side. Anterior overbite is about 0.5 mm to 1 mm at the most. Transversely, the right side may be just maybe about 1 mm lower than the left side. Upper arch on the left side appears to be more rounded, and on the right side is a little bit flatter relative to the line along the buccal surface of the posterior teeth. In the upper arch she has retained Cs, Ds, and Es bilaterally.

To palpation, B250 has some mild tenderness over the left masseter area, right TMJ, right styloid area, and bilateral SCMs. On opening, she has a click in the left joint at about 15 mm and a closing at about 10 mm. Right side seems to function smoothly. Maximum incisal opening is 43 mm but opening with good comfort 32 mm. Excursive movements are 6 mm in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows that the lower Cs, Ds, and Es are resorbing away and that the permanent teeth are about to erupt in. In the upper arch, she only has her primary C remaining on the right side but has a C, D, and E on the left side yet. In the upper arch, the second molars are developed but unerupted. The third molars might be developing. In the lower arch, the second molars are pretty much erupted in except the left side is partly soft tissue covered. Third molars are developing but the right third molar is rotated so the crown is facing outward. She has a 6 x 6 retainer in place. The left condyle appears flattened and appears somewhat small. The right side appears somewhat elongated. Sinuses are clear. Turbinates appear relatively normal in size with what appears to be good airway.

Waters view shows that her sinuses appear relatively clear. Mandible is seen shifted off toward the left side.
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit small. Difficult to tell where the cortex on the condyle. Fossa has a moderately steep articular eminence. Joint space in one view may appear slightly decreased superiorly and posteriorly.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle positioned posteriorly in the fossa. Appears to be some superior beaking of the condyle. Could possibly be an osteochondroma in the right condyle. Open views show that there is good translation of both joints. Right condyle looks larger than the left condyle, and it appears there may be some extra bone developing around it.

Cephalometrically, B250 has what appears to be a skeletal Class I position and has a Class I occlusion. Oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal with a dimension from the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall of 9 mm and from the posterior border of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall 15 mm. Slightly high occlusal plane is present. Vertical difference in the heights of the inferior border from one side to the other. Maxillary occlusal plane appears fairly level, although there appears to be more vertical asymmetry in the lower arch.

Basic Diagnoses
Right TMJ osteochondroma versus condylar hyperplasia with a horizontal growth pattern
Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction
Mandibular deviate prognathism
Class III occlusion on the right side and slight Class III occlusal relationship on the left side
Bilateral posterior crossbites
Mixed dentition with retained maxillary right C, left C, D, E, and mandibular left C, D, E and right C, D, E
Developing 4 third molars
Headaches TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Probable transverse maxillary deficiency and vertical asymmetry
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism

B250 has no other joint problems, but she does have some bunions on her feet that are relatively asymptomatic at this time. She usually does not wake up with headaches but usually develops them during the day.

Recommended Treatment
MRI of left and right TMJs including coronal and sagittal views
Consider selective extraction of primary teeth to encourage eruption of the permanent teeth

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch Align and level mandibular arch
Continue to monitor facial growth and development
Surgery
Right TMJ low condylectomy with articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with repositioning of the mandible back onto the facial midline
Possible maxillary osteotomies to transversely level and expand
Removal of third molars x 4

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B250 MRI Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition: Date of Reading:
Left TMJ, coronal view, Condyle appears large. Cortex appears to be intact. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa with slightly decreased joint space and discal tissue medially. Anterior displacement of the discal tissue appears to be present. Fossa cortex is intact.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with significantly decreased vertical joint space. Appears to be discal tissue medial to the condyle. Lateral rim of the fossa curves significantly inferiorly. May be discal tissue anterior to the condyle.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head and some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and somewhat foreshortened in anteroposterior dimension. Could be a little osteophyte on top of the condyle. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space underneath the articular eminence.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle. It appears that the disc remains anteriorly displaced.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with fairly good morphology but some mild anterior beaking. Decreased superior joint space. Out laterally, the disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. Articular eminence is moderately steep. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space adjacent to the articular eminence.

On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyle although not quite as good as the left side, and the disc does appear to reduce.
Impression:

Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation probably without reduction
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction
B250 

B250 is here for further evaluation. It has been almost a year-and-a-half since I last saw her. She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, hearing loss, headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain. She rates her jaw function at 1, diet at 0, and disability at 0. She takes Claritin, and that is the only medicine she takes at this time. In the summer, she had a gum graft done. She also had some retained primary teeth removed. She has no other joint problems except she has some bunions on her feet that are very well-tolerated at this time. She continues to clench and brux at nighttime and probably some during the day as well.

To palpation, she has some moderate tenderness over the TMJs and mild to moderate tenderness over the temporalis muscles and styloid areas. On opening, B250 has a click in the left TMJ at about 30 mm and a closing click at about 10. On the right side, the joint seems to function relatively smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 8 mm and to the left 7 mm.

Basic Diagnoses
Right TMJ osteochondroma versus condylar hyperplasia with a horizontal growth pattern
Right TMJ articular disc dislocation Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction
Mandibular deviated prognathism
Class II end-on occlusion on the right side, Class II end-on occlusion on the left side
Left crossbite extending from the lateral incisor through second molar
Right crossbite involving the first and second molars
Buccal position of maxillary cuspid
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism

Recommended Treatment:
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch Align and level mandibular arch
Surgery
Right TMJ low condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition the mandible back on the facial midline
Maxillary osteotomies to correct transverse problems, level, and advance
Removal of impacted third molars x 4

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

