B254 
B254 is 39 years old and referred by Dr. 
B254 is in good health with no major medical problems. Her primary concerns are:
Unhappy with her overbite.
Unhappy with her smile. Clenching and bruxism particularly at night.
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints.

B254 has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or pain around the head and neck area. She rates her jaw function and diet at 1 and disability at 0. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. She has some problems with her lower back. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time and also clenching during the day.

Previous treatment she has had to date includes orthodontics from the age of 12 to 14 and then 9 years ago she had orthodontics to realign some of her teeth for about 6 months. She takes no medications. B254 was aware of some clicking in her joints 16 years ago at the age 23. The etiology is unknown. She has been essentially asymptomatic relative to any pain or headache type of problems.

CLINICAL VIEW. In frontal view, B254 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 25 mm. Upper tooth relationship is 3.5 mm. Right eye is 1-2 mm higher than the left eye. Midlines are congruent. In profile view, the maxilla and upper lip are retruded 2-3 mm. Chin is retruded 10-12 mm. She has a good occlusion with a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has had previous orthodontics and has had all four first bicuspids extracted. She appears to have adequate attached gingiva in both arches. Uvula is moderately long, but soft palate looks normal. Fascial pillars are mildly constricted. Tonsils are mild to moderate in size. She has moderate hypertrophy of her turbinates. The septum is deviated slightly towards the left side. Columella is mildly wide and nostrils are moderately narrow. She does give a history of mild snoring, but no daytime somnolence and no sleep apnea. She is a mouth breather at nighttime.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of 1 bicuspid in each quadrant and all four third molars. Sinuses appear reasonably clear.
Axial view shows that the turbinates are fairly large particularly on the left side. The sinuses are clear.

Coronal view shows that the inferior turbinates, particularly the left side that appears to obliterate most of the nasal airway, but the sinuses are clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows the condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa with some anterior breaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep but very short in vertical length. There is increased anterior joint space and decreased posterior joint space.

Right sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that has some flattening on the superior head and some slight anterior beaking. The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with increased anterior joint space. The articular eminence is moderately steep and moderately short in vertical height.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show decreased medial joint space and vertical joint space. The condyle has good width.
Right TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that has fairly good size but with perhaps a little bit of roughness on the superior surface and decreased joint space vertically and also at the lateral aspect of the joint.

Lateral cephalogram shows the maxilla and mandible are AP hypoplastic and there is decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Basic diagnoses for B254 would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. Maxillary AP and posterior hypoplasia. AP mandibular hypoplasia. Decreased oropharyngeal airway an AP dimension of 5 mm (normal 11 mm). Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction. High occlusal plane angle of 16 degrees (normal 8 degrees).
Missing all 4 first bicuspids and all 4 third molars. Excessively long upper lip with a vertical measurement of 25 mm (normal for a female is 20 mm, +/- 2 mm).

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch. Surgery. Bilateral TMJ articular discs repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect and advance slightly. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B254 
B254 was here for a second consult. We reviewed again her surgery and recommended treatment. We went back through the complications, the expected results, etc. I spent almost 45 minutes with her again today. We went back through the potential nerve injuries, etc. She is anxious to proceed on with treatment.

B254  MRI 
AGE: 39/F
DOB: 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. It appears the disc may be anteriorly displaced. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. There is decreased vertical joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. It appears that the disc may be medially displaced. There is slightly decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. There is a little flattening on the anterior head. There is a little bit of anterior beaking but not too significant. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced. Posterior band is quite thickened. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is reduction of the articular disc and good translation of both the condyle and the articular disc.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is slightly flattened on the anterior head. There may be some slight anterior beaking but not too significant. Articular eminence is moderate steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and just on the anterior slope of the condyle with decreased posterior-superior joint space. There is no fluid in the joint spaces. On opening, there is early reduction and good translation of the condyle and disc.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with early reduction. Right TMJ arthritis and anteriorly displaced disc with early reduction.

