B255 
Met with him and his mother at my home for about 2-1/2 hours discussing his conditions and recommended treatment. Reviewed the MRIs showing the arthritis and also the indicators of a displaced articular disc that does reduce bilaterally. Doesn't have many TMJ symptoms but does at times get some pain in his jaw joints. Has no problems with headaches, earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or any of those factors as previously recorded. He and his mother definitely agree that the mandible has grown off to the left side in the last couple of years, and it has been a couple of years since his completed his previous orthodontics. Discussed the pros and cons of doing the joint procedure. If the high condylectomies are not done, he has a good probability of continuing to grow on the right side. If the discs are not repositioned, then there is a risk of worsening arthritis particularly since he already has arthritic changes present in both joints. Discussed activities postsurgery as well as dietary restrictions. Discussed the necessity for doing both jaws in order to get the best functional and aesthetic result as compared to doing just the lower jaw or just the upper jaw. Discussed the locations of incisions. The biggest problem affecting them in the financial aspect and the fact that I am not on their plan. They have already met with Dr. . Dr. has told them that he doesn't do joint work. Suggested that possibly Pedro Franco is probably on their plan and would be a possibility for them if the financial factors will control whom they will see. I answered all the questions that B255 and his mother had at this time. Discussed at length sinuses problems, turbinates, etc. The mother, who is an allergist, is more concerned about the middle turbinates. A CAT scan apparently was done that I have not seen, but she says that there are some abnormalities in the middle turbinates. I told her that those could be reduced at the time of surgery. Apparently Dr. told them that the middle turbinates can't be approached during the procedure. I also strongly suggested that the inferior turbinates be reduced in size, and the mother is concerned as to how much is removed as she says she has experienced people who have developed atrophic rhinitis as a result of that treatment. I think likely those are patients that may have been on long-term steroids or other nasal conditions prior to the reduction turbinectomies. They are to contact me if they have any other questions or concerns.

B255  CT Scan Evaluation
Date of Acquisition:	
Date of Reading: 
On CT of the sinuses, he has extremely large frontal sinuses particularly on the right side where the sinus extends the entire way out to the lateral orbital rim. On the right side, the sinuses are quite a bit smaller but still extend probably almost half way across the orbit. Appears to have a sinusitis in the left frontal sinus where there is some definite thickening, perhaps a mucous retention cyst in the sinus toward the lateral aspect. Maxillary sinuses are quite large. There is no evidence of any sinusitis there. The ethmoid sinuses are also quite large with more septae on the left side than the right side. The inferior turbinates are hyperplastic particularly on the right side. The right turbinate almost totally obliterates the right nasal airway. Left turbinate is quite large, but there is better airway passage on that side. The middle turbinates have a very abnormal shape to them where they actually curve in toward the lateral nasal bones and have essentially a reverse curvature associated with them. The ostium is located quite high beneath the superior aspect of the middle turbinates. The nasal septum is relatively straight. Only the right TMJ is seen in the coronal view, and it shows a significantly decreased joint space vertically. Lateral pole of the condyle is located quite inferior to the medial pole. Impression:
Normal-appearing bilateral maxillary sinuses and bilateral ethmoid sinuses
Extremely large maxillary right frontal sinus but clear of pathology
Left frontal sinus mucous retention cyst versus thickening of the lining at the lateral aspect of the sinus
Hypertrophied inferior turbinates with the right side being extremely large and almost obliterative of the nasal airway
Bilateral middle turbinates with significantly abnormal pathology with a reverse curvature and hyperplasia

Recommendations:
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies
Bilateral partial middle turbinectomies
B255  MRI Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition:	
Date of Reading:

Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is a little bit hard to identify. Head may be overrotated. Condyle appears a little bit narrow. Joint space is difficult to determine. Disc position is difficult to determine. Does appear that there is a decreased joint space vertically.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width, and the condyle appears larger than the opposite side. Appears to be significantly decreased joint space. Articular disc may be medially displaced. Cortical bone appears to be intact on the condyle and in the fossa.

Axial views show that both condyles are fairly broad mediolaterally. Cannot identify the disc on these views.
Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that out laterally appears to have a fairly good shape but toward the middle and medial aspect there is anterior beaking present. Decreased vertical joint space is present. Difficult to tell where the articular disc is but appears that it may be anteriorly and medially displaced. Appears to be a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space.

On opening, there is restricted translation. Appears that the disc may be in position. Condyle looks narrow anteroposteriorly compared to the opposite side.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that appears a little bit broader anteroposteriorly compared to the opposite side. Out laterally there appears to be a little bit of flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. Appears to be decreased joint space superiorly. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced sitting beneath the articular eminence. Articular eminence is relatively shallow in its slope. On opening, there is a question as to whether the articular disc reduces or not.
Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and possibly anteromedial displacement of the articular disc Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation and possibly nonreducing

B255 
B255 is 17 years old.
Patient History
As far as noting any problems, this has only been within the last one to two years. B255 has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or headaches. He gets periodic TMJ discomfort, more so on the left side. B255 has undergone significant previous orthodontics with Dr. __. He had ortho for about five or six years and had palatal expanders and a number of different appliances. B255 originally did have a lot of difficulties eating and chewing because of a crossbite problem. Dr. ____ retired, and they transferred to Dr. ____. At the completion of orthodontic treatment approximately two years ago, the bite was satisfactory. Since then, there has been a significant shift of the lower jaw off toward the left side and development of an anterior crossbite. He has no headache problems. He gets periodic TMJ discomfort, the last time being a couple of weeks ago that registered at about a level of 4 predominantly on the left side. On an average day, he really doesn't have any significant pain or headache problem. He rates his jaw function at 2 and diet and disability at 0. He does have a significant history of sinus problems and difficulties breathing through his nose. He does experience significant problems with his ears when he flies probably due to change in air pressure. He has difficulties clearing his ears after plane flights. Recent tympanogram revealed that there was fluid in just the left ear.

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B255 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted off to the left side approximately 3 mm. Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other. Therefore, chin is also shifted off to the left side about 3 mm.

In profile view, B255 has probably about 4 or 5 mm of AP deficiency in the maxilla. In the upper orbital area, may be just slightly retruded by about 2 to 3 mm. Chin also may be just slightly AP deficient by about 3 to 4 mm. Chin-neckline appears fairly normal in length and chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, B255 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. He has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch. Has fairly good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. A little bit of inflammation about his lower anteriors. In the upper arch, B255 has all of his teeth back through the second molars present. B255 has a Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by about 4 mm and on the left side by probably about 2 mm. Maxilla appears fairly symmetric in anteroposterior position. Slight cant in the transverse plane with the left side being about a millimeter lower than the right side. Oropharynx appears clear. May have a bifid uvula present, but otherwise everything looks relatively normal. Appears to have good oropharyngeal airway space. B255 has a 0 over bite relationship. Is tending toward a crossbite on the left side, and he has an anterior crossbite tendency particularly on the left side. Right side central and lateral incisor are end-on with the lower lateral incisor and cuspid.

Intranasally, the nasal septum is deviated a little bit of toward the right side but not really significantly. Right turbinate is quite enlarged creating a decreased airway on that side. Left inferior turbinate is moderate in size, but there appears to be a little bit greater airway on the left side as compared to the right side. Both turbinates could be hyperplastic and causing some airway problems. Cannot see posteriorly to evaluate the airway dimension at that level.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows that all four third molars are absent. Sinuses appear reasonably clear. Appears there could be some obstruction in the left nasal airway more toward the posterior aspect. Right side shows a turbinate that is enlarged, but it appears there is a little bit of airway at the base of the nose. Has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch. Right condyle appears larger than the left one both in anteroposterior width and in vertical height.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that actually appears narrow anteroposteriorly compared to the size of the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. Decreased superior joint space indicative of possible anterior and/or medial displacement of the articular disc. Occlusion is Class III.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that there is a decreased superior and posterior joint space. Condyle appears somewhat narrow anteroposteriorly compared to the size of the fossa. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Less of a Class III occlusal tendency on this side.

On opening, there appears to be a greater restriction of translation on the left side as compared to the right side, although both of they are a little bit shy of translating onto the apex of the articular eminence.

Waters view demonstrates that the septum may be a little bit of toward the right side. Right turbinate is extremely large and essentially obliterates the right nasal airway. Left side does demonstrate some passable airway. There is either enlargement of the middle turbinate or a polyp present in the right side. It most likely may be the middle turbinate. Sinuses look relatively clear and equally lucent on either side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a skeletal Class III relationship. Has and end-on incisor relationship. Vertical height of the mandible is fairly symmetric with just about a 2-mm difference at the inferior borders. Oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal. Soft tissues thickness at pogonion is decreased. Tongue looks relatively normal size. Maximal incisal opening for B255 is 41 mm and about 36 mm without discomfort. Excursive movement to the right is 6 mm and to the left 7 mm.

Basic Diagnoses
Right TMJ condylar hyperplasia and medial displacement of the articular disc Left TMJ arthritis and medial displacement of the articular disc AP maxillary hypoplasia
Mandibular deviate prognathism
Class III occlusion on the right side and moderate Class III occlusion on the left side
Anterior crossbite and developing left posterior crossbite
TMJ pain
Hypertrophied nasal turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction
Chronic sinus problems secondary to nasal airway obstruction

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch. Keep the lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally. May need to tip the right lateral incisor root more mesial than it currently is to provide adequate room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Right TMJ high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, expand, and level the occlusal plane
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to align the mandible back on the facial midline
Bilateral partial turbinectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B255 
Telephone conversation. Last week he had a couple of days when he had increased clicking in his jaw joints where it would click about every hour. This was slightly uncomfortable, but not too bad. This week he is feeling better. He is going to get a night guard made. He has an Essex retainer which is an equal thickness over the occlusal surfaces and it is not good for his occlusion. I told him that could intrude the posterior teeth creating a posterior open bite for him. He understands. He does have an appointment to met the splint man and I told him to be sure that all of the teeth touch in the splint. He has not been taking Klonopin. I explained to him what the problems are that are going on. I explained to him that since his mother did not allow us to use a Mitek anchor that the system we had to use is not strong and supportive of the disc. With his clenching and bruxism that could tear any system apart. Hopefully, he will get better with the splint. Otherwise, he is doing well and enjoying dental school. He is to keep me informed of his progress

