B256 
This is a 34-year-old female referred by Dr.   .
PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Malocclusion.
Teeth worn down.
TMJ problems.
Food goes easily into her lungs causing her to use rescue inhaler.

She has a history of asthma and adenomatous colon polyps, sinus problems and dysplastic moles. TMJ treatments she has had to date include enameloplasty about 15 years ago, night guard from 13 years ago to last year and night guard to place the TMJ in a neutral position.

MEDICATIONS: Advair b.i.d.
Zyrtec D b.i.d.
Atrovent nasal spray t.i.d.
Nasacort AQ 1 to 2 times per day.
Singulair 10 mg daily.
She takes other medications as needed but not currently and are included in her chart.

B256 has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her feet, knees, right hip, sacroiliac joint and fingers and toes. She has allergies to cats, benzoyl peroxide, erythromycin and Prolene. She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at night and she does that sometimes during the day as well. She has no problems with headaches and rates her TMJ pain at 2, average daily pain at 4 but a lot of that is in her neck. She rates her jaw function at 1, diet at 4, disability at 3. B256 is not aware of having TMJ problems until the last 1 to 2 years of unknown etiology. Previous history include orthodontics including headgear as a teenager. She was placed in a splint in about 1 to 13 years ago to try and keep her from clenching at night. In fact, she had a new splint made last year. She has had a previous enameloplasty on her teeth in the past. She feels as though she occludes only on one tooth intraorally at this time. The splint she had for about 12 years is basically a flat plane splint. The new one she puts it in warm water and inserts it and then it sort of self adapts. In frontal view, B256 has a little bit more fullness in the right side of her face by probably 5 to 6 mm mainly in the masseter muscle area. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline and chin are all pretty much on the facial midline. In profile, she has some AP deficiency in the maxilla probably about 4 to 6 mm. Mandible appears to be retruded by probably about 10 to 12 mm. Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle not well-defined. Intraorally, B256  has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. Good attached gingiva is present. In the upper arch she is missing first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the third molars present. In centric occlusion she occludes on the maxillary and mandibular second molars. She has an overjet of about 6 mm. She has an anterior open bite of about 2 to 3 mm. B256  Page 2

She has a good 6 mm Class II. Intraorally, the uvula is pretty much normal as is the soft palate and faucial pillars. Intranasally, there may be a little bit of deviation of septum to the left side and a little bit of spurring at the inferior aspect of the septum. The turbinates appear moderate in size. The nasal airway actually looks reasonably good, better than on the CT scan. She is not aware of snoring, has moderate daytime somnolence but is not aware of any sleep apnea problems. She does have difficulties getting to sleep. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the shoulders and over the right TMJ. All other areas are pretty much free of pain to palpation. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly on opening. There is a little deviation of the mandible off towards the right side 2 to 3 mm. On excursive movements she has a palpable pop in the right TMJ. Left joint functions relatively smoothly. Depending on how much she is clenching will have an affect on her daily pain levels. As B256 postures her mandible forward, she ends up with a reasonable alignment of the jaws. Manipulation of her dental models shows that she does go into a nice acceptable occlusal relationship of about 1 mm vertical overbite and Class I cuspid molar relationship.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
: Panorex shows the presence of all of the upper teeth except for the first bicuspids. It appears that she may have 4th molars present that are well formed but unerupted. In the lower arch she is missing the third molars but has all the rest of her teeth present. Condyles appear a little bit arthritic but difficult to evaluate the sinuses.

Waters view shows that the bony septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side. Turbinate appears moderate in size though there may be a passable airway. The sinuses look fairly clear except she does have a mucous retention cyst in the left maxillary sinus.

Left TMJ tomogram shows her mandible to be postured forward and she is not in centric relation so she has an increased superior and posterior joint space.

Right TMJ tomogram likewise shows that she is likely postured forward some and image is not real clear. On opening, there appears to be better translation in the left joint as compared to the right joint. In centric relation on the lateral cephalogram, she has an open bite that extends from the first molars forward. She has an overjet of about 6 mm. Oropharyngeal airway is significantly decreased being only about 3 mm at the soft palate level and about 5 mm at the most at the base of the tongue.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction.
AP mandibular deficiency. Anterior open bite extending anteriorly and bilaterally. Occlusion only on the left maxillary third molar and mandibular second molar. TMJ pain.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Class II occlusion. B256  Page 3

AP maxillary deficiency (patient interested in having this corrected.)
Missing maxillary first bicuspids.
The patient has maxillary third molars present.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward in a counterclockwise rotation.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B256 CT Scan
Date of Acquisition: 
The sinuses appear relatively clear except she has two mucoceles, one in each of her maxillary sinuses with the left side being a little bit larger than the right side. She has a deviated nasal septum with it being deviated towards the left side and septal spur going off even further into the left side of the nose. The turbinates appear hypertrophic.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have some sclerosis in the head and some decreased joint space vertically.
Right TMJ coronal view likewise shows some sclerosis in the head of the condyle and what appears to be decreased joint space vertically.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and decreased joint space.
Bilateral maxillary sinus mucoceles.
Bilateral nasal turbinate hypertrophy.
Nasal septum deviated to the left with a septal spur.

B256 MRI Evaluation
Age: 34/F
Date of Birth:
Date of MRI:
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. The joint space appears fairly good except more anteriorly it tends to narrow some. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. Discal tissue appears to be anterior and medially displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Some arthritic changes present towards the anterior part of the condyle. A little sclerosis on the head. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. The disc appears to be a little better positioned although medial and anteriorly displaced as well.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has reasonable morphology although there is sclerosis on the head. Out lateral there may be loss of condylar volume. Some anterior beaking on the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. It is quite short anteroposteriorly. There appears to be inflammation in the bilaminar tissues posterior to the condylar head. On opening, there is moderate translation but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. Medially there may be some compressed bilaminar tissue above the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat arthritic. There is little osteophyte sticking up from the mid part of the condyle and significant anterior beaking greater than the opposite side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. It is quite short anteroposteriorly and thickened significantly more than the opposite side. There is probably some compressed tissue within the joint space that shows up on the T2 films. On opening, there is restricted translation on this side compared to the opposite side and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction or significant deformation. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction or significant deformation. Very questionable salvageability of the articular discs.

