B258
B258 is 54 years old and is referred by Dr. ___. She has had previous surgeries including a hysterectomy, carpal tunnel and knee surgery. B258 is in good health except for her jaw joint problems.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Soma 250 mg tablets, ½ tablet at bedtime. Lipitor 10 mg tablets daily.
Fiorinal q.6h.
PRIMARY CONCERNS: Severe and constant headaches on the left side of the face from the temple and downward.
Difficulties eating and chewing. Noises in the jaw joints.

B258's problems began when she was about 44 years old  of unknown etiology. She just started developing pain and headaches on the left side of her head and jaw area. She headache seen a number of doctors in reference to her problems. She has had two brain MRIs that were clear. The headaches have increased significantly in intensity and in occurrence. About 7 weeks ago the headaches and pain became constant. B258 rates her headaches at 10 in the left temple area. She rates her TMJ pain at 5 average daily pain at 10, jaw function at 5, diet at 3 and disability at 10. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo. The only other joints that bother her are her knees. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also during the day.

CLINICAL EVALUATION:
In frontal view, B258 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is just slightly to the left about ½ mm. Chin may be about 1 or 2 mm to the left. In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose. Chin may be retruded about 8 mm or so. Chin-neckline is not well defined. Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids and has the other teeth back through the second molars. She has crowns on all four molars. A little bit of crowding in the lower incisors. Good attached gingiva is present. She has about a 2 mm space between the left cuspid and second bicuspid. In the upper arch she is also missing first bicuspids. She has crowns on the left first and second molar and right second molar. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally being probably 5 mm Class II on the left side and about 4 mm on the right side. She has an anterior deep bite of about 5 mm. Uvula and soft palate are normal. Some mild constricture of the faucial pillars. Tonsils are mildly enlarged. Turbinates are mildly enlarged. She has a large septal perforation measuring about 1 cm x 8 mm. She has no history of previous nasal surgery. She does not appear to have any nasal airway obstruction. B258 occasionally gets chest pain and jaw pain sometimes. This only occurs at work. It is an infrequent occurrence but she was checked out with cardiac testing which turned up negative. She has a slight cant in the transverse occlusal plane with left side being 1 mm higher than the right side. B258  Page 2

To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Maximum opening is 45 mm but only 33 mm without pain or discomfort. Excursive movement to the right is 9 mm, left 8 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all first bicuspids. She has crowns on all the molars except for the maxillary right first molar. The left condyle appears quit arthritic and appears to have lost vertical dimension. The sinuses appear relatively clear.

Waters view show that the sinuses appear clear. The septum appears straight. The right turbinate appears a little bit lager than the left side.
Left TMJ tomogram shows decreased posterior and posterior joint space. The condyle has a hockey stick shape to it and it seems narrow anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic. Joint space appears fairly good. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening there is restricted translation of both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency, some AP mandibular deficiency, a moderately high occlusal plane angle and a decreased oropharyngeal airway.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction and severe degeneration.
AP mandibular deficiency. AP maxillary deficiency. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Snoring. Class II occlusion.
Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars.
Residual spacing in the mandibular left quadrant between the cuspid and second bicuspid approximately 1.5 to 2 mm. High occlusal plane angle. Slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being higher than the right side. TMJ pain worse on left side than the right side. Left-sided severe and constant headaches.

B258  Page 3
RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. Try to close the spacing on the left side by advancing the posterior teeth at least 1 mm or more if possible to avoid creating lower arch asymmetry.
CT scans of jaws and jaw joints. (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it posteriorly. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoid plasties.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B258 MRI evaluation
AGE: 54/F
DOB: 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe degenerative changes. The condyle head is very narrow mediolaterally and very short vertically. Increased joint space appears to be present. It is difficult to tell if there is discal tissue present or not. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat degenerated but not to the severity as the opposite side. There appears to be increased joint space. The discal tissue is hard to identify but there does appear to be some anterior and medial to the condyle. lateral rim of the fossa is extremely flat. Cortical bone on the head of the condyle appears sclerotic.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears fairly degenerated. The condylar head is small anteroposteriorly and vertically. There appears to be increased joint space vertically and posteriorly. Out laterally, the disc appears to be anteriorly displaced but in many views it is difficult to identify any significant discal tissue. There appears to be decreased joint space at the anterior aspect of the joint towards the lateral aspect of the joint. There could be some remnants of the disc present but very difficult to identify. There are no open views available. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There may be some inflammation in the bilaminar tissues.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a hockey stick shape it. There is some anterior beaking present. Some sclerosis on the head of the condyle. There appears to be increased very and posterior joint space. There appears to be discal tissue present but anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. Articular eminence is fairly steep towards the medial aspect of the joint. This could be an inflammatory process posterior to the condyle.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ severe arthritis and severe degeneration of the articular disc rendering it non-salvageable. Right TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc anteriorly and medially dislocated with degenerative changes.

