B262  MRI Evaluation 
Date of MRI:
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. It appears that the cortical bone for the most part is intact. Articular disc may be anteriorly and medially displaced. Decreased lateral joint space although the downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa is relatively moderate.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that probably has good mediolateral width. Decreased superior joint space and lateral joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa is slightly downward curved perhaps just a little bit more than the opposite side. It appears that the articular disc may be anteriorly and medially displaced.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow compared to the width of the fossa. Some sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Some flattening of the anterior aspect of the condylar head. Slightly decreased posterior joint space. Articular disc is vertically oriented within the fossa. Out laterally, the disc is essentially not seen indicative of perhaps medial displacement. There is a little fluid in the superior joint space anteriorly. There is fairly good translation with reduction of the articular disc on opening.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is very narrow anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with significantly decreased posterior joint space. Articular disc is in a vertical orientation and anteriorly displaced: Probably more evident out laterally than medially. There is fluid in the superior joint space.

On opening, there is moderately good translation, and the articular disc appears to reduce on opening.
Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation in a vertical direction and probably in a pre-click position with early reduction.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction.

B262 
B262  is an identical twin, and she is 29 years old.
Patient History
Approximately 2 years ago, she had some chiropractic treatment done for her back. Apparently this particular episode created significant pain problems for her through her back, neck, and eventually up into her jaws following the treatment. Since that time, she has had splint treatment x 4, equilibrations on her teeth. The most recent splint she has, the doctor has been trimming it off to try to get her teeth to erupt in, and this apparently has made things even worse, and now her bite is significantly off. She has been to different pain clinics including one in Topeka. She has had neck injections with steroids. She has had 12 Botox shots from the neck upward, and this only caused a lot of swelling, and also she couldn't hold her head up without extreme difficulty. This is beginning to wear off, but the shots were of no value to her. She has had intensive physical therapy. None of these modalities of treatment have been effective for her.

Patient Concerns
Primary concerns that she has at this time include the following:
Pain in her temples, shoulders, neck, and jaws. Pain in the jaw joints and essentially throughout the head and neck area. Severe headaches. Severe pain through the muscles around the head and neck area. Difficulties eating and chewing. Teeth don't fit together. Clicking and popping in the jaw joints as well as grinding noises. Closed lock where she can't open more than about 1-1/2 finger widths. Restless leg syndrome. Female hormone problems. Probable fibromyalgia. Possible Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Elevated ANA titer, high cholesterol, and elevated ionized calcium. She has been hospitalized three times since the onset of her problems for severe migraine problems x 3 and once for major abdominal problems, and one hospitalization was a possible reaction to going off medications and/or a kidney infection.

B262 gets occasional earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her back, neck, shoulders, elbows, wrists, fingers, hips, knees, ankles, feet, and questionable in reference to the toes. She gets daily headaches at a level of 8 on the left side in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area, and on the right side at a level of 5 in those same areas. However, twice a week she gets severe “migraine” headaches at a level of 10. She rates her TMJ pain at 9, overall pain at 8, jaw function at 8, diet at 6, and disability at 7. Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, B262 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is probably about 2.5 mm. Maxillary dental midline and mandibular dental midline are on the facial midline.

In profile view, she may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency. Mandible is also just slightly AP deficient by probably about 8 mm or so. Intraorally, B262 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth appear to be fairly nicely aligned and leveled. Gingiva is really thin over the lower anterior teeth. She has a high-attached labial frenulum. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars. She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship but fairly significant open bite on the left side extending from almost the lateral incisor back through the second molar. On the right side, she has a little bit of an open bite from about the first bicuspid through and including the second molar, but it is not as significant as it is on the left side. Her bite was never off prior to the onset of her joint problems and the splint therapy. She did have orthodontics as a teenager with a good bite result. She has a 2-mm overbite anteriorly.

To palpation, she has severe pain throughout the head and neck area. On jaw function, she appears to have a closed lock on opening with a maximal incisal opening of 19 mm. She can open about 18 mm without severe pain. Excursive movement to the right is 8 mm and to the left 7 mm indicative of perhaps ability to reduce her discs on translation but not on opening. She hears and feels crepitus in both joints on excursive movements.

Oropharynx appears clear. Faucial pillars appear to be anterior with what clinically appears to be good space between the soft palate and the posterior pharyngeal wall. She appears to have a wide columellar base and narrow nostrils. Intranasally, she has a little bit of spurring on the left side of the septum, but turbinates are not too large. By opening up the nostrils, B262 could breathe a lot easier through both sides of her nose, and she stated it made a significant difference for her. B262 does have a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side at the maxillary cuspid, and the mandibular cuspid on the left side is about 1.5 mm higher than the right side.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of three third molars; both lower third molars and left maxillary third molar. Right sinus appears a little bit cloudy compared to the left one. Condyles appear a little bit arthritic. Both appear to have some anterior beaking present and flattening in the anterior aspect of the condylar head. Articular eminences look relatively steep. No other significant pathology noted.

Waters view shows what appear to be rather large turbinates intranasally. Sinuses actually appear fairly equal in opacification in this view. Frontal and ethmoid sinuses appear clear. There appears to be a little bit of deviation of the nasal septum. Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is extremely steep. Decreased posterior and vertical joint space. Articular discs are probably vertically oriented within the joint. Posterior teeth are out of occlusion, which could be a result of the splint therapy.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a little bit greater joint space perhaps as a result of the splint therapy, and the open bite is a little bit greater posteriorly on this side. Articular eminence is extremely steep, and the articular disc is probably in a vertical orientation.

On opening, there is severe lack of translation in both joints.
Cephalometrically, she appears to have a slight skeletal Class II position with slight overangulation of the lower incisors. Tongue appears to fill the majority of the oral cavity. Airway at the base of the tongue to posterior pharyngeal wall is only about 2 to 3 mm. Soft palate level, however, is closer to about 8 mm. There is some significant vertical difference at the occlusal plane level as well as at the inferior border. Cephalometric analysis shows there may be some slight AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency. Oropharyngeal airway looks somewhat constricted. Except for the vertical asymmetry, probably no need to consider surgery.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with a closed lock situation (difficult to tell if it is disc problem versus muscular).
Bilateral posterior open bites being worse on the left side as compared to the right side.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side.
Multiple joint problems.
Tentative diagnosis of Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
Severe headaches.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe myofascial pain.
Reported elevated ANA titer.
Malaligned maxillary right third molar.

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Medications
Doxycycline 100 mg tablets, disp. 60, 1 tablet b.i.d., refill x 3.
Klonopin 1 mg tablet, disp. 30, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x 2.

Perform the following lab tests
Immunodeficiency panel including CD56.
IgA, IgE, IgG, and IgM.
Chlamydia antibody group including psittaci.
HLA-A, B, C, and DR loci.
ANA rheumatoid factor and thyroid profile.

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization.
Consider possible eminectomies.
Extract maxillary right third molar.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
Physical therapy if necessary to re-establish good jaw function

