B264  CT Scan 
Date of Acquisition:	
Date of Reading: 
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows extremely flat lateral rim of the fossa with no downward curvature. Decreased joint space vertically at the medial aspect of the condylar pole. Medial beaking of the condyle is present. Roof of the fossa is absolutely flat. The patient has probably had previous surgery. Cortical bone on the roof of the fossa is extremely thin in some areas and actually may be lacking. Cortical bone is intact on the condylar head.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has undergone significant osseous changes. It is narrow mediolaterally. Some medial beaking present. Sclerosis on the head of the condyle with some small pseudocysts in the condylar head. No joint space between the condyle and fossa. Fossa appears very sclerotic. The roof of the fossa is extremely flat with no downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. Degenerative changes are present in the fossa.

Left TMJ, axial views, show that the condyle has fairly good mediolateral width. Fairly flat in angulation compared to the opposite side. Shape of the condyle looks relatively normal.

Right TMJ, axial view, shows a condyle with fairly significant curvature of the lateral aspect anteriorly as compared to the medial aspect. Appears there is no joint space between the anterior aspect of the lateral pole of the condyle and the articular eminence. Osteophytic formation coming off the medial aspect of the lateral pole of the condyle. The bone appears to be more disrupted as compared to the opposite side.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has a hockey stick shape to it. Anterior aspect is flat. Decreased posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Some roughness on the cortical bone particularly toward the lateral aspect. Significantly decreased joint space out laterally as compared to more medially where there is a little bit greater joint space. Some sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Condyle appears arthritic but not nearly as significant as the opposite side. Some unevenness and even some minor osteophytic formation are present on top of the condyle. Translation is somewhat restricted, but the condyle comes down fairly close to being beneath the articular eminence. Joint space appears decreased although it is present.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that demonstrates significant degenerative changes. There is a small pseudocyst in the head of the condyle. Condyle head and neck are very sclerotic. There is some evidence of bone resorption in the condylar head. Virtually no joint space between the condyle and the fossa and articular eminence. Degenerative changes on the articular eminence as well.

Translation is restricted with the condyle coming only about two thirds of the way down the articular eminence. At this position, there is no joint space indicative of perforation being present. Pseudocyst in the condyle is larger at the lateral aspect of the condyle and becomes smaller toward the medial aspect.

Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and probable articular disc dislocation
Right TMJ severe arthritis with bone on bone function
B264  MRI Evaluation 

Date of Acquisition:	
Date of Reading: 
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. Cortical bone appears to be intact. Joint space appears to be a little bit narrow toward the medial side of the joint. Minimal downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. Difficult to tell if discal tissue is in position, but it appears that there is discal tissue anterior to the condyle. Also, the disc could be laterally displaced. Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is small mediolaterally compared to the opposite side. Arthritic changes in the condyle and loss of vertical height. Appears to be some roughness on the superior surface of the cortex. Significantly decreased vertical joint space. Normal downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. Difficult to identify discal tissue.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has osteoarthritic changes with it particularly toward the medial side. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly and laterally displaced. Does not appear to reduce on opening.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows severe osteoarthritic changes and a disc that is severely degenerated. Condyle is quite small on this side with evidence of loss of vertical anteroposterior dimension. Significantly decreased vertical posterior and anterior joint spaces. Evidence of heterotopic or reactive bone formation. Anterior beaking is present. Articular eminence is moderately steep, and the eminence itself appears degenerated. Virtually no evidence of discal tissue present on this side that can be identifiable, or there may be some areas of severe degenerative deformation of this disc.

MRIs were reviewed with Dr. __ and we agreed on the following findings:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly and laterally displaced without reduction
Right TMJ severe arthritis
Dr. __ feels that there is significant arthritis in the left joint but obviously not as severe as the arthritis in the right joint

The best treatment for this treatment would probably be bilateral TMJ total joint prostheses.
B264 
B264 is 59 years old and referred by Dr. __.

Patient History
B264 has had three back surgeries. She has had a bladder and rectum repair, and she has had her ovaries and ovarian cysts removed. She also has had surgery for a ruptured appendix and a hysterectomy as well as two sinus surgeries. She has persistent back pain and leg pain as well as TMJ problems and has low thyroid.

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, and has some hearing loss, but this may be genetic in nature since both her father and her mother have hearing problems. She has high sensitivity to smell. She is very much aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at night. She has probably had TMJ problems for a long time, but the problems didn't get worse until a few months ago when she has having a root canal done, and her mouth was “cranked open,” and this exacerbated the TMJ problems. Recently, she had a right TMJ arthrocentesis by Dr. __ .

She does have a history of having two resistant staph infections following her sinus surgeries. Prior to her sinus infections, she had been on Cipro for a while presurgery. Postsurgery is when she developed the resistant staph infections and had to be on IV home therapy on Vancomycin. They then switched her to Synercid. Other joint problems that B264 has include the following: Neck, back, fingers, and feet. She does get epidural injections in her neck that seem to be helpful for her.

B264's TMJ problems began at about the age of 21 when she fell down about 14 basement stairs and hit her head. She developed a closed lock situation. She had all four third molars then removed, but this didn't help her situation. She had extensive equilibrations done, but this did not fix the problem. She had three steroid injections into the right TMJ, and after the third one she did fairly well in reference to her right joint from 20 to 33 years ago when she began developing problems again. At that point she was seeing Dr. __ , who placed her into a splint. She had orthodontics for five years from 15 to 10 years ago. All together she has worn splints for about 20 years. Since April of this year, she has had to wear her splints continuously to be reasonably comfortable in order to eat. She has had physical therapy p.r.n. since 20 years ago until recently. She gets massage therapies weekly as well.

B264 is in recovery from alcoholism for the past 18-1/2 years. She had two pancreatic attacks which stimulated her desire to get into AA and get away from alcohol.

Allergies
Environmental allergies
CECLOR (anaphylactic shock)
VANCOMYCIN (red-man syndrome, severe)
HORSE SERUM AND ANY MEDICATION MADE FROM THAT TYPE OF SERUM creates joint pain and hives
FLUORESCEIN DYE 10% (head to toe hives, immediate)
SULFA
In addition, she cannot take ORAL PAIN MEDICATION and can only use suppositories

Current Medications
Synthroid 0.1 mg q.d. Protonix 40 mg (for acid reflux)
Zetia (for cholesterol)
Corgard 10 mg Soma q.h.s. Robaxin 750 mg b.i.d. Vitamin E 600 IU
Darvocet 50 mg suppositories for her back pain p.r.n. Tylenol suppositories for back pain p.r.n. Estrogen injection therapy q. monthly
Ambien 2.5 to 5 mg p.r.n. q.h.s. Bimonthly desensitization injections for allergies

Patient Concerns
Right TMJ comes out of place
Difficulty eating and chewing
Lower jaws are retruded
Sleep disorder
Teeth don't fit together
Wakes up with headaches during the night or in the morning
Chronic neck and back pain
If she yawns, her right jaw joint will go out of the socket
If she tries to chew an apple or anything hard like that, the jaw will go out of the socket
If she rests her jaw on her hand on the left side, it will cause the right joint to go out of the socket

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B264 has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline. Chin may be a little bit off to the right side about 2 mm.

In profile view, she has an obtuse nasolabial angle. Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by a couple of millimeters. Maxilla is probably 6 mm AP deficient. Chin is retruded about 15 to 20 mm. Chin-neckline is not well-defined, and length is probably less than 20 mm. She has a lot of fullness in the submental area and fullness in the neck area.

Intraorally, she has some significant buccal tipping with a major reverse curve of Wilson in the lower arch. She has crowns on all of the lower teeth. She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch being a little bit worse on the left side as compared to the right side. Cuspids on forward are elevated probably a couple of millimeters on the right side and probably maybe 3 mm on the left side compared to the posterior teeth. Left cuspid maybe just slightly posterior to the right cuspid by about 1 mm. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has an end-on Class II cuspid relationship bilaterally. She has posterior crossbites and major open bites posteriorly of probably a good 5 to 6 mm bilaterally. Oropharynx appears relatively clear. Soft palate and uvula appear relatively normal. She does have a geographic tongue. She doesn't have any problems with her geographic tongue, except when she eats pineapple; it causes a significant burning sensation.

Intranasally, the airway looks clear. It appears that she has had previous turbinectomies with complete removal on the left side and probably at least two thirds on the right side.

In the closed position, she has about a 4-mm anterior overbite relationship. Maximal incisal opening is about 45 mm, but she can open to about 42 without significant discomfort. Excursive movements are about 9 mm in each direction.

To palpation, she has some relatively mild tenderness over the right temporalis, left TMJ, and right styloid area. Left joint functions relatively smoothly. Right joint has some significant crepitation associated with it.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the sinuses appear relatively clear. Septum is in line. Inferior turbinates are essentially absent. All four third molars are absent. She has multiple root canals and this includes the mandibular left possibly second bicuspid but definitely the left cuspid, left central incisor, right second bicuspid in the upper arch, right cuspid, second bicuspid, second molar, and left first molar. She has crowns on all of her lower teeth and all of her upper teeth except for her four incisors and left cuspid. She has arthritic changes in the right TMJ and some mild changes in the left TMJ. There is some dense calcification at the base of the mandibular right second molar mesial root. Just below that area there is a little round area measuring about 4 to 5 mm in diameter that may be just a change in trabeculation pattern in that particular area.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head. Appears to be some decreased vertical joint space in one of the views, but on the other view it appears better. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Slight hockey stick shape to the condyle.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite small in size, and it appears to have lost significant volume. Anterior beaking is present. Decreased vertical joint space, although the posterior joint space is actually increased. Significant posterior open bite present throughout the whole arch.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle on the left joint and some restriction in translation on the right joint. In the right joint, there is virtually no space between the condyle and articular eminence, whereas in the left joint, there is fairly good space that could be compatible with the disc being in position.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates are quite small in size, and the nasal airway is excellent. Some asymmetry is present in the lower jaw with the right angle being probably a good 7 mm elevated compared to the left side.

Cephalometric analysis shows that she has a high occlusal plane angle with it actually being a little bit higher in the maxillary arch than in the mandibular arch. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the soft palate level, and at the base of the tongue one of the dimensions measures about 5 mm. Mandible is quite retruded, and maxilla appears retruded. Posterior maxillary aspect appears deficient vertically as well.

Basic Diagnoses
Right TMJ severe arthritis secondary to steroid necrosis
Left TMJ arthritis but condition and position of disc are unknown
AP maxillary hypoplasia
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia
AP mandibular deficiency
Transverse mandibular dental excess
Class II end-on occlusion Posterior open bites of about 6 mm
Reverse curve of Wilson, lower arch
Crowns on all the mandibular teeth and on all but the maxillary incisors and left cuspid
TMJ pain
Headaches Myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment
MRI of left and right TMJ to determine the condition of the left joint and the extents of disease created by the right TMJ steroid necrosis

Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch Align and level mandibular arch. Try to narrow the lower arch by rotating the posterior teeth lingually to eliminate the reverse curve of Wilson and establish a more normal curve of Wilson. Try to level out the accentuated curve of occlusion as well

CT scan of TMJs (TMJ Concepts protocol)
Surgery
Right TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis
Reconstruct left TMJ depending on MRI findings by either Nothing if joint is healthy and disc is in position
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor if disc is dislocated but salvageable
Total joint prosthesis if disc is displaced and nonsalvageable
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it posteriorly
Bilateral coronoidectomies Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)
Left mandibular ramus osteotomy if the left TMJ is healthy or the disc is displaced and can be repositioned by the Mitek anchor (total joint prosthesis would not be indicated if the joint can be treated by either or these options)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
Dental restorations as necessary to finalize the bite


RE: B264 
Dear __:
I recently talked to B264  who continues to have significant pain problems although according to her, her occlusion is fine and she looks great.

She continues to have significant problems. She just recently had two heart stents placed. She has GERDS.
She is currently taking the following medications:
Ticlid to thin the blood.
Cozaar for high blood pressure.
Thyroid medication.
Corgard.
Robaxin to help with her back pain.
Antibiotic for sinus infection which she is almost finished with.
Lidocaine cream to her lips.
Lidocaine gargle for the pain in the roof of her mouth.

She is getting physical therapy one day a week to try and improve her jaw excursive mobilities but this does not seem to be helping her. She has no headaches and no TMJ pain but does have a burning kind of sensation and pain down through her lower lip and chin area as well as in the upper jaw behind her teeth. In addition she has hypersensitivity to smell though it has been fairly stable for the last 2 years and has not gotten worse. She says her husband John tells her that she looks like a teenager and her face is very symmetric. Her occlusion fits together reasonably well but she does have these pain issues. I believe she probably has systemic factors that are ongoing that are affecting her abilities to heal well. This may account for vascular problems with the maxilla as well as the poor response to her nerves after the usual stretching that goes on with this type of surgery. I told her that in 95% of patients at least do not have this kind of problem after this type of surgery. She says that her brother, 2 sisters and her mother all have had surgeries that have yielded poor outcomes and her physicians tell her that there must be something systemic within her family that interferes with the normal capabilities.

RE: B264 

She says she has tried Lyrica and Neurontin and has been unable to tolerate those medications as they upset her stomach. I suggested that we try Topamax 25 mg b.i.d. to see if this would help her. The dosage may need to be increased. She will check with her pharmacist to make sure that there is no cross reaction to the other medicines that she is taking and will talk to her pain doctor about perhaps prescribing that for her. It will be important for her pain management doctor to prescribe this for her instead of you or myself only because her pain physician is seeing her on regular basis and managing other medicines for her. She will keep me informed of her progress.

I told B264 I know of no way to eliminate the nerve problems that she has except to try medications. Any treatment for her around the jaws or elsewhere where nerves may be stretched could end up with a similar kind of nerve outcome. The pain she experiences is very unusual and thus there may be genetic factors and her own systemic factors that are probably contributing to her current pain problems. Hopefully she will be able to tolerate the Topamax as I feel this is the medication that may help her pain levels. I just want to update you in reference to my recent conversation with B264 .

I hope all is going well with you and I look forward to seeing you again soon.
With best regards,


