B265  MRI Evaluation
Age: 49/F
DOB:
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have some sclerosis. The condyle appears a little bit small in size. There appears to be discal tissue medial and anterior to the condyle. Articular eminence is fairly flat with very minimal downward curvature at the lateral rim.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a joint that is very difficult to identify structures. Likely there had been previous surgery on this joint. Anatomic structures are not identifiable.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have better morphology than in the coronal view. The condyle may be a little bit small. A little bit of flattening on the anterior head. A little bit of anterior beaking is present. Articular eminence is quite steep and has almost a 90-degree angulation to the fossa base. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. Towards the medial direction, it is in a little bit better position. There is decreased posterior joint space at the medial aspect. There is some fluid in the superior joint space. The condylar size actually looks fairly good. On opening, there is good translation of this condyle and reduction of the articular disc early on.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a joint that has severe distortion of the anatomy. There may be evidence of a previous surgery having been performed here. Tremendous artifact present. It is possible that a portion of the ramus and condyle could be absent. Opening views do not help in identification of the anatomical areas.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint but with early reduction. Previous surgery in right TMJ with probable severe deformation.

B265 
B265 is 49 years old and is referred by __. She has had previous surgeries that have included a rhinoplasty, hysterectomy, breast augmentation and condylar replacement with the rib graft in the right jaw joint. B265 is in good health except for her current jaw problem.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
HRT-TR-EST 5 mg/prog 100 mg.
Celebrex 200 mg daily.
Wellbutrin XL 300 mg.
Crestor 10 mg.
Zetia 10 mg.
She has had an adverse reaction to codeine but no other known allergies.

B265's problems began sometime around 7 years ago of unknown etiology. She was eating lunch and her right TMJ locked up. Shortly after that in 7 years ago she had a lavage of her right TMJ and then her situation got worse. 6 years ago, the right joint was reconstructed with the rib graft. She wore a splint since 6 years ago and currently wears a splint at nighttime. The only other treatment she has had were injections x2 into the right joint. The first time she had a very good outcome for a while but then the problems started again. The second injection did not help her. B265  does get earaches on the right side but no tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. Her pain is worse in the afternoon and during the evenings depending on how much she has to use her jaws in talking during the day. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. She rates her TMJ pain at 8 being worse on the right side than the left side, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 6, diet at 3, disability at 8. She gets headaches in the right temple area and these headaches are constant. PRIMARY CONCERNS:
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Right-sided earaches.
Pain that gets progressively worse in the afternoon and evenings.
Dental problems.
Bite appears to be moving around causing chipping of some of her teeth.

In frontal view B265 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. There may be some slight increased fullness on the right side probably related to the rib graft. Upper lip length is about 26 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -3. Maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 1 to 2 mm to the right. Chin is also shifted just slightly to the right. In profile view, she has fairly good facial balance. Intraorally, B265 is missing mandibular right first molar with the second and third molar drifted forward. She has all of her teeth back through the second molars.

B265 
In the upper arch, she appears to have all of her teeth back through the second molars although she has an implant at the maxillary left cuspid area with the crown on it. B265 has an end-on Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by probably 3 mm. On the left side she may be just about 1 mm Class III. She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 to 5 mm. When B265 opens, her mandible deviates to the right side by probably about 3 to 4 mm. Incisal opening is 31 mm. Maximal incisal opening is 31 mm including the vertical overbite. She can open to about 27 without significant pain. Excursive movement to the right is only about 3 mm and to the left about 1 mm. To palpation, she has moderate pain on the right side involving the temporalis, masseter, medical pterygoid, TMJ, styloid area and SCM. She has no pain to palpation on the left side.

Oropharyngeal airway appears normal with a normal appearing uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars. Of interest, B265 states that she had condylar resorption in the right joint prior to her previous surgery. This possibly could be related to her reactive arthritis. She more recently has been getting swelling on the right side of her face. Dr. __ put her on an antibiotic and the swelling significantly decreased which again could be supportive of a reactive arthritis kind of problem occurring. She appears to have heterotopic bone that has developed around the right graft and joint area which would also coincide with the presence of reactive arthritis being present.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows that she is missing probably both mandibular first molars with the second and third molars drifted forward. On the right side she has a small pontic that is even smaller than the size of a bicuspid to hold and maintain some of the spacing between the right mandibular second bicuspid and second molar. She has a root canal in the mandibular left second molar. In the upper arch she is actually missing a maxillary right lateral incisor. She has a root canal on the two central incisors, right cuspid, left lateral incisor and then she has a crown on a dental implant in the left cuspid area. She has crowns on most of the posterior teeth. Sinuses appear relatively clear although it is possible that she could have a little mucocele in the left sinus.

Left mandibular condyle appears relatively normal. She has an extremely steep articular eminence.
Right joint shows evidence of rib graft with likely heterotopic bone formation around the graft. There are 4 bone screws to stabilize the rib graft in place. It appears that there is some heterotopic bone in the fossa area as well as around the rib graft itself.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear in all areas. Turbinates appear moderate in size.
Right TMJ shows presence of a rib graft. There appears to be heterotopic bone and fuzziness around the TMJ. There are 4 bone screws in the area that presumably the rib graft was placed.

B265  Page 3
Left TMJ tomogram shows articular eminence is quite steep. Condyle appears reasonably normal. The joint space may be slightly decreased but difficult to tell on these views. On opening, there is very good translation of the left condyle where it actually comes anterior to the articular eminence. This should indicate that the right lateral excursive movement should be greater than clinically recorded. On opening, the right joint appears to have no translatory abilities.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has perhaps just a slight Class II skeletal relationship but the occlusion is fairly close to being a Class I. Oropharyngeal airway looks adequate.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Right TMJ failed rib graft.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction.
Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ condylectomy and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Application of arch bars with subsequent removal.

I gave B265 a prescription for Klonopin 1 mg tablets dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s. She is to ask for just 10 pills initially to make sure it agrees with her. I did give her 4 refills.

B265 
The patient presents for follow-up evaluation. The patient is now just a little bit over 2 months postsurgery. She is doing exceptionally well. No pain or headaches. Incisal opening is 37 mm which is 7 mm more than before surgery. Excursive movements are about 3 mm in each direction. No pain to palpation around the head and neck area. She is progressing very well. She is to return to see Dr. __ for dental work and also Dr. __ who referred her down so that he can see her progress. She and her husband are most appreciative of her result.

B265 
B265 presents for followup evaluation. She is now 27 months post surgery for bilateral TMJ total joint prostheses reconstruction. About 6 or 8 weeks ago, she had developed some significant pain in the jaw area. Radiographically, the joints seem to be in good condition. To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the masseter muscles and medial pterygoid muscles. No pain over the TMJs or temporalis muscles. Incisal opening is 40 mm and excursion movements are only about 1 mm in each direction. Her previous opening the year post surgery was 45 mm. I believe that the myositis of the masseter muscles and medial pterygoid muscles have limited her opening. She is on Wellbutrin and has been on this for about I believe 3 to 4 years. She was on this prior to her surgery because of depression. It is quite possible she could eliminate that medication now as hopefully her depression is over. She was pretty much pain free until just a couple of months ago. Radiographically, her joints seem to be clear and I could not identify any evidence of heterotopic bone and she also has no tenderness over her joints. Her diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral masseter and medial pterygoid muscle myositis.
Possible reaction to Wellbutrin. Nocturnal clenching.
Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Medications: Klonopin 1-mg tablets, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x5. Magnesium 250-mg tablets, 3 tablets in the morning and 3 tablets in the evening. Discontinue wearing of occlusal splint. Eliminate Wellbutrin.

She is to contact me in about 2 weeks to let me know how she is progressing. I believe that this will help and hopefully she will not need medication for depression. She is otherwise is progressing well.

