B270 
B270 is 15 years old, referred by Dr. __. B270's primary concerns are:
Severe underbite. Teeth do not fit together very well.

B270 apparently has always had some alignment problems with the jaws and the teeth. She had orthodontics from the age of 10 to 12. The orthodontics did not correct the bite problem, but it was not as significant as it is currently. The onset of the problem is unknown and the initial etiological factor is unknown.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B270 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship appears to be about a -1 mm. The maxillary and mandible dental midline appear pretty much on the facial midline, and the chin is actually fairly close to being on the facial midline as well. In profile view, B270 has some actual increased prominence of the upper lip. She has an obtuse nasolabial angle. The chin also appears somewhat prominent, but the lower lip is actually more protrusive than the chin. When B270 bites down, the chin becomes fairly strong and the lower lip becomes even more protrusive. She has a vertical over-closure with a bite relationship. Intraorally, B270 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch with the cuspids slightly blocked out of the occlusion. She has adequate attached gingiva. The lower incisors appear to be in a little bit of lingual inclination. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch. She has a full Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally. She has an anterior crossbite and vertical overbite of probably 5 mm with a reversed deep bite. She has an anterior crossbite, but posteriorly she is out of crossbite. In the lower arch, there might be just a slightly increased curve of Wilson, but in the lower arch there is definitely an increased curve of Spee. In the upper arch, she has a significant increased curve of Wilson. Oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal and healthy. Tonsils are moderately enlarged. The turbinates look relatively normal. She does not appear to have any nasal airway obstruction. Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm. Excursion movement to the right 5 mm, to the left 7 mm. She has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. Joints function smoothly.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of four developing but unerupted third molars. The rest of the teeth are all present. Sinuses look relatively clear. Vertical height of the posterior mandibular bodies are a little bit short vertically. It is difficult to evaluate the joints. Waters view shows that the nasal septum is straight and the turbinates are moderate in size with good functional nasal airway. Right sinus appears a little bit cloudy, but the left one appears clear. Left TMJ tomogram shows a condylar head and neck that are elongated. The condyle itself appears to have a reasonably good anatomy. Articular eminence is relatively normal in inclination. Right TMJ tomogram shows a condylar head and neck that are elongated. It is difficult to evaluate the joint space and condylar morphology. Articular eminence is relatively normal in inclination. On opening, there is fairly good translation of both joints. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B270 has a skeletal Class III bite relationship. Upper incisors may be somewhat over angulated. Oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal. Mandibular ramus body AP length appears elongated.

Basic diagnoses for B270 would be as follows:
Mandibular prognathism.
Maxillary vertical hypoplasia.
Maxillary transverse hyperplasia.
Rule out bilateral condylar hyperplasia.
Class III occlusion.
Anterior crossbite.
Impacted third molars x4.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1 to 2 mm. Overangulation of the maxillary incisors.
Moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch.
Transverse deficiency of the lower arch in the bicuspid and first molar area. Accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Include the maxillary second molars in the arch wire.
Align and level mandibular arch. Try to transversely expand the lower arch in the bicuspid and first molar area. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower incisors forward. Evaluate for active condylar hyperplasia growth. Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies if condylar hyperplasia is confirmed. Bilatertal mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly approximately 10 mm.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the maxilla, transversely narrow the upper arch, and move the maxilla posteriorly about 2 to 3 mm. Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B270 
X-rays sent by __. B270 has grown out in forward position on the mandible approximately 18 to 19 mm in 5 years and 8 months. She should have grown forward closer to 9 mm. She has almost twice the growth rate in the mandible than is normal. This confirms that she has active condylar hyperplasia and will benefit from the high condylectomies.

B270  MRI 
AGE: 15/F
DOB: 
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ condyle appears to be long vertically with a long condylar neck. Joint space appears to be decreased vertically. It is difficult to tell if the disc is in place as it could be quite thin.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle is long vertically and with a long condylar neck. Joint space is very narrow. Difficult to identify discal tissue.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condylar head and neck that are quite elongated. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. It appears there may be discal tissue posteriorly displaced. The disc is quite thin. No significant evidence of inflammation present. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and disc, and disc in the open view is in a reduced position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condylar head and neck that quite elongated. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. There appears to be discal tissue posterior to the condylar head. The disc may be posteriorly displaced. No inflammation is seen. On opening, there is good translation and reduction of the disc.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia. Bilateral posterior displaced articular discs.
B270 
Telephone conversation with Dr. __. He had sent some records down on her. I have evaluated those and discussed with him the fact that all four second molars are extruded, and it would be helpful if they could be intruded to level off the marginal ridges for the first molars. In addition, it would be helpful to expand the lower arch as this will improve her overall function and facial aesthetics. He understands. He is to contact me if he has any concerns or problems.

