B271  MRI Evaluation 
Age: 12/F
DOB: 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is really difficult to identify. There is significant interference because of the orthodontic appliances. It appears there is a condyle there but is not very well calcified. Decreased joint space superiorly and I do not see any evidence of discal tissue.

Right TMJ coronal view likewise shows a condyle that appears to have significant degenerative changes and a small condyle mediolaterally in dimension. Slight increased joint space appears to be present. Discal tissue is difficult to identify.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows it is really difficult to identify discal tissue and even to identify the condyle. Condyle appears small in size. The condyle can best be seen in T2s. Degenerative change appears to be present. Anterior beaking is present. Condyle is quite small. There appears to be some thick tissue in the joint space that is filling up the majority of the joint area. On opening, there appears to be good translation. It appears like it is almost like a cystic formation within the joint. I cannot identify discal tissue.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to be better identified in the T2 films but the condyle appears small in size. I cannot really identify discal tissue. Increased soft tissue thickness within the joint space. Condyle is quite small in size. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, it appears that there is translation of the condyle in the joint area.

DIAGNOSES:
Left TMJ severe degenerative changes with increased thickness of tissues in the joint space. Right TMJ severe arthritis with increased soft tissue within the joint space.
Probable indications for bilateral total joint prostheses.

B271 
B271 is 12 years old. She is referred by Dr. ___.
PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Abnormal facial profile.
Orthodontic treatment has pushed the teeth out further.
Difficulties closing her mouth in a relaxed manner.
Teeth and jaws do not fit together properly.

The onset of B271's problems is unknown and the etiology is unknown. The parents have been aware that there have been some facial changes probably in the last 2 years but it was really Dr. __ who really brought the changes to their attention. She has previously been treated by Dr. __ and Dr. __ for orthodontics. She got her braces two years ago.

She takes no medications. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She has no problems with headaches, TMJ or TMJ pain. She rates her TMJ pain, facial pain, headaches, jaw function, diet and disability all at 0.

In frontal view, B271 has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline. In profile view, B271 has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose. This perhaps may be a couple of mm AP deficient but not too bad. Chin is approximately 20 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is extremely short and the chin-neck angle is not well defined. Intraorally, B271 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. The teeth appear to be fairly well aligned. She appears to have adequate attached gingiva around her lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship being probably about 2 mm Class II. She has a little bit greater overlap on the left side than the right side by about 1 mm. She has about ½ mm vertical overbite relationship. There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left cuspid 2 mm higher than the right cuspid. It is a little hard to see the soft palate and uvula but they look relatively normal as do the faucial pillars. Difficulty visualizing has to do with the high occlusal plane angle, the mandible and the elevation and posterior positioning of the tongue. Intranasally, the left turbinate is a little bit larger than the right turbinate. The septum is fairly straight although deviated a little bit towards the right side anteriorly but there still appears to be adequate nasal airway down both sides of the nose. To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head/neck area. TMJ pain to palpation is about a level of 3. With jaw function there is occasional little glitch in the left joint but otherwise the joints seem to function relatively smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is 45 mm. Excursive movement to the right 8 mm, left 7 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the presence of 4 impacted third molars. All other teeth are present. Good spacing between the laterals and cuspids. Sinuses look relatively clear. Turbinates look moderate in size. TMJs appear arthritic. B271  Page 2

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Septum appears reasonably straight. There is a slight bend towards the right side. Turbinates appear relatively normal in size and the airway looks adequate.

Left TMJ tomogram shows the joint appears arthritic. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. Difficult to identify the top of the condyle. The condyle appears as though there is some significant resorption that has occurred with it.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also appears to have undergone some resorption. The condyle appears a little bit more evident but there is what appears to be increased vertical joint space perhaps. The condyle is small in vertical dimension as well as anteroposteriorly. Condylar neck appears short. On opening, there is fairly good translation of both joints.

Lateral cephalometric evaluation shows that she is postured forward slightly and is in centric occlusion not centric relation. B271 has a high occlusal plane angle. There are 2 vertical levels of the occlusal plane in the inferior border of the mandible. Oropharyngeal airway appears decreased. At the base of the tongue there are some areas where she only has about a 3 mm airway space.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: Bilateral TMJ severe condylar resorption.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
Anterior open bite. Impacted third molars x4. TMJ pain with palpation. Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 2 mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Consider removing orthodontic appliances and redo MRI scan to get better interpretation of joint pathology. Orthodontic appliances are significantly interfering with the quality of the image. Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.
Continue to align and level the mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.
CT scans of jaws and jaw joints. (This would be indicated if severe condylar resorption is verified.

B271  Page 3
Surgery. Treatment plan 1.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction and decrease the occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral TMJ coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Surgical removal of 4 bony impacted third molars. Augmentation genioplasty of 6 mm. Surgical option 2.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies and advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Surgical removal of 4 bony impacted third molars. Augmentation genioplasty of 6 mm. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

Comparing to a lateral cephalometric radiograph taken about 16 months ago, it shows that she had about 3 mm further condylar resorption and retrusion of the mandible.

