B275 
B275 is 24 years old, referred by Drs. __. She has had problems with tachycardia in the past. She currently takes Toprol XL 25 mg 1 tablet per day and this controls her tachycardia currently. She has had jaw surgery x2. The first one was when she was about the age of 12. She had double jaw surgery advancing the lower jaw forward and building the upper jaw upwards because she had a gummy smile and a severe overbite relationship. This was unstable and her bite began to open and develop a new Class II again and then she had a second jaw procedure to move the upper jaw up in the back and perhaps move back some to try to correct the problem. Since then, the lower jaw has become more retruded once again. B275 likely had idiopathic condylar resorption that was not treated at the time. The surgery apparently were done within a couple of months of each other so it is possible that initially the upper jaw may not have been as far back as it should have. In any event, the upper jaw surgery was repeated shortly after the first surgery. She smokes 1 pack of cigarettes per week and has done this for about 7 years. She had a reaction to Bicillin in the past where she got an injection one day and the next day was paralyzed down half the side of her body. The eventually cleared within a day.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Teeth and jaws do not fit together properly.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Jaw muscles get tired if she has to chew anything of significance.

B275 has no problems with earaches, vertigo or hearing loss. She gets occasional tinnitus. Other joints that bother include her back and neck at times and also her knees. She may clench and brux her teeth at night. Her TMJ problems began about the age of 10 but prior to that when she was 3 years of age she had a table fall on her jaw. She had her first orthognathic surgery at the age of 12 and it involved double jaw surgery. And then a few months later that same year, the upper jaw surgery was repeated. She had orthodontic appliances on from about the age of 8 until the age of 13. She has no problems with headaches or TMJ pain. She does have some myofascial pain that she rates at about a level of 2. She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 2, disability at 0.

In frontal view, B275 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. There is some asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 3 mm. Maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to the left. Mandibular dental midline appears to be pretty much on the facial midline. Chin appears to be off to the right side about 3 mm. In profile view, B275 appears to have some excessive fullness in the upper lip area. She has about a 90-degree nasolabial angle. Upper lip supralabrale is probably almost 5 mm anterior to the subnasale. Chin may be retruded about 10 to 15 mm. Chin-neckline is short but chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined. B275 has lip incompetence of fairly close to 10 mm. Intraorally, B275 has all of her lower teeth except she is missing mandibular left central incisor. She has moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch. She had adequate attached gingiva. Lower right central incisors trapped lingual to the lateral incisors. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a division II anterior occlusion relationship. B275  Page 2 She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally by about 4 or 5 mm probably. She has an overjet of about 7 to 8 mm and an overbite of about 3 mm. B275 has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. She may have just a slightly reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch. As B275 slides her lower jaw forward into a Class I position she has an open bite of probably about 4 mm. She continues to have an overjet of probably about 3 mm or so. Oropharynx appears clear. The uvula is actually a little bit hypoplastic. Soft palate appears normal in length and faucial pillars appear normal. Intranasally, turbinates are quite large. However, the transverse width of the nasal cavity is a little bit greater than normal as well. It appears that there certainly could be some obstruction particularly at night. B275 does state that she is predominately a mouth breather at night when she sleeps. Her mother states that when B275 sleeps, she does sleep with her mouth wide open. She does not snore apparently at night. B275 is a little bit tired during the day but attributes it to the fact that she is under stress with her husband in Iraq and she has an 18-month-old son. To palpation, B275 has some mild tenderness over the TMJs, masseters areas and moderate tenderness over the styloids and posterior neck area.

With jaw function, joints seem to function reasonably smooth although there is a little bit of fine crepitus on the left side. The right side seems to function a little bit smoother. On excursive movement, there is a little bit of abnormal noise in the left joint area. Maximal incisal opening is about 70 mm. Excursive movements in each direction about 12 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Waters view shows the septum is reasonably straight. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Wires are seen in the maxilla, the piriform and zygomatic buttress areas and also wires in the mandibular ramus area. Intranasally, the turbinates are quite large. However, the transverse width of the nose appears to be somewhat excessive.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is small in size and appears to have lost vertical volume. The condyle actually appears fairly sclerotic. Articular eminence is moderately shallow but long in length. There appears to be decreased joint space superiorly. Some anterior beaking is present.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have more arthritic changes compared to the opposite side. The condyle appears a little bit smaller than the right side. Articular eminence is moderately shallow and fairly long in length. In one view the joint space appears to be somewhat decreased but in another one it appears to be more normal vertically and posteriorly. There appears to be decreased anterior joint space. On opening, there is excellent translation of both condyles completely out of the fossa with there actually being a little bit greater translation on the left side as compared to the right side.

B275  Page 3
Cephalometrically, B275 has a significant Class II skeletal relationship. Loss of posterior vertical mandibular height probably due to condylar resorption. There is an anterior open bite and significant occlusal and skeletal Class II relationship. Increased occlusal plane angulation of the lower arch.

Panorex view shows the absence of all 4 third molars as well as a mandibular left central incisor. There are interosseous wires in the ramus area and wires in the maxilla and the piriform area and the zygomatic buttress area. Condyles appear as though they have undergone significant osteoarthritic and resorptive changes. Sinuses look relatively clear. Tooth analysis with the 5 lower anterior teeth compared to the maxillary 6 anterior teeth shows a Bolton's reverse difference of 6 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption and articular disc dislocation with nonsalvageable discs.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary excess.
Vertical maxillary excess.
Class II end-on cuspid molar relationship.
Overjet of 7 mm.
Missing mandibular left central incisor.
Anterior open bite of 3 to 4 mm.
Accentuated curve of Spee of upper arch.
Slightly reverse curve of Spee of mandibular arch.
Crowding of lower anterior arch.
Crowding of maxillary anterior arch.
Reverse tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 6 mm. TMJ discomfort.
Hyperplastic turbinates.
Partial nasal airway obstruction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align maxillary arch in two occlusal plane levels. Align the cuspids to the molars at one level and put an upward step in the arch wire to align the 4 incisors in an elevated plane. Tip the lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally.
Slenderize the maxillary anterior teeth by removing tooth structure mesially of the cuspids and mesial and distal sides of the lateral incisor to help compensate for the significant reverse tooth size discrepancy. The idea is to remove up to 3 mm of tooth structure if possible.

B275  Page 4
Align and level mandibular arch. Open about 1/2 mm to 1 mm space around each of the lateral incisors and central incisors to help compensate for the tooth size discrepancy. These teeth will need to be bonded at a later time.

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
Bilateral coronoidectomies Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla posteriorly and superiorly as well as level the accentuated curve of Spee.
Fat grafts to bilateral TMJs (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B275  MRI Evaluation
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is sclerotic. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly a moderate amount maybe 3 mm. There is some sclerosis there. Disc appears to be displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with loss of significant volume mediolaterally as well as vertically. Condyle appears sclerotic. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly approximately 2 mm. There is joint space present. The articular disc appears to be anteriorly and medially displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite sclerotic and has lost vertical volume. Significant anterior beaking is present. Articular eminence has a moderate slope to it. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and significantly degenerated without much substance left. There appears to be some roughness in the fossa area at the lateral aspect of the joint. There does not appear to be much inflammation in the joint area and there is just a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there appears to be restricted translation of the condyle but it is difficult to tell as on the open view the condyle is not very evident.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has lost vertical and some anteroposterior volume. Some significant anterior beaking is present. Condyle appears to have a little more volume loss as compared to the left side. Joint space seems fairly well balanced, however. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and appears significantly degenerated. Not much inflammation seen around the joint space. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle although the disc remains non-reducing.

IMPRESSION Left TMJ significant arthritic changes and articular disc location with severe degenerative changes and a sclerotic condyle. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and significant degenerative changes. Discs appear non-salvageable.

