B276  MRI 
AGE: 48/F
DOB:
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Sides are not labeled so I will classify this side 1 and side 2.

Side 1 shows a condyle that is arthritic with some anterior beaking. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc appears significantly deformed. On opening, there is significantly restricted translation. The articular disc remains anteriorly displaced and non-reducing. There appear to be some degenerative changes on the posterior wall of the articular eminence as well.

Side 2 shows a condyle that has undergone significant degenerative changes with sclerosis on the head of the condyle and there appears to be loss of volume with anterior beaking. The disc is anteriorly displaced sitting down towards the inferior aspect of the articular eminence. Disc appears show in anteroposterior dimension. The superior and posterior joint spaces are significantly decreased. Side 2 shows restricted translation of the condyle, and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears small in size. There appears to be some discal tissue that may be medially displaced. Lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Right coronal view shows a condyle that is arthritic. There is decreased superior joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm. Distal tissue appears to be anteriorly and medially displaced.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis, being worse on the left side with displaced articular discs and nonreducing.
B276 
B276 is 49 years old, referred by Dr. __. B276's TMJ problems began when she was about 16 or even maybe slightly later in her teens years of unknown etiology. She had clicking and popping in her joints that could be heard across the room. She had no treatment for. It actually did not cause her any problems until she had jaw surgery. 26 years ago, she had a Le Fort I osteotomy to actually move her maxilla backwards to meet an AP deficient mandible, but did help decrease some of her joint issues. However, she developed sleep apnea following that procedure. She was tried on several CPAP machines and finally 3 years ago, she had maxillary and mandibular osteotomies and the maxilla and mandible were advanced forward by Dr. __  in Santa Barbara, California. The sleep apnea was corrected, but she now has severe TMJ problems as well as neurological problems. She has been to see Dr. __ who is a nerve specialist, but he was unable to help her with this situation. She has been to see several other doctors including Dr. __. Dr. __ did remove the plates and screws last year in hopes that this may improve her situation, but it has decreased some of the tenderness around the maxillary area, but she still continues to have her severe pain problems.

B276 gets headaches at about a level of 4 in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 8, diet at 7, and disability at 8. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. She has some genetic factors that contribute to hearing loss. The only other joints that bother her are her toes. Talking makes her “nerve pain” worse and also her TMJ pain worse. She relates most of her pain problems being in the perioral area involving the upper lip, lower lip, and chin area. CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B276 has fairly reasonable left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm. The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are fairly close to being on the facial midline. In profile, LuB276 has fairly good AP facial balance. Chin neckline is fairly good. She does have some lip incompetence. With B276's lips relaxed, she actually shows some of her lower gingiva. She exposes about 8 mm of her lower teeth and gums. The lip incompetence is probably about 7 mm. Intraorally, B276 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has good attached gingiva. Her teeth appear relatively nicely aligned and leveled. In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids that were taken for previous orthodontic and surgical treatment. She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy and normal. Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the left side. Turbinates are mild to moderate in size, but there does not appear to be any significant airway obstruction. She does not snore. She has some moderate daytime somnolence that may be more medicine related. She does not have any sleep apnea. To palpation, B276 has got some moderate pain over the temporalis and masseter muscles and milder tenderness over the retromandibular area and shoulders. She has crepitus in the left TMJ, but the right joint seems to function reasonably smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is about 44 and she can open to about 30 mm without significant pain and discomfort. Excursion movements are about 4.5 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
I-CAT coronal view shows that the septum is deviated off towards left side. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. In fact, the septum and the turbinate on the left side are actually touching. Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes. There is anterior beaking. There is significantly decreased joint space. There appears to be loss of condylar volume vertically. Articular eminence is quite steep. Joint space is decreased superiorly and posteriorly. There appears to be advanced arthritis in this joint. Right TMJ tomogram shows also has undergone some significant arthritic changes with significant flattening on the anterior head and some anterior beaking, but also some superior peaking of the condyle. There is decreased vertical and posterior joint space. Arthritis is advance on this side, but not quite as significant as the opposite side. Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes. There is sclerosis on the head of the condyle. There appears to be some resorption of the lateral pole of the condyle. There is decrease vertical joint space, and it appears that there may be areas of bone-on-bone contact. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly only about 2 mm. Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that likewise is arthritic. There is significantly decreased vertical and medial joint space. There appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact in this joint as well. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 4-5 mm. Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and probably maxillary first bicuspids. There appears to be some type of grafting in the maxilla. There is one partial bone screw that appears remaining in the maxilla. There is bone plate left in the symphysis. Bone plates that had previously been placed in the maxilla and mandible except for the one in the chin have all been removed.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has fairly good AP balance. Occlusal plan is fairly low. Oropharyngeal airway, despite the advancement, measures about 7 mm at the soft palate and only about 5 mm at the base of tongue, although the tongue is being held low when this x-ray was taken.

Basic diagnoses for B276 would be as follows:
Previous history of Le Fort I osteotomy (26 years ago) and double jaw orthognathic surgery (3 years ago) including bilateral sagittal split osteotomies, maxillary osteotomies, and an osseous genioplasty. Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis, being worse on the left side as compared to the right side with articular discs dislocated, severely deformed, and nonreducing. Bilateral inferior alveolar/mental and infraorbital nerve painful dysthesia. Rule out hypersensitivity to prosthetic materials (titanium alloy, chromium cobalt alloy, polyethylene). Headaches. TMJ pain. Myofascial pain. Lower lip ptosis.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ intracapsular injections with Marcaine to evaluate the effects on headaches, myofascial pain, TMJ pain, and perioral painful dysthesia.
Blood tests to evaluate hypersensitivities to titanium alloy and chromium cobalt alloy. Surgery Stage 1: Exploration of bilateral inferior alveolar nerves with surgical repair.
Re-suspension of mentalis muscle to correct lower lip ptosis. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery Stage 2: Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.


