B277  MRI Evaluation 
Right TMJ coronal view that shows good width and height that curves inferiorly probably 2 to 3 mm. There may be discal tissue medially displaced. I cannot see much discal tissue out lateral. There is a possibility there could be anterior displacement but difficult again to tell on this view.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good medial lateral width. Decreased space without evidence of discal tissue in place. It possibly could be medially displaced again but again difficult to tell from these particular images.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Towards the medial side there may be some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. It appears that the disc is anteriorly displaced. There is decreased superior and posterior joint space.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. There is some anterior beaking. Articular eminence is moderately steep.
There are cine views that unfortunately are not marked as to which side is left and which side is right. One cine view shows the disc anteriorly displaced. On opening it appears that it does reduce and there is fairly good translation of the condyle and disc.

On the opposite side which I am assuming is the left side, in the closed position it is hard to see where the disc is but on opening it appears that there may be discal tissue that does go into position which may be indicative of perhaps a medial displacement. It appears there is a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ medial displacement of the articular disc with reduction. Right TMJ anteriorly displacement of the articular disc with reduction.

B277  I-CAT 
Coronal view shows that the condyles appear somewhat enlarged. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm on both sides. Significantly decreased joint space present bilaterally. On the left side there is a slight prominence of the lateral pole extending slightly further lateral. The sinuses appear clear. The nasal septum is deviated towards the left side with a septal spur present. The turbinates are moderately enlarged.

Lateral TMJ view shows condyle has a fairly good shop. There is a moderate inclination but it appears long in length. There appears to be decreased superior joint space. Condylar head and neck appears elongated.

Right TMJ shows condyle has fairly good shape to it. Decreased vertical joint space. Articular eminence has a moderate slope to it. Condylar head and neck appears elongated. Joint space is decreased vertically and posteriorly in both joints. She has a skeletal and occlusal Class III jaw relationship. Oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal. In the actual TMJ imaging screen, both condyles appear to have reasonably good morphology, as do the fossas. Both condyles show significantly decreased vertical and posterior joint space. The condylar heads and necks appear elongated.

IMPRESSION: Compatible with bilateral condylar hyperplasia.
Decreased superior and posterior joint space compatible with articular disc dislocations.

B277 
B277 is 16 years 10 months of age. B277 was previously orthodontically treated with a good Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship. Treatment was completed in approximately four years ago. Photographs show an excellent occlusion and good facial balance. Since then, B277 has grown into an end-on Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship. In addition, she apparently has developed some significant pain problems. BASIC DIAGNOSES: Bilateral TMJ condylar hyperplasia.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations. TMJ pain.
Headaches?
Myofascial pain?
It appears that B277 has active condylar hyperplasia. With this condition the mandible could continue to grow into the 20s. The mandible has grown forward about 10 to 12 mm in the past 4 years when normally she should not have grown any more than approximately 3 and at the most 4 mm in the mandible.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch. Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies to eliminate the pathology growth process in the mandible.
Reposition the articular discs over the condylar heads and stabilize with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to set the mandible back into proper alignment with the maxilla.

In the presence of active condylar hyperplasia, the highly predictable treatment would be to do high condylectomies to remove the growth centers thus stop the pathological growth process. Her headache and pain problems are likely related to displaced articular discs. Therefore, repositioning the articular discs should eliminate the pain and headache problems that she is experiencing. Of course the sagittal splits will realign the jaw structures. This treatment plan should provide her with the best possible and most predictable treatment outcome.

B277 
B277 is 17 years old, referred by Dr. __ . B277 is also referred by Dr. __ . By history, B277 completed treatment in approximately 4 years ago. Records at that time show that she had an excellent occlusion and good facial balance. Since that time, B277's lower jaw has continued to grow creating a jaw malalignment and the current significant pain and headache problems that she has. B277 only became aware of the headaches, jaw and TMJ pain when she was about 14 years old of unknown etiology. She originally started out with just the jaw pain and the headaches did not develop until about a year and a half ago. B277 gets headaches about once or twice a week at about a level of 4 on the average in the frontal and temple areas and behind her eyes. Her headaches can escalate to a level of 6. She rates her average TMJ pain somewhere around 6 though this can also escalate to about 9 to 10. Her average daily pain on the average is around 4. She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at a level of 3. She gets occasional earaches, occasional tinnitus as she does have some problems with vertigo as well. No other joints bother her. She apparently does clench at nighttime and during the day particularly when she is under stress.

MEDICATIONS:
Ibuprofen. Yasmin. PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Jaw pain. Overgrowth of the lower jaw. Headaches. In frontal view, B277 has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the left and the chin is probably 1 mm to the left as well. In profile view, she seems to have fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose. The chin appears a little bit prominent by maybe about 3 mm or so. Intraorally, B277 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch. She has nicely aligned teeth. The gingiva appears healthy. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a 2 x 2 retainer in the upper arch. She has a little bit of step between the upper right lateral incisor and cuspid. She is about 4 mm Class III on the right side and probably 2 to 3 mm Class III on the left side. She has anterior crossbite that extends from the right lateral incisor to the left cuspid. She has about ½ mm reversed overbite relationship. She has about a -4 mm overjet relationship. Oropharyngeal area tissues look healthy. The uvula and soft palate appears normal. Faucial pillars are somewhat constricted secondary to enlarged tonsils. The left tonsil is moderately enlarged. The right tonsil is moderate to severe in size. Nasal turbinates are moderate in size but she does not complain of any airway obstruction. No history of snoring, sleep apnea or sleep disorder. To palpation, she has some mild to moderate tenderness over the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, left styloid and right SCM area. Joints today are functioning reasonably smoothy although it just does not feel very comfortable for her to open. KB277  Page 2 Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm but only about 20 mm with comfort. Excursive movement to the right is 5 mm, left 6 mm. B277 has had her wisdom teeth removed in approximately two years ago.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. She has a 3 x 3 retainer that appears broken in the lower arch and a 2 x 2 retainer in the upper arch. Vertical height of the posterior mandibular body appears a little bit short. The condylar head and neck may be slightly elongated but difficult to tell. Sinuses look relatively clear.

Waters view shows that the nasal septum in the bony area is reasonably straight. There is just a slight deviation towards the left at the base. Sinuses appear relatively clear. She has large frontal sinuses.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is relatively normal in steepness. Joint space appears decreased in thickness superiorly and posteriorly.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit harder to evaluate but appears to have very good shape. Articular eminence is a little bit steeper on this side compared to the opposite side. Joint spaces appear narrow. On opening, there is reasonably good translation of both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B277 has a Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway looks very good. Airway dimension from the soft palate to the posteropharyngeal wall of about 12 mm and from the base of the tongue to posteropharyngeal wall about 12 mm.

B277 usually does not wake up with pain but it seems to develop during the day indicative that she probably is not clenching significantly at night but may be doing some during the day.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation with early reduction. Mandibular prognathism.
Class III end-on occlusion.
Anterior crossbite.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Hypertrophied tonsils with potential for oropharyngeal airway obstruction. Slight malalignment of the maxillary right lateral incisor and cuspid. Mandibular dental midline shifted 1 mm to the left.

B277  Page 3
RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. Reevaluate for continued progressive abnormal mandibular growth (obtain lateral cephalogram in January of next year to determine if active condylar hyperplasia is present).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible back.
Consider removal bilateral hypertrophied tonsils.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

