B283 Age: 20
Date of Birth: 
The patient is referred by . She does have asthma and still has symptoms with it. B283 is in good health except for the asthma and some allergy and sinus problems. She takes the following medications:
Ventolin.
Lexapro.
Yasmin.
Atarax for hives.

Prior to her accident 4 years ago, B283 was not aware of having any TMJ problems. She and her brother were in the car and the vehicle rolled about 7 times. She had her seatbelt on and only had some minor injuries including laceration of her right thumb which required just a few stitches to repair. 4 years ago, she was seen by Dr. __ including visits with right earache and jaw pain. She was found to have a right perforation of the tympanic membrane. She was treated with antibiotics and subsequently developed Candida otitis externa. Over a 2-week period, the symptoms did resolve. 3 years ago, she developed right-sided facial numbness and developed 7th cranial nerve paralysis or Bell's palsy. An MRI performed at that time revealed that she had maxillary and ethmoidal sinusitis. In three to four weeks, her symptoms pretty much resolved and her hearing was normal and the tympanic membrane perforation had healed although there was still some minor facial asymmetry noted. By earlier this year, the facial paralysis had cleared. She also was having no ear or facial pain at that time. B283 has been aware of mandibular asymmetry since about the 7th to 8th grade. Her accident was 4 years ago. She had orthodontics sometime around the age of 7 to 8 and then she had a second round of orthodontics beginning 11 years of age, for about 1 year.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Headaches.
Neck hurts.
Jaws hurt.
Bite is off.
Jaw joint pain.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Jaw becoming continually more asymmetric.
Cannot breathe through nose.
Predominately a mouth breather.

B283 has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her shoulders, risk hands, fingers, knees, ankles, feet and toes. She gets hives almost nightly that involve her back, legs, arms, hands and stomach. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night. She has been getting bouts of where her jaw pain would get worse and then she gets tingling down through her arms particularly on the right side. She will get a bad headache, felt like collapsing, and her arm would get numb. B283  Page 2

The other joints that bother her include her shoulders, risks, hands, fingers, knees, ankles, feet and toes. She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. She does have a lot of allergy problems including penicillin but also dust mites, mildew, cats, dogs, horses, grasses etc. She does have a significant nickel hypersensitivity as well. Cannot wear cheap jewelry. When she was in high school, she appeared as though she had mono but it was tested and no one could ever diagnose her with that but she did have some facial swelling that sort of goes along with that type of problem. B283 rates her headaches that occur essentially all over her head including the frontal, temporal, posterior head and top of the head at about a level of 5 and they occur daily. TMJ pain is about a level of 8 and it fluctuates from one side to the other as to which side is worse. Average daily pain is at 5, jaw function at 6, diet at 5, disability at 4. Seventh cranial nerve functions normally. She has no particular problems with numbness at this time. In frontal view, B283  has fairly good facial symmetry in middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm on the left and about 1.5 mm on the right. Maximally midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Maxillary incisor tip, however, is 1/2 mm off to the right and the apices of the teeth are slightly off to the left. Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left side. Chin is probably about 5 mm off to the right side. There appears to be some increased fullness of the face and the right side in the angle area by probably 3 to 4 mm as compared to the left side. The right inferior border of the mandible back in the angle area is probably 5 mm higher than the left side. There is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.

In profile view, B283 has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose. There could be just a slight AP deficient by not anymore than about 2 mm. The chin is probably about 10 to 15 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is short. She has some fullness in the submental area. Chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined.

Intraorally. B283 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars except she is missing the left second bicuspid that has been replaced by an implant and a crown. She has a 3 x 3 retainer on the lower anterior arch. She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth although the margin of attached gingiva is narrow. Teeth appear fairly well aligned and level. In the upper arch, B283 has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a little palatal tori present on the roof of her mouth. She has a slight Class II end-on occlusion on the right side about 2 mm and the left side probably 3 to 4 mm. She occludes only on the right side and all the teeth on the left side are out of occlusion extending from about the central incisors completely back through all the left teeth. She has about a 2 to 3 mm open bite on the left posterior aspect. She does have almost 2 mm of vertical overbite. She is almost into a crossbite on the left posterior side. She has at least a 3 mm cant at the cuspid area with the right side being higher than the left side. Cant in the mandibular plane is a little bit greater by probably about an extra mm with the left mandibular cuspid being about 4 mm lower than the right cuspid. She does have some crenations on the lateral borders of her tongue. The uvula is relatively normal in length as is the soft palate. Faucial pillars are moderately constricted and the tonsils are of moderate size. The faucial pillars are somewhat constricted. The tonsils sort of jet out a little bit from the pillars with a little bit greater constriction of the oropharynx. B283 
The turbinates are moderately enlarged, particularly the left one. She has some constricture of the luminal valve. In fact, holding the luminal valves open significantly improves her abilities to breathe through her nose. Nostrils are actually normal in size as is the columella. The septum appears to be reasonably straight. She probably has a moderate nasal airway obstruction. Obstruction is due in part to the turbinates but also to the luminal valves. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the TMJs and milder pain over the posterior neck, styloid areas and temporalis muscles. On opening, the left joint seems to function relatively smooth and this seems to have a good translation. As she opens, she does deviate off towards the right side maybe 3 to 4 mm. She has a loud glitch or pop in the right joint on maximum opening. It does not appear to be a disc reducing but it is possible. Maximal incisal opening is about 55 mm. without much discomfort 22 mm. Excursive movement to the right 14 mm and to the left about 9 mm.

EVALUATION OF OTHER AREAS
She does have problems with her joints including her shoulders, wrists, hands, fingers, knees, ankles, feet and toes. She had a urinary tract infection a few times during the 10th grade but not since then. She does have nocturia x3. Her periods are irregular and she has excessive pain. This is controlled with the Yasmin. No other reproductive systems problems that she is aware of. No gum problems. No eye abnormalities. No sinus problems. No smoking. No ear problems. She had pneumonia as an infant. She was diagnosed with asthma at about the age of 5. No known GI problems. She does have chronic fatigue problems. She has her thyroid checked yearly and it is okay. She has not been around cats or birds. She has been around hoofed animals as they have walking horses x8. She ahs no implants except for the osseointegrated dental implant.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of all 4 third molars that are impacted. She has an osseointegrated implant in the left second bicuspid area with a crown on it. All the rest of the teeth are present. She has a 3 x 3 retainer present. Sinuses appear a little bit as though there could be some fluid or thickening of the membrane. The left condyle appears to show some flattening on the anterior head and some peaking on the condylar head. There may be a little bit of sclerosis present but difficult to tell.

Right TMJ looks quite arthritic. There is some anterior beaking and loss of vertical height with erosions in the superior surface.
Waters view shows that there is a significant deviation of the nasal septum in the bony aspect with it being shifted significantly off the right side and then back to the left side. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. Particularly on the left side the turbinate appears to fill most of the functional airway. The right side of the turbinate appears smaller in size. The sinuses appear relatively clear. Frontal sinus has essentially never developed. Right side of the maxilla is shorter in vertical height and the mandible is particularly shorter vertically on the right side as compared to the left side. B283 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a joint that appears quite arthritic involving the condylar head and also the neck of the condyle appears smaller than normal. There appears to be decreased superior joint space and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There appears to be pseudocyst in the head of the condyle.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle appears to have some flattening associated with it on the superior surface. There appears to actually be an increased joint space present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is good translation of the left condyle although the flattening on the anterior head and superior peaking of the condyle and flattening of the posterior aspect of the condyle is evident. In the right joint, there is actually fairly good translation of the condyle coming down directly beneath the articular eminence. The condyle appears quite small in size. The articular eminence is more shallow on this side compared to the opposite side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is vertical facial asymmetry. In the right side of the inferior border of the mandible is significantly shorter than the left side. There is also a discrepancy at the occlusal plane surface. The oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is constricted measuring about 3 to 3.5 mm at the base of the soft palate. At the base of the tongue the airway dimension is closer to about 9 to 10 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Right TMJ severe resorptive arthritis and articular disc dislocation and nonsalvageable.
Right TMJ possibly anteriorly displaced disc at the most lateral aspect of the joint but otherwise, disc in good position. Slight AP maxillary deficiency. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. AP mandibular deficiency. Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side. High occlusal plane angle.
Class II end-on occlusion. Decreased oropharyngeal airway with a dimension of 3.5 mm (normal 11 mm.)
Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction.
Impacted third molars x4.
Sleep disorder.
Snoring. Nocturnal clenching and bruxism.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.
Left-sided apertognathia.

B283 
RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Medications.
Klonopin to help with sleep and to decrease nocturnal clenching and bruxism. Consider antiinflammatory medications such as Celebrex, Relafen, etc. to evaluate improvement in symptomatology. Consider antibiotic such as Z-Pak, Levaquin or doxycycline to see if this improves joint symptoms.
Evaluation by rheumatologist to rule out connective tissue autoimmune disease or inflammatory disease. Consider use of temporary occlusal splint to see the effects on symptomatology particularly involving the left side.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies if necessary.
Align and level lower arch. Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy and to decrease the overangulation of the lower incisors. Tip left mandibular first and second molars mesially. Consider if necessary reducing the size of the crown on the left second bicuspid implant so that it would be of proper size and shape to interdigitate with the upper arch.
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Right TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Fat graft to right TMJ (harvest from the abdomen.)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft it posteriorly, level transversely and anteroposteriorly as well as correct any transverse discrepancy. Left sagittal split osteotomy to align it.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Bilateral partial turbinectomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B283  MRI Evaluation 
Age: 24/Female
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. A little medial beaking is present of the medial pole. The lateral rim of the fossa curves moderately inferiorly. The disc appears to be medially displaced. About half the condylar head is covered by the disc. Cortical bone appears to be intact on top of the condyle and in the fossa.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone osteoarthritic and degenerative changes. There is a lateral osteophyte and medial beaking of the condyle. There are erosions in the head of the condyle. Decreased superior joint space. Difficult to identify discal tissue although it may be anteriorly displaced. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa is present. Significant erosion is present in the mid part of the condyle. The condyle is quite small with probably 1/2 to 1/4 of the volume of the opposite condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of peaking superiorly and a little bit of anterior beaking. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Out laterally, it appears that the disc may be anteriorly displaced but in the mid part of the condyle and medially, the disc is in a more normal position. A little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint space. There is good translation of the condyle and the disc is in a reduced position and translates well with the condyle. The other condyle looks almost like a short hockey stick.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes and condylar resorption. The head of the condyle is quite flat. Anteriorly there is some erosion apparent in the head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. In some areas, the joint space appears greater than normal in the vertical and posterior dimension. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. It is severely deformed and quite short anteroposteriorly. The disc is actually more obvious towards the lateral aspect of the joint. The condyle appears to be eroded in the middle and medial aspect of the joint. There appears to be a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is restricted translation of the condyle compared to the opposite side. The condyle approaches the posterior aspect of the articular eminence. The articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction and demonstrates severe degenerative changes and deformation.

IMPRESSION
Left TMJ relatively normal disc position except at the lateral aspect that could be anteriorly displaced and some mild arthritic changes.
Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and with severe degeneration and deformation.

