B286 
B286 is 45 years old. Referred by Dr. __. B286 is in fairly good health, although she does have some allergy problems and some nasal stuffiness problems. 2 years ago, she was a victim of a gunshot wound that entered her left cheekbone area and exited adjacent to the right temporomandibular joint. Her left orbital floor and rim apparently were shattered, and, 2 years ago, Dr. __ repaired the injuries. 2 years ago, she went back for secondary surgery for repair of her tear duct. This also was performed by Dr. __. Primary concerns that B286 has include the following:

Limited jaw movement.
Worried about future problems related to her jaws.
Severe migraines that occur about 2 times per month which she never had before the injury.

She rates her headaches she gets 2 times per month in the left frontal and temporal area at about a level of 9. Her usual TMJ pain is at level of 4 but can escalate to 8. Average daily pain is at 2. Jaw function is 5, diet at 4, and disability at 6. She gets bilateral earaches, occasional tinnitus, and moderate occurrence of vertigo. No other joints bother her. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night and occasionally during the day she will clench. She apparently has total anesthesia to the upper lip and in her cheeks.

B286  has fairly good left-to-right symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The chin and mandibular dental midline are pretty much on the facial midline. In profile, B286 has fairly good facial balance. Intraorally, B286's lower arch is complete back to the second molars. Teeth are nicely aligned and leveled. She did have orthodontics done from 5 years ago through 3 years ago. There is a crown on the mandibular left first molar. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. B286 has just a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side, but Class I on the left side. She has an anterior deep bite of probably 4 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. Intranasally, the turbinates look fairly large. To palpation, B286 has some moderate tenderness over the right masseter, left posterior neck, and milder tenderness over the right TMJ. On opening, she has a glitch in the left joint and her mandible deviates towards the left side about 3 to 4 mm as she opens. Maximum opening is 28 mm, but it took several efforts to get to that point. The excursion movements are about 6 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows that she has some mesh in the left orbital floor and some bone screws perhaps stabilizing the mesh in place. The right joint appears a little bit arthritic. She is missing the mandibular third molars, but the rest of the teeth are present. She has a 3 x 3 retainer. Coronal view shows that she has hypertrophied turbinates. The right sinus is pretty much full of fluid with just a small air space remaining near the superior aspect of the sinus. In the left side, she has thickening of the sinus membrane, particularly at the lateral wall of the sinus.

Axial view shows that she has hypertrophied turbinates, although the septum appears reasonably straight. The right sinus is completely opacified at the level of cut evaluated. The left sinus has thickened sinus membrane, particularly along the anterior and lateral walls.

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking. There is some decreased joint space anteriorly and also towards the lateral aspect of the joint. The directly superior and posterior joint spaces look reasonably good. The articular eminence is moderately shallow.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little bit arthritic with some anterior beaking. There is decreased joint space between the base of the articular eminence and the head of the condyle. The joint space appears to be fairly good directly superior and posterior to the head of the condyle. The articular eminence is moderately shallow.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. There is decreased lateral joint space with the superior and medial joint space appearing relatively normal.

In the right TMJ, the lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 3 or 4 mm. There appears to be significantly decreased lateral joint space. The directly superior and medial joint space looks fairly good.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that a bone plate along the orbital rim on the left side and an additional bone screw. There is mesh across the orbital floor. On the right side, she has a zygomatic arch that is slightly displaced. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has good facial balance and good oropharyngeal airway and skeletal and occlusal Class I relationship.

Basic diagnoses for B286 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs that are medially displaced with possible perforation through the left disc.
Decreased incisal opening of only 28 mm, although she has good excursion movements.
Myositis of right masseter muscle.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Right maxillary sinusitis.
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism.
Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Medications: Klonopin 1 mg tablet, dispensing 30 tablets, 1/2 to 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x2.
2.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. b.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies to control occlusion. c.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. d.	Right maxillary nasal antrostomy.

B286 
Meeting with Dr. __. We reviewed her MRI. He feels the discs are in reasonably good position. There is some osteoarthritis being a little bit worse on the left side than the right side. In both joints, the discs appear to be stuck to the condylar head and there appears to be translation only between the discs and the fossa. Opening is restricted in both joints. He did believe that the discs were significantly medially displaced. Initially, he thought that the discs may be posteriorly displaced, but on further evaluation he believes that the discs may be just slightly posteriorly positioned, but the darker tissue may be just some compressed bilaminar tissue that extends down along the posterior head more towards the medial side of the joint.

B286  I-CAT 
Coronal views of both joints show the condyles have fairly good morphology. There is decreased lateral joint space and slightly increased medial joint space. The left sagittal view shows some slight anterior beaking in the condyle and perhaps some decreased vertical joint space between the condyle and the articular eminence. Superior and posterior joint space looks relatively normal. Right TMJ shows a little bit of anterior beaking and some flattening on the head of the condyle. There appears there may be some decreased joint space between the condyle and articular eminence. The superior and posterior joint space looks normal. The articular eminence is moderately shallow in both joints.

B286 MRI 
AGE:	45/F
DOB:	
DATE OF MRI ACQUISITION:	
DATE OF INTERPRETATION:	
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good shape and morphology. There is decreased vertical joint space. There appears to be perhaps some discal tissue medially but difficult to tell. There could be some discal tissue anteriorly and displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with very minimal downward curvature of the lateral rim.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. There is decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The disc may be medially displaced as well as anteriorly displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. The discal tissue appears to be in position, but there appears to be a lack of continuity between the anterior and posterior band. In the T2 imaging, there is some fluid in the superior joint space. It is possible the disc could be posteriorly displaced. On opening, there is restricted translation of the mandible. There appears to be discontinuity of the disc with perhaps a perforation through the disc. I believe the disc is in place on opening. There is limited translation. On the cine imaging, the disc might have a perforation through it and there is limited translation, although there seems to be mobility between the disc and the fossa.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. The disc appears to be in position again, but the intermediate zone is not seen. In some views, it appears that the disc may be posteriorly displaced, particularly toward the medial side. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint, the discal tissue is very difficult to see. Very minimal fluid in the joint spaces. Right TMJ open views show some limited translation, however, the disc appears to be in position. Right cine shows there also may be discontinuity in the disc, but the disc seems to translate reasonably well with the fossa, but there is restricted translation.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis with articular discs that may be medially displaced, but may also demonstrate discontinuity or degeneration with decreased translation of the condyle and disc.

