B288  MRI Evaluation 
Age: 20
Date of Birth: 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There appears to be minimal joint space vertically. It appears there may be discal tissue medially. Just some moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa probably about 3 mm. Cortical bone appears to be intact. The condyle appears long in a vertical dimension.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa of about 3 mm. Decreased vertical joint space particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint. There appears to be discal tissue medial to the condyle and anterior. Cortical bone appears to be intact. Condylar head appears long and vertical length.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Decreased vertical joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint that would support likely medial displacement of the articular disc. There is a possibility that it could be posteriorly displaced as well. The disc appears quite thin. There does not appear to be any significant inflammation and there is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space beneath the articular eminence. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and it appears that over medially at least the disc reduces into position. Out laterally there is not much discal tissue seen.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has very good morphology. A little bit of flattening on the anterior head and maybe a little bit of anterior beaking present. Decreased superior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc appears to be sitting beneath the articular eminence. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint the disc is not seen. There appears to be a little of fluid in both superior and inferior joint spaces particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle and the articular disc appears to reduce on opening.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ articular disc medially displaced.
Right TMJ arthritic changes and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Size of condyles could indicate a possible condylar hyperplasia.

B288 
B288 is 20 years old, referred by Dr. __.
B288 is in good health with no major medical problems. She has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus. She gets vertigo about one time a week but no hearing loss. No other joint problems. No problems with clenching or bruxism that she is aware of.

MEDICATIONS: BCP.
ASA occasionally.
B288 and her parents believe that she has had an underbite since she was a child. At age 4, maxillary expansion was done. She had no other orthodontic treatment until last year when she restarted her orthodontics.

B288 gets headaches at about a level of 7. She rates her pain directly in the TMJ around a level of 1 but average daily pain at 4. She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 0, disability at 1.

In frontal view, B288 has fairly good facial asymmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline may be just slightly off to the right side about 1 mm. Chin may be off to the right side about 3 mm. In profile view, B288 has some AP maxillary deficiency. Upper lip supralabrale is probably 2 mm posterior subnasale. She probably has about 4 to 6 mm of AP maxillary deficiency. Chin may be just slightly off a couple of mm perhaps. Chin neckline however, looks fairly normal and chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined. Intraorally, B288 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth appear to be nicely aligned and leveled. Transversely the arch appears reasonably symmetric. In the upper arch B288 has all of her teeth back through the second molars. B288 has a reverse deep bite of about 1 mm. She has a Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally. Transversely the occlusal cant appears fairly level. B288 has tonsils that are mildly enlarged. She has fairly significant turbinates that appear to block off a significant portion of her functional nasal airway. The septum appears reasonably straight. The columella and nostrils are relatively normal. No history of snoring but she does have daytime somnolence that is mild to moderate. She is not aware of any sleep apnea problems. She is a mouth breather particularly when sleeping. To palpation she has some mild tenderness over the TMJs and styloid areas. Maximal opening is about 48 mm. Excursive movements appear to be about 4 to 5 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the absence of the four third molars but all other teeth are present. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Condyles are hard to evaluate on these images. Little ossification below the apex of the mandibular right first molar.

B288 
Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Nasal septum appears to be deviated particularly in the back of the bony area where it shifts off towards the left side. Turbinates appear enlarged particularly on the right side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is relatively normal in slope and angulation. There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology but maybe with some anterior beaking and a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle compared to the opposite side. Articular eminence is relatively normal in angulation. There appears to be decreased superoposterior joint space. On opening there is good translation of both condyles and they come anterior to the articular eminences.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B288 has a high occlusal plane angle and a skeletal Class III relationship. She has a full Class III occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal in size. Tonsils appear a little bit enlarged. The maxilla appears AP deficient. B288 has a Bolton's difference of 2 mm in the anterior arch.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: Bilateral TMJ condylar hyperplasia (possibly arrested.)
Bilateral TMJ articular disc medially displaced.
AP maxillary deficiency. Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Class III occlusion.
Anterior bilateral posterior crossbites.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasoseptal deviation.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Maintain current spacing between the roots of the lateral incisors and cuspids.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and expand it.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly and correct the asymmetry.
Partial turbinectomies.
Nasoseptoplasty. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

