B291 
B291 is 17 years old, referred by Dr. __. B291 was diagnosed with Crouzon's syndrome and had reconstructive surgery in April of 19__. 3 and 5 years ago, there were some oral surgical procedures performed to remove some primary teeth and some permanent teeth. Other than that, B291 is in good health. He takes Excedrin for migraine headaches as needed. He does get migraine headaches but usually when under stress. There is no schedule or pattern to their occurrence. They just occur occasionally. B291 tends to breathe through his mouth when he sleeps and he does have some mild snoring.

B291 does get regular headaches as well as migraine headaches. He says he cannot figure out what triggers them. The headaches occur predominately in the forehead and temporal areas. He does get some mild back pain. He has some lower back pain that is attributed they think to his height and it is aggravated by standing in the upright position. He has some problems with lightheadedness and dizziness if the stands too quickly. No TMJ pain. Headaches he rates at a level of 6 to 7. Shoulder pain around the head and neck area about a 1 to 2. Jaw function is essentially normal.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Jaw malalignment.
Teeth malalignment.
Migraines.
He is unaware of clenching and grinding his teeth. No other joints bother him except for his lower back factors.

In frontal view, he appears to have fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 27 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline may be about a mm off the side. Mandibular dental midline is about 4 mm off to the right side. Chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline. In profile view, B291 has a little bit of an obtuse nasolabial angle. It seems there may be some AP maxillary deficiency of about 4 mm and AP mandibular deficiency probably 8 to 10 mm. He has some fullness in the submental area. Chin-neckline is well defined. He has a head postured forward neck position. Intraorally, he has all of his teeth back through the third molars except for the lower left cuspid which was previously because of ankylosis problems. No crowding in the lower arch. Attached gingiva appears adequate. In the upper arch he has all of his teeth back through the third molars. He has a reverse curve of Wilson in the upper arch. He has an anterior open bite of about 2 to 3 mm. He has as Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally. He has an anterior end-on incisor relationship. Oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal with normal uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars. However, he has huge tonsils that approach the midline and probably block off at least half of the available oropharyngeal airway space. Intranasally, the turbinates appear relatively normal in size. The septum is deviated off towards the right side and there is fairly good size septal spur coming off it. It appears to cause some obstruction in the right side of the nose. Holding the nostrils open does not seem to improve B291 's airway significantly. Columella is somewhat wide and it may narrow the nostrils some. He has some mild snoring problems, some moderate daytime somnolence but he is not aware of any sleep apnea problems. B291 

To palpation he has no particular tenderness around the head and neck area except over the TMJs at a level of about 3. Maximal incisal opening is about 54 mm. Excursive movements are 6 mm in each direction. He rates his headaches at a level of 7 in the frontal in and temple area. He rates his TMJ pain at 0, average daily pain 2, jaw function and diet disability at 0. Joints seem to function smoothly.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth back through the second molars except missing mandibular right cuspid. Sinuses are clear but difficult to evaluate.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little hard to visualize. Joint space looks reasonably good. Articular eminence is moderately steep.
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have some increased vertical joint space and perhaps a little bit increased posterior joint space. Articular eminence is fairly steep. On opening, there appears to be adequate translation in both joints.

Waters view shows that the bony septum has some deviation associated with it. Nasal airway actually looks reasonably good. Sinuses appear relatively clear although the sinuses are relatively small with the left side being somewhat smaller than the right side. Frontal sinus is quite large. There is evidence of wires in the skull area from his previous surgery.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows Class III occlusal relationship and a slightly increased occlusal plane angulation. Accentuated curve of Spee and perhaps some slight over angulation of the maxillary incisors and mandibular incisors. Tonsils are quite enlarge and are set fairly low in the oropharynx. Maxilla and mandible may be slightly AP deficient.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: Crouzon's syndrome.
Rule out mandibular condylar hyperplasia and articular disc dislocations. AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary excess.
Mandibular prognathism.
Class III occlusion.
Bilateral posterior crossbites.
Anterior end-on incisor relationship.
Anterior open bite.
Missing mandibular right permanent cuspid. Mandibular arch asymmetry with the right bicuspid being about 3 mm anterior to the left bicuspid. Accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. TMJ discomfort. Headaches.
B291 

Deviated nasal septum with spurring off to the right side. Nasal airway partial obstruction. Hypertrophied tonsils.
RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
MRI of left and right TMJs.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch in three segments but using a continuous archwire. Extrude both cuspids 1 to 2 mm to get them level with the posterior teeth. Align the four incisors. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure. Tip the lateral incisor roots mesially and left cuspid and right first bicuspid distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Assess for active condylar hyperplasia. Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition in the mandible and advance the right side.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand, advance and superiorly reposition. Anterior mandibular subapical osteotomy to advance the four incisors and rotate to the left.
Right mandibular ostectomy to advance the posterior mandibular segment.
Nasal septoplasty.
Tonsillectomy (by Dr. __)
Consider extracting the maxillary third molars and mandibular left third molar.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B291  MRI Evaluation
Age: 17/M
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have reasonable mediolateral dimension. It appears to have significant rotation to it but a little bit difficult to tell. He has a medial downward curvature at the lateral rim. There does appear to be decreased joint space and there appears to be some fluid in the superior joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view has a similar appearance as the left side. Joint space seems definitely decreased on this side. It appears there is some fluid in the superior joint space. The condyle likewise has a funny shape to it.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has reasonable good morphology. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There is fluid in the superior joint space of some significance directly over the top of the condyle. In one view it appears that the top of the condyle is flattened or perhaps slightly indented in the mid portion towards the lateral aspect of the joint. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc is in a reduced position on top of the condyle. In the opening view, there is evidence of anterior beaking on the condyle and flattening on the anterior aspect of the condyle. The condyle has somewhat of a hockey stick shape to it. There is definite fluid remaining in the superior joint space.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with a little bit of flattening on the posterior aspect at the lateral aspect of the joint. More medially the condyle appears somewhat narrow anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. There is fluid in the superior joint space directly above and slightly posterior to the head of the condyle. Open view shows that the condyle and disc are reduced and translate fairly good. The disc appears to have a reasonably good shape. There is some anterior beaking on the head of the condyle. Fluid can still be seen in the superior joint space although not as prominent as the opposite side.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction but with fluid in the superior joint space greater on the left side than right side.



