B292 
B292 is 44 years old and referred by __. B292 became aware of having joint problems probably 5-9 years ago. She began developing an open bite and a little bit of achiness in her jaws. B292 has some previous x-rays dating back to 16 years ago. 16 years ago, she had good condyles and she was approximately 17 years old when that x-ray was taken. 17 years ago, it appears that the condyles particularly in the right side became a little bit smaller. 12 yeas ago x-ray shows that the right one appears a little bit smaller, although it is probably out of the field. The next x-ray is taken 6 years ago showing that there is significant resorption particularly in the right joint, and left joint also shows evidence of resorption. The latest x-ray from her dentist last year shows almost complete loss of the condylar heads and significant resorption of the condylar necks as well. The condyles are postured far forward in the fossa. She did see Dr. __ 8 years ago. He suspected rheumatoid arthritis and sent her to a rheumatologist, but he did not really do any blood tests on her to confirm or eliminate that possibility. She has been to see Dr. __ ~ 5-9 years ago and he told B292 that she needed total joint prostheses. More recently, her dentists referred her to Dr. __, who referred her here. B292 has had no treatment to date for her condition. B292 does have thyroid problems and takes Synthroid 0.112 mg q.d. and vitamins and minerals.

Primary concerns that B292 has include the following:
Open bite.
Mouth opens when sleeping causing her to wake up.
Difficulty eating and chewing most foods.
Biting only on her very back teeth.

Other medical conditions that have been noted include:
Hypothyroidism.
Vitiligo.
Osteopenia.
Hypoglycemia.
Antiphospholipid antibodies.
Previous surgeries include a C section 4 years ago; uterine ablation last year; and arthroscopic knee surgery last year.

B292 has no problems with headaches. She rates her TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 0, jaw function at 3, diet at 3, disability at 1. She has no earaches, tinnitus nor vertigo. The only joint that bothers her is her right knee where she had surgery about a year and a half ago. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. B292 wakes up frequently at night with difficulties breathing. She also gets choking and coughing spells when she tries to eat likely related to the severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B292 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm. The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. The nasal tip is about 1 to 2 mm to the left but near the dorsum is shifted a little bit off towards the right side. The mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the fascial midline. Chin is deviated off towards to the right side about 2-3 mm. In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 3 mm. The chin is retruded about 25 mm. She has no chin neckline or angle. Intraorally, B292 has all of her lower teeth back through second molars. She has some crowding in the lower anterior arch. She has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She occludes only on her second molars and actually is just slightly Class II end-on occlusion. B292 has an anterior open bite of about 5 mm. On T1, the occlusion is fairly level. She had a little defect in her soft palate that she said was caused by an ulcer that was treated with nitrostick that left a permanent scar. Otherwise, the oropharyngeal structures look relatively normal. Soft palate appears moderately elongated with a decreased oropharyngeal airway width. It is difficult to evaluate the oropharyngeal airways because of the retruded lower jaw. Intranasally, the left turbinate looks a little bit large and may block the airway on that side somewhat. Septum is reasonably straight, although it does have a little bit of curvature to the left and to the right. B292 has no tenderness around the head and neck area to palpation. Joints function relatively smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is about 35 mm. Excursion movement to the right 7 mm and to the left 6 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. All the rest of the teeth are present. She has no condyles bilaterally. Condyles are functioning far forward in the fossa. Sinuses looks relatively clear. The left turbinate appears enlarged.
Coronal view shows nasal septum is deviated significantly off towards the right side. Sinuses appear clear. Left turbinate appears quite large. Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates are moderately enlarged bilaterally. Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show that the condyle and most of the condylar neck have been resorbed. The articular eminence has been resorbed as well. The condyle is functioning anterior in the fossa. The fossa is significantly large because of the resorption of the articular eminence. Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show severe resorption of the condyle and neck. The condyle is functioning anterior in the fossa. Articular eminence has been significantly resorbed away. Condyle is narrow mediolaterally. Left TMJ coronal view shows that there has been severe resorption of the condylar head and neck. The remaining functional part of the mandibular aspect is quite narrow. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 4-5 mm. Right TMJ coronal view shows significant loss of condylar volume and resorption into the neck area. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm. There appears to be some increased joint space. Functioning condylar component is quite narrow mediolaterally. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B292 has some AP maxillary hypoplasia, significant posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia, and severely retruded mandible. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 2 mm at the base of the tongue and 3 mm at the soft palate level indicating severe airway obstruction. She has an extremely high occlusal plane angle.

Basic diagnoses for B292 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ severe resorption of condyles and articular eminences compatible with rheumatoid arthritis. Severe mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Anterior open bite of 5 mm.
Occludes only on second molars bilaterally. High occlusal plane angle.
Slight Class II end-on occlusion. Mild crowding of the lower anterior arch. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm (normal 11 mm).
Sleep apnea.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1 mm of tooth structure to account for small tooth size discrepancy and to help keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward.
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Consider sleep study.
Surgery. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral coronoidotomies.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Augmentation genioplasty.

B292 
AGE: 44/F
DOB: 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant resorption. The condyle is actually functioning forward in the fossa and is very narrow mediolaterally with significant loss of vertical volume. There appears to be an inflammatory process present.

Right TMJ coronal view likely shows a severely resorbed condyle that is functioning anterior in the fossa. This condyle appears even smaller than the opposite site. There is an inflammatory process in the fossa.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe condylar resorption and appears also severe resorption and alteration in the fossa area. The condyle is functioning probably 8-10 mm anterior to its normal position. There is some discal tissue present anterior and sitting beneath the remnants of the articular eminence. The fossa is extremely wide anteroposteriorly and almost twice the normal size. There is some inflammatory tissue present in the joint posterior to the condyle. On opening, there is restricted translation of the condyle and the remnant of the disc remains anteriorly displaced. There is decreased joint space vertically within the joint.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle is quite small and most of the condyle is resorbed with just a little bit of the condylar neck remaining. There is resorption of the articular eminence and widening of the fossa anteroposterior. The condyle is functioning forward probably 8 mm from its normal position. There is a small remnant of the disc sitting beneath the articular eminence. There is inflammatory process within the joint. On opening, there is restricted translation and the remnant of the disc remains anteriorly displaced. There is decreased joint space present as well.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ severe resorptive arthritis with resorption of the articular eminence and anterior position of both condylar remnants. Imaging is compatible with rheumatoid arthritis.

