B293  MRI Scan Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition:	
Date of Reading: 
Age: 57 years
Left TMJ, coronal views, show condyles that are extremely small in mediolateral width. Condyles may be rotated somewhat so that perhaps they have maybe an average width but may be narrow anteroposteriorly. Appears to be actually increased joint space vertically. Very flat lateral rim of the fossa with virtually no downward curvature. Condyle appears as though it has undergone resorption. Condyle appears arthritic. Fossa appears to be intact. On some views there appears there may be some discal tissue displaced medially but difficult to tell.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit better mediolateral width. However, there appears to be significantly decreased vertical joint space with almost no joint space present. Lateral rim of the fossa is very flat quite similar to the opposite side. The outline of the condyle is very difficult to identify in this view. It is possible that there could be some significant loss of cortical bone on the top of the condyle perhaps. It is possible that there may be an increased joint space instead of lack of joint space, but tissues are difficult to differentiate.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is extremely small anteroposteriorly. Condyle seems to have fairly good width but extremely narrow in the AP dimension. Articular eminence is fairly significantly steep. The condyle appears quite small in reference to the size of the fossa. Appears that there may be some discal tissue anterior to the condyle but with significant degenerative changes associated with it. There is an increased superior joint space, and the posterior joint space may be slightly increased as well. No particular inflammatory response seen and only a minor amount of fluid in the superior joint space.

On opening, there is limited translation of the condyle with it coming down toward the inferior aspect of the articular eminence but not beneath it. Any discal tissue that is present remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. Disc is severely deformed and degenerated.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is extremely narrow anteroposteriorly and even worse than the opposite side. Appears to be very little condylar substance present and remaining. However, there is good mediolateral width to the condylar head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle looks quite dwarfed relative to the size of the fossa. Appears that there may be some remnants of a degenerative articular disc anterior to the condyle. Definition of the disc is not very good. There is increased joint space vertically and posterior and particularly anteriorly within this joint. No particular inflammatory process seen with just a minimal amount of fluid in the superior joint space.

On opening, there is significant restriction of translation. Appears to be a little bit more restriction on this side as compared to the opposite side. Any discal remnants present remain anteroposteriorly displaced without reduction.

Impression:
Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and severe degenerative changes
Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe degenerative changes and severely deformed
Probable candidate for bilateral total joint prostheses

B293 
B293 is 57 years old and referred by Dr. __. Patient History She has had previous back surgery with effusion 4 years ago. Removal of hardware from the back was done 3 year ago. She had a partial facelift done last year by Dr. __.

B293 gives no history of problems with earaches, but she gets occasional tinnitus and vertigo but no hearing loss. The only other joint that really bothers her is her right hip. She has an allergy to IODINE but no known drug allergies or food allergies. No problems wearing jewelry that she is aware of. She is aware of clenching and bruxing of her teeth at night and sometimes during the day.

B293's TMJ problems began about two to three years ago of unknown etiology although it possibly could be related to her clenching and bruxism. The back surgery was 4 years a go and then a repeat 3 years ago. Stressed that this may have contributed and may have caused her to clench and brux perhaps. She began orthodontics on her lower teeth last year and in earlier this year the upper appliances were placed. She has had previous biofeedback treatments. She gets daily headaches in the temporal areas that she registers at a level of 5. She rates her average TMJ pain at 4 and overall average facial and jaw pain at 5, jaw function at 5, diet at 7, and disability at 5. She has some numbness in the left cheek area that has been there since the facelift procedure was performed. She gets pain in her neck and shoulder areas that she rates at about a level of 4.

Current Medications
Tylenol sometimes 2 to 6 per day Extra Strength for headaches
Ultra 50 mg as needed for pain
Clonazepam 0.5 mg as needed for sleep

Patient Concerns
Headaches
Jaw joint pain
Jaw joints click and pop
Jaws feel as though they are locked in the mornings
Neck and shoulder hurting
Teeth and jaws don't fit together and function well
Difficulties eating and chewing

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B293 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin. Mandibular dental midline is shifted to the left about 3 mm.

In profile view, she has good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Mandible appears short vertically and appears somewhat retruded. Chin appears to be probably about 8 to 10 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is short, although the chin-neck angle is moderately well-defined.

Intraorally, B293 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. A slight accentuated curve of occlusion is present. Seems to have adequate attached gingiva. Lower incisors appear overangulated and a little bit crowded yet.

In the upper arch, B293 has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. B293  has a Class II end-on occlusion cuspid relationship on the right side and the left side with it being a little bit greater on the left side. It is almost a full Class II occlusion on the left side. Has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm. The left cuspid in the lower arch is about 1.5 mm posterior to the right cuspid. Upper arch is fairly symmetric.

Incisal opening is 37 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 9 mm and to the left 10 mm. She has crepitus in both TMJs, and she has an opening pop in the left joint at about 20 mm and closing pop at about 15. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, posterior neck and shoulder areas, and mild to moderate pain to palpation over the styloid areas and SCMs.

Intraorally, oropharynx appears clear. May be a decreased dimension between the soft palate and the posterior pharyngeal wall area.
Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged. B293 does feel she has difficulty breathing through her nose. Septum has some deviation to it. Columella is extremely wide making the nostrils narrow. I could constrict the columella, and she could breathe easier through her nose. She has some mild constricture of the luminal valves intranasally but not too significantly.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. She has root canals on the left upper and lower first molars, right second bicuspid, and both central incisors. Sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Right condyle appears extremely arthritic. Left condyle appears arthritic but not nearly the degenerative changes as seen on the right side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. Could have a little cyst on the right mesial sinus wall. Septum is deviated significantly off to the side, although turbinates appear moderate in size. Sinuses all appear clear.

For the left TMJ tomogram, she probably was not in centric relation as the mandible is postured forward into a Class I occlusion. She has an increased superior and posterior joint space. Will need to redo these x-rays. Condyle appears somewhat small in size. Appears quite small compared to the size of the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is significantly posteriorly positioned in the fossa in centric relation. Condyle is quite small anteroposteriorly. It is particularly small in reference to the size of the fossa. Articular eminence is quite long in length. Slope is sort of moderate. Appears to have significant arthritis in this joint as well as the opposite one.

For the right TMJ tomogram, she is in a centric relation position on this side. Condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Condyle is extremely small and probably perhaps a third to a quarter of the normal size. Articular eminence is extremely long vertically with sort of a moderate slope to it. Increased anterior joint space.

On opening, there appears to be restricted translation in both joints, but this is not compatible with my clinical impression.
Cephalometrically, B293 has a skeletal Class II relationship. She has a high occlusal plane angle an AP microgenia. Lower incisors appear overangulated. Oropharyngeal airway, however, looks quite good. Anterior vertical height of the mandible could be a little bit short.

B293 demonstrates a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm. In repositioning the models by hand, she has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Class II end-on cuspid relationship. On the right side, however, the teeth fit vertically together much better than they do on the left side where there is probably a 2 to 3-mm open bite present. This is in part due to the fact that the left first molar and second bicuspid are somewhat depressed, and the distal part of the second molar is elevated compared to the anterior part.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocations with perforations
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Class II occlusion being a little bit worse on the left side than the right side
Lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid
Mandibular dental midline shifted 2 mm to the left of the chin
Significant overangulation of the lower incisors
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Headaches
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 2 to 3 mm
Overangulation of lower incisors
Hypertrophied turbinates
Extremely wide columella constricting the nostrils Nasal airway obstruction

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm or perhaps 3 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them forward any further and actually hopefully retracting them some as well as to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy Consider using interarch elastics to try to help align up the mandibular dental midline back onto the midline of the chin. This could requite some Class III elastics on the right side and Class II elastics on the left side. Also the lower teeth on the right side could be stripped a little bit more as compared to the left side to further help shift the mandibular dental midline the 2 mm required to get it in the midline of the mandible

CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol)
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Multiple maxillary osteotomies with bone plate stabilization and hydroxyapatite grafting to advance it slightly, downgraft it posteriorly, as well as expand it
Partial turbinectomies
Reconstruction of the nasal columella

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
Restorative dentistry as necessary to finalize the bite relationship

