

B294  I-CAT
AGE: DOB:
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation:
Coronal view shows that she has enlarged turbinates. The sinuses look clear. There may be a crack in the sinus wall particularly on the right side, but nondisplaced. Left TMJ condyle has a little bit of an odd shape and some flattening across the top, but it seems to have reasonably good joint space. Right TMJ condyle appears larger than the left side, but there appears to be decreased vertical joint space. The left condyle appears arthritic. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have reasonably good shape, a little flattening anteriorly and a little bit of anterior beaking. Joint space looks reasonable through most of the joint except out laterally it appears a little bit narrow. The turbinates appear quite large. Sinuses appear clear. Left TMJ shows a condyle that appears a little bit smaller and a little bit arthritic. Joint space superior and posterior appear excessive. Axial view shows that the inferior turbinates are quite hyperplastic, however, the septum is straight and sinuses are clear. Condyles appear reasonable in this view.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis.
Right TMJ appears to have decreased joint space.
B294 
B294 is 18 years old. Earlier this year, she was involved in a motor vehicle accident and sustained trauma to the head and face area including skull fractures and an intracranial bleed. She also sustained injury to the left TMJ area. Primary concerns that she has from our standpoint are that she cannot open her jaw very wide and she has a lot of pain on her left side when she does try to open or particularly when she yawns.

She has a malfunction of her pituitary gland and she does take the following medications for her situation:
Genotropin 1.8 mg subcutaneous q.h.s.
DDAVP for diabetes insipidus 0.1 mg 4 tablets per day. Aricept 5 mg every morning. Birth control pill. Ibuprofen. Norco 10 p.r.n.

She has no problems with earaches or tinnitus, but does get vertigo. She has a neurological problem affecting her left eye and may be getting some Botox injections into that eyelid to control the blepharospasms. B294 gets headaches predominantly in the left frontal and left temporal area on a daily basis that reach on the average at about a level of 9. Average daily TMJ pain is at 8 and only on the left side. Her average daily pain is at 9, jaw function is at 4, diet at 3, and disability at 3. Clinically, B294 has fairly good symmetry and balance. Occlusion looks fairly good and is basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship. Maximal incisal opening is 40 mm, but she could open to about 30 mm without significant pain. Excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction. To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the left TMJ, left temporalis, and moderate pain over the left retromandibular area and right temporalis. Interestingly, B294 states that she used to have clicking and popping in her left TMJ prior to the accident, but now the joint does not pop, but she feels as though it needs to pop.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch. Sinuses look relatively clear. Left condyle appears a little bit smaller in size than the right condyle. Waters view shows that sinuses appear clear. The septum appears straight. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic. There appears to be actually increased joint space. Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears larger than the left side. Joint space appears a little bit more narrow in this joint than the opposite side. On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she is basically a skeletal Class I and occlusion. She has some adenoid tissue up in the nasopharynx area. Oropharyngeal airway appears somewhat constricted with an AP dimension of about 3 to 4 mm. The decreased airway is surprising since she has actually good facial profile. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. The turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the left side. The septum looks reasonably straight. She may have some mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction.

Basic diagnoses for B294 would be as follows:
Post severe intracranial hemorrhage associated with an MVA.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and with deformation. Severe headaches. Severe TMJ pain. Myofascial pain. Somewhat relative AP mandibular hyperplasia. Nocturnal and daytime clenching and bruxism.
Left blepharospasm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Medications: Klonopin 1 mg-tablet, dispensing 30 tablets q.h.s., refill x5.
Surgery.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. Mandibular sagittal split osteotomy to maintain occlusion and create space within the TMJ to accommodate the articular disc. Application of arch bars.


