B295 
B295 is 24 years old and referred by Dr. __.
Patient Concerns

Crooked jaws
Difficulty closing the mouth and lips
Retruded lower jaw
Dry throat
Cold teeth because she can't close her lips together
Difficulty breathing through the nose
Snoring

Patient History
The only medications that B295 takes are birth control pills. She does get some earaches about three times during the past year, and she does have some hearing loss on the left side. No tinnitus or vertigo. No other joints bother her. She is not aware of any clenching or bruxism. She has no problems with headaches or TMJ pain. She does get some pain behind the mandible bilaterally at about a level of 3, and this is over around the posterior border of the mandible. B295 has no headaches and no TMJ pain. She gets pain behind the posterior border of the mandible at about a level of 3. She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 2, and disability at 5. She had orthodontics at the age of 12 years for about 1-1/2 years, and it involved the upper arch only, and she did have teeth extracted from both jaws.

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B295 has good facial balance in the middle and upper third face. She does have some asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 8.5 mm on the right side and about 7.5 mm on the left side. Maxillary dental midline is about 0.5 mm off to the right side as is the mandibular dental midline. Chin is about 4 mm off to the right side. Transverse cant in the occlusal plane has the right maxillary teeth about 2.5 mm above the left side. Inferior border of the mandible on the left side is probably about 4 or 5 mm lower than the right side at the gonial angle area. Upper lip supralabrale is about 2 mm posterior to subnasale. The maxilla is probably about 5 mm AP deficient. Chin appears to be about 15 to 20 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is somewhat short. Lower third face is elongated. She has significant lip incompetence of approximately 10 mm. B295 has a slight head postured forward neck position.

Intraorally, she is missing a lower incisor but has the rest of her teeth. Transverse width of the lower arch is extremely narrow and crowded. More lingual tipping of the teeth on the left side in the second bicuspid/first molar area than on the right side. In the upper arch, she is missing either the lateral incisors or the cuspids. Appears that she must have had the maxillary lateral incisors extracted and the cuspids moved into the lateral incisor position. Appears that they took out the left lateral incisor. She is missing her wisdom teeth on the right side, but on the left side both maxillary and mandibular third molars are erupted in. B295 has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship without any crossbites. Has an anterior deep bite of about 1.5 mm. Uvula, soft palate, and faucial pillars all look normal, and tissues look healthy. Actually, her occlusion is a Class I on the right side, Class III on the left side in the cuspid area where the first bicuspids are functioning as cuspids. On the right side, she is Class II molar. On the left side, she is Class I molar. Mandibular right cuspid is 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid in the lower arch, and in the upper arch the right cuspid is a millimeter posterior to the left cuspid. B295 has a very wide columella and very constricted nostrils. Intranasally, the septum looks fairly straight. Turbinates are moderately enlarged and are a little purplish in coloration indicative of allergic kind of response most likely.

Maximal incisal opening is about 43 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 7 mm and to the left 6 mm.
Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of maxillary and mandibular right third molars and one lower central incisor. In the upper arch, it appears that the lateral incisors are absent, and the cuspids have been moved into the lateral position and have been lateralized. Maxillary sinuses appear relatively clear. Right condyle appears somewhat broad anteroposteriorly. On the left side, the condylar head and neck appear slightly elongated compared to the right side. The third molars on the left side are both in position.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit flattened on the anterior head and a little flattened on the posterior head with a little bit of a hockey stick shape associated with it. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Appears to be reasonable joint space superiorly and anteriorly, although there does appear to be some decreased joint space posteriorly.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit better overall morphology. There appears to be good joint space. Articular eminence is a little bit steeper on this side. Cortical bone appears to be intact around the condyle.

On opening, there is some moderate translation of the condyles over the fossas.
Waters view shows that the sinuses are quite open both the maxillary, ethmoids, and frontal sinuses. The frontal sinuses are quite large and extend almost a half to two thirds across the roof of the orbit. The vertical asymmetry in the mandible is easily noted. The vertical difference at the angle of the mandible is probably about 3 or 4 mm on this view.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B295 has a high occlusal plane angle. She has vertical maxillary excess and may have also vertical mandibular excess. There are two different levels of the occlusal plane, although the inferior borders appear to line up reasonably well and appear better than they do clinically. Oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue measures about 6 mm and at the soft palate level measures about 8 mm.

Basic Diagnoses
Vertical maxillary excess and asymmetry
Mandibular hypoplasia and asymmetry
AP microgenia
Anterior vertical mandibular hyperplasia
Missing maxillary lateral incisors with the cuspids in the lateral position and missing mandibular left lateral incisor and right maxillary and mandibular third molars
High occlusal plane angle Lip incompetence
Hypertrophied turbinates
Wide columella creating narrow nostrils
Collapse of the nasal valves
Nasal airway obstruction Class I cuspid relationship on the right side but Class III relationship on the left side
Masticatory dysfunction

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch Align and level mandibular arch
Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly, decrease the occlusal plane angle, correct the asymmetry, and correct any transverse discrepancies that may be present
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible, rotate it to correct the asymmetries, and achieve a good occlusal interrelationship
HTR implant to anterior mandible
Bilateral inferior turbinectomies
Reconstruction of the columella
Consider removal of the left maxillary and mandibular third molars

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
MRI EvaluationLeft TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. The lateral pole of the condyle extends out perhaps just slightly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa. Decreased lateral joint space. Disc is displaced medially and anteriorly. It definitely seems to be medially displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. The lateral pole extends out to and perhaps just slightly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Decreased joint space out laterally. The disc is medially displaced and likely anteriorly displaced as well. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly a moderate amount.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows decreased joint space out laterally. Disc is not seen at the lateral three cuts of the joint. The disc begins to show up more medial. At the medial aspect, the disc appears to be in fairly good position. There is significant flattening at the superior head of the condyle. The articular eminence is moderately steep, but quite long in length. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle and disc and the disc is reduced in the open position.

Right TMJ sagittal view laterally, there is no disc tissue seen. The condylar head is significantly flattened with a little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is quite steep and slightly steeper than the opposite side. Out laterally, the disc is not seen compatible with medial disc displacement. This is seen towards the medial side of the joint and slightly anteriorly displaced there. On opening, the disc does reduce and there is moderately good translation and a little bit better than the opposite side. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc displaced medially and slightly anteriorly with reduction on opening.
Right TMJ arthritis and medial displacement as well as slight anterior displacement of the articular disc.

