B296 
B296 is 15 years old and referred by Dr. __.
Patient History

She has been diagnosed as having Graves' disease, gastric reflux disease, and exercise-induced asthma. B296 had her wisdom teeth removed on last week. B296's mother also had thyroid problems in the past and may be the etiology for B296's situation.

The primary concern B296 has is that her teeth and jaws don't fit together properly. B296 is aware that the lower jaw has been getting stronger for her over time.

She did wear braces back around the fourth grade, and her bite apparently was corrected for a while, but then the lower jaw has grown back out again.
Clinical Examination

In frontal view, B296 has fairly good facial symmetry and balance. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 0.5 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline. Nasal tip may be deviated just a touch to the left side 1 to 2 mm.

In profile view, B296 has some deficiency in upper lip projection with it being probably a 3 to 4-mm AP deficiency. Chin has fairly good balance. Chin-neckline is relatively normal in length. Cheeks and nasal structures appear to be in good balance.

Intraorally, B296 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars in place. Some lingual inclination of the posterior teeth particularly on the left side. Lower incisors appear to be somewhat lingually inclined. A little bit of crowding, lower anterior arch. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva, although it is fairly thin over the roots of the teeth.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has an increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch. She has almost a full Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and on the left side being at least 5 to 6 mm Class III. She has an anterior crossbite. Upper incisors might be slightly overangulated. Lower incisors are fairly lingually inclinated. She has anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites. B296 has a reverse deepbite relationship of 0.5 mm.

Intraorally, the oropharynx is clear and appears healthy. Intranasally, turbinate on the left side is moderately enlarged. She has a wide columella base but doesn't seem to create any significant airway problems for her. Right turbinate is relatively small today.

B296 did have previous orthodontics at the age of 8 to 9 where Class III elastics were used to correct her bite. This was done by Dr. __. She had her wisdom teeth removed on last week. This could affect her opening, and she did have some slight tenderness over the masseter muscles associated with the wisdom teeth removal. Today she could open to about 43 mm and about 5 mm in excursive movements.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows that the sinuses look relatively clear. Turbinates are relatively small. Four third molars are absent. She has some large earrings in. Condylar heads and necks look extended in length.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear, and she has a spring clip on the back of her head at about the area of her nose that is a hair-holding device. Septum is a little bit deviated, but airway looks reasonably good. Jaws look relatively symmetric.

Left TMJ joint shows a condyle that appears elongated through the head and neck area. Appears to be a decreased posterior joint space, and vertical joint space is a little bit thin as well. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. In fact, there doesn't appear to be much bony substance in the articular eminence area at all.

Right TMJ tomogram looks similar to the left side with what appears to be decreased vertical and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is very shallow with very minimal bone structure in the articular eminence area. Condylar head and neck appear long in both joints.

Opening views show some restricted translation, but, again, this could be due to the recent removal of the third molars.
Cephalometric radiograph was taken without the teeth completely together.

Tooth-size analysis shows that there is a Bolton's difference of about 2.5 mm between the upper and lower anterior teeth.
Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia
Mandibular prognathism
Maxillary AP hypoplasia
Maxillary transverse hypoplasia
Maxillary posterior vertical hypoplasia
Class III occlusion
High occlusal plane angle
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Overangulation of maxillary incisors
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 2.5 mm

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip maxillary incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about a millimeter of tooth structure to help compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy

Re-evaluate for disproportionate growth of the mandible
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, expand it, downgraft the posterior aspect, and upright the incisors
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a slight counterclockwise direction and correct the AP position

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B296 MRI Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition:	
Date of Reading: 

Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is wide and completely fills the transverse width of the fossa. Significant downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa with it coming back probably at least 5 to 6 mm below the superior portion of the fossa. Significantly decreased joint space out laterally as well as vertically. Appears to be discal tissue medial to the condyle indicative of medial disc displacement. Joint space is extremely narrow. Cortical bone appears to be intact.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears even slightly larger than the left condyle. Completely fills the fossa space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 4 to 5 mm. Could be some discal tissue medial to the condyle. Virtually no identifiable joint space. Cortical bone on the condyle is very thin.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is fairly broad anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is very shallow. Vertical joint space particularly out laterally is extremely narrow. Appears that there is discal tissue anterior to the condyle. Superior and posterior joint spaces are constricted. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle, and the disc does reduce into position. There is some mild anterior beaking.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with some flattening on the posterior head and some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is very shallow. Some fluid in the superior joint space. Disc is hard to identify particularly out laterally. In one area there appears to be no vertical joint space and decreased posterior superior and posterior joint space.

On opening, the disc does appear to reduce.
Impression:
Left TMJ large condyle and articular disc dislocation located anteromedial with reduction
Right TMJ anterior beaking and articular disc dislocation with reduction
Both discs appear salvageable



