B300 
B300 is 34 years old and was referred by Dr. ___.
Patient Concerns
Basic concerns that B300 has include the following:

TMJ pain.
TMJ clicking and popping.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Sinus problems.
Earaches.
Ringing in the ears.
Lightheadedness and dizziness.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Snoring.
Teeth don't fit together.
Missing teeth.
Loss of facial balance and aesthetics.
Hearing loss.

Patient History
Her TMJ problems began back around the age of 15 to 16 years of unknown etiology. She has been told it possibly could be related to the orthodontic treatment that she had. She had orthodontics from the ages of 14 to 19. She had her bicuspids extracted. Her teeth apparently were congenitally missing the maxillary second bicuspids, mandibular lateral incisors, and the mandibular third molars. The maxillary third molars were surgically removed. About the age of 19, her problems did get worse. She has had physical therapy in the past. She wore one when she was in college and through most of college. It would help some but not always. Then two years ago she went through splint therapy again, and this actually made her condition worse.

She does get earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo. The only other joints that really bother her are her knees. She has a lot of allergies to dust mites, trees, grasses, apples, wheat, potatoes, cats, nuts, etc. She has difficulties wearing cheap earrings and they tend to bother her ears quite a bit. She carries an Epipen with her because of her severe allergy to nuts. She does have extreme difficulties breathing through her nose and is predominantly a mouth breather. She is not sure whether or not she clenches her teeth at night when she sleeps.

Clinical Evaluation
In frontal view, B300 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 17 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. Maxillary dental midline may be about a millimeter off to the left. Mandibular dental midline is on the facial midline. Chin is fairly well aligned with the facial midline. Nasal tip is deviated 1 to 2 mm to the left.

In profile view, she has probably about 4 to 6 mm of AP maxillary deficiency. Chin is between 10 and 15 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is short, but chin-neck angle is fairly well defined. Upper lip is protrusive compared to the lower lip. Chin is fairly prominent relative to the projection of the lower lip. Nasal dorsum is somewhat prominent.

Intraorally, she is missing two lower incisors but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars present. The lower teeth appear to be in somewhat of a lingual inclination. Some minimal spacing between the cuspids and bicuspids. In the upper arch, she is missing a first bicuspid on the right side, the lateral incisor on the left side replaced with a pontic, and a first bicuspid. In centric relation, she occludes only on the second molars bilaterally with all other teeth completely out of occlusion. The A-P incisor relationship in that position and has an overjet of almost 8 mm. Oropharynx looks fairly clear. There appear to be some prominent glands running vertically along the uvula in parallel rows coming up into the soft palatal area some.

Intranasally, she has relatively large turbinates. Nasal septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side. She has some extreme constricture of the luminal valves particularly on the left side with a fairly prominent band of tissue. Holding the luminal valve area open did significantly improve her abilities to breathe through her nose. She says she feels that she has to force air up through her nose in order to breathe. The luminal valves in conjunction with the turbinates being enlarged probably contribute significantly to her nasal airway obstruction.

To palpation, she has severe pain over the masseter muscles and high moderate pain over the TMJs, shoulder areas, and moderate pain over the styloids, SCMs, posterior neck area, and milder pain over the temporalis area. Maximal incisal opening is 38 mm but without significant pain only about 20 mm. Excursive movements are about 7 mm in each direction, but her joints are painful in excursive movements with the right side being greater than the left side.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and maxillary second bicuspids and mandibular lateral incisors. Maxillary left lateral incisor likewise is also missing, and there is a 3-unit bridge to replace that tooth. Sinuses look relatively clear. Turbinate particularly on the left side looks quite enlarged. Left condyle looks a little bit flattened anteriorly, and right condyle has a little bit of unusual characteristics. Roots on the teeth are extremely short particularly some of the molar roots and the first molar particularly as well as the bicuspids and cuspids. In the upper arch, some of the teeth have relatively blunted roots as well, particularly the first molars.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some flattening in the anterior aspect and some significant anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Anterior joint space appears a little bit increased. Decreased vertical joint space although the directly posterior joint space looks relatively large.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some significant anterior beaking also present, although the crown of the condyle looks better. Fairly steep articular eminence but not quite as steep as the opposite side. Increased anterior joint space and decreased vertical joint space indicative of probably anteriorly displaced discs bilaterally. There is good translation in both joints with the left side translating a little bit further than the right side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear and the frontal sinuses are quite large. Septal spur present extending off towards the left side about half way up onto the septum may be causing some airway obstruction. Turbinates are fairly large, and left side appears for the most part to be obliterated, although on the right side, there is a crease that may indicate some airway opening.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Kirstin has a fairly significant Class II skeletal relationship. Chin in relatively prominent compared to the lower dental alveolus. Roots all appear for the most part very short. Lower incisors appear somewhat vertical in angulation. Oropharyngeal airway actually looks reasonably good with an airway space of about 6 mm from soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall and probably around 8 mm from the posterior aspect of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall. Mandibular height may be a little bit excessive compared to the vertical height of the maxilla and upper lip length. Turbinates appear to extend to the posterior aspect of the hard palate.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP and vertical macrogenia.
Class II occlusion.
Congenitally missing maxillary left and right second bicuspids, mandibular left and right lateral incisors, and mandibular third molars.
Missing maxillary left lateral incisor replaced by a pontic and a 3-unit bridge.
Over-contoured crowns on maxillary left central incisor and maxillary right lateral incisor.
Vertical inclination of the maxillary incisors.
Vertical inclination of mandibular incisors.
Some spacing in both arches between some of the teeth.
Extremely short roots on many of the teeth.
Occludes only on the second molars with all other teeth being out of occlusion.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Chronic sinus problems.
Earaches.
Tinnitus.
Vertigo.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Extreme constricture of the luminal valves bilaterally being worse on the left side.
Significant nasal airway obstruction.
Snoring.
External nasal deformity.
Left-sided nasal spur.
Left-sided septal deviation.

Recommended Treatment
Open MRI of left and right TMJs obtaining coronal and sagittal views
Preliminary dentistry
Remove left maxillary pontic.
Recontour overbuilt veneers to a more normal incisal edge dimension.

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up space in the second bicuspid area to equal the size of a second bicuspid. This will require distalization of the molars and slight increased inclination of the maxillary incisors. Place a pontic tooth in the left lateral incisor area to help maintain the spacing. Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower bicuspids removing at least 0.5 mm of tooth structure from each of those teeth and at least 0.5 mm of tooth structure from the first molars. Maximize posterior anchorage and move all the teeth posteriorly. Open up space between the cuspids and central incisors bilaterally to equal the size of a lateral incisor. Consider trying to distalize the second molars initially in order to pick up an additional millimeter or 2 of space to then subsequently distalize the first molars on through to and including the cuspids. This may help create the lateral incisor space required.
Carefully monitor roots since they are already quite short in all four quadrants.

Surgery
Correct TMJ problems by one of the following methods depending on results of the MRI:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, meniscectomies, debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advanced with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible 10 to 12 mm if total joint prostheses are not used.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and correct any transverse discrepancies that may be present.
Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
Reconstruct bilateral nasal luminal valves.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy for AP and horizontal reduction genioplasty.
External rhinoplasty.
Nasoseptoplasty.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
Restorative dentistry to include osseointegrated implants and crown reconstruction in areas of missing teeth

B300  MRI Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition:	
Date of Reading:	
MRIs are of poor quality because they were done in an open MRI because she gets claustrophobic in the regular MRI.

Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with a fairly good mediolateral width. Decreased joint space vertically. Appears there may be discal tissue medially. Joint space significantly decreased out laterally. Cortical bone appears to be intact but difficult to tell because of the poor quality.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears to have good mediolateral width. Appears to be decreased vertical joint space. Cortical bone on the surface of the condyle does not appear to be as nice as the opposite side, but again difficult to tell because of the poor quality. Appears there may be some discal tissue medially.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with some flattening on the anterior head. Some anterior beaking is present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced but there may still appear to have a good morphology. The disc is in a vertical orientation within the joint space, and there is decreased posterior joint space. It appears that the disc is acting as a wedge pushing the condyle posteriorly in the fossa. Increased anterior joint space. There is significantly decreased vertical joint space, and it is possible there could be perforation in this joint. There may be a small pseudocyst developing in the head of the condyle. There appears to be a small osteophytic projection from the top of the condyle and a little bit of sclerosis in the head on the condyle.

Open views show significantly restricted translation, and there does not appear to be reduction of the disc. The open views are extremely poor quality.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with some flattening of the anterior head. There is some anterior beaking present. There appears to be a small osteophyte developing on the superior aspect. Superior joint space in one area appears almost nonexistent indicative of perhaps a perforation. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Posterior spaces and superior joint spaces are significantly decreased, but anterior joint space is increased. Disc is in a vertical orientation but anteriorly displaced. Disc appears as though it still should be salvageable.

On opening, there appears to be reduction of the disc, although the disc itself does not appear to move very well, and there is still restriction of the transitory movements of the condyle.

Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation in a vertical direction, but the disc appears to be salvageable
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. Disc is salvageable

