B302 
B302 is 46 years old, referred by Dr. __. B302 is in good health with no major medical problems except he does have some allergies. He does not take any medications. Apparently no known allergies to medications. B302 has never had orthodontics. Apparently congenitally missing maxillary lateral incisors in the upper arch but appears to have the rest of his teeth. B302 is not sure when his jaw joint problems began and there is no known etiology. B302 has had not treatment for his jaw problems to date. He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. Other joints that bother him include his back where he has a herniated disc and he has been diagnosed as having scoliosis. He is not aware of clenching or bruxing. Headaches that he gets occur around two times per month at about a level of 3 but can reach a level of 7 to 8. TMJ pain is about a level of 2 with the right side worse than the left side. Average daily pain is about a 1, jaw function at 5, diet at 1, disability at 2.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Jaws popping and aching.
Difficulty breathing through the nose.
Difficulty swallowing.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Daytime tiredness that requires sometimes taking naps.
Snoring.
Sleep apnea concerns.

In frontal view, B302 has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 26 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is 0. Mandibular dental midline is 2 to 3 mm off to the left side. Maxilla is retruded probably about 6 mm or so. Chin is retruded probably 20 mm. Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is absent. Intraorally, B302 does have all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. Transverse narrowness in the lower arch is present. In the upper arch, he is missing lateral incisors. Transverse width of the arch is narrow. He has a curve of Wilson. Lower arch has a slight increased curve of Wilson. He has basically a Class I cuspid relationship. He has a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship. Slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being maybe 1 mm higher than the left side. He has oral dystopia with the right eye being 1 to 2 mm higher than the left eye. As B302 bites his teeth together, his mandible tends to shift an extra mm towards the right side. In centric relation, however, the mandibular midline and chin midline appear to be fairly close to the facial midline. Oropharyngeal airway demonstrates what appear to be healthy tissues. Uvula may be slightly elongated. Soft palate may be mildly elongated. Faucial pillars are relatively normal or perhaps slightly constricted. Intranasally, the anterior part of the septum is tipped off towards the left side but the mid part of the septum is off to the right side. Turbinates are moderate in size. The right side seems to have more airway obstruction compared to the left side and today he can breathe better through the left side although he says it does switch from side-to-side at times. Holding the left nostril open, he can breathe better. On the right side he cannot determine too much difference. Snoring is moderate. Daytime somnolence is moderate and sleep apnea syndrome is mild.

B302 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
B302 is missing maxillary lateral incisors and all four third molars. He has a little calcification around the root apex of the mandibular left cuspid. Both condyles appear arthritic. Sinuses appear reasonably clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size.

Waters view shows that the bony nasal septum is deviated and there may be a spur at the superior right side. The right turbinate appears moderately enlarged while the left one looks relatively normal in size. Sinuses look relatively clear with essentially no development of the frontal sinuses.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic with a pseudocyst in the top of it. Decreased superior and posterior joint spaces. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle that appears to have a pseudocyst in it. Decreased superior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is moderately good translation of the left joint and not quite as good of translation on the right side although on the the translation was quite good in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B302 has AP retrusion of the maxilla and mandible. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 3 mm at the soft palate level and about 5 to 6 mm at the base of the tongue. The tongue seems to fill a good portion of the oral cavity except for the very anterior aspect. He has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship. He has a moderately steep occlusal plane angle. To palpation he has some mild tenderness over the right masseter but no other pain around the head and neck area. On jaw function he does have a definite pop in the right TMJ probably 30 mm of opening and 20 mm of closing. The left joint seems to function relatively smoothly. The right joint also has some crepitus types of noises. Maximal incisal opening is 63 mm. Excursive movement is about 12 mm in each direction.

B302's wife states that she feels that B302's profile has become more retruded in the chin area than when they first met when B302 was 20. Tooth size analysis evaluating the maxillary cuspids and centrals with the lower anterior six teeth shows that there is a difference of about 15 mm of spacing that would need to be created to accommodate the maxillary incisors and coordinate that with the lower anterior six teeth. However, both the maxillary and mandibular cuspids and incisors are excessively wide anteroposteriorly which will create a little bit more discrepancy in tooth size analysis. In fact, using the bicuspid as the cuspid and the cuspids and lateral incisors in the upper arch would actually work out as a pretty good tooth size balance. Space would be required to almost equal the size of the maxillary cuspids. An option might be to open up spacing back in the bicuspid area instead of in the lateral incisor area. Using the first bicuspids as cuspids reveals a good match tooth-size-wise between the upper and lower anterior six teeth.

B302 
BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with significant degenerative changes.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Missing maxillary lateral incisors. Class II cuspid molar relationship.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway of about 3 mm (normal 11 mm.) Deviated nasal septum. Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction. TMJ pain. Headaches. Sleep apnea symptoms. Snoring. Daytime somnolence.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up bicuspid space between the bicuspids bilaterally. Align and level mandibular arch. Consider slenderizing the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward.
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance in a counterclockwise direction. Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen or buttocks.)
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Nasal septoplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Osseointegrated implants and crowns to place teeth in the bicuspid area.

B302 Evaluation Age: 46/M
Date of Birth: 
Date of : Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. A little bit of deformity in the superior aspect of the condyle right in the center. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. There appears to be discal tissue medial and anterior to the condyle. It is quite flat and I see no curvature.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears as though it has undergone some resorption and it appears smaller vertical in dimension. Decreased vertical joint space. There appears to be discal tissue medial and anterior to the condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is arthritic. There is anterior beaking and sclerosis on the anterosuperior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The disc is anteriorly displaced and significantly degenerated. It is actually sitting beneath the articular eminence. No particular inflammatory process seen in the joint. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and disc but the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have undergone condylar resorption. There is anterior beaking and sclerosis on the anterior aspect of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is quite deformed. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space at the articular eminence area by the disc. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc dislocated without reduction with significant degenerative changes.
B302 

