B303 
B303 is a 36-year-old female referred by Dr. __. There is no history on this patient except she has bilateral jaw pain. was taken and it shows that she has bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
:
Profile view shows that she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency. She has AP mandibular deficiency. Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not well defined. In frontal view, she appears to have fairly good left to right facial symmetry although her head is rotated slightly. She seems to have normal upper lip length and normal tooth-to-lip relationship. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth and all of her upper teeth back through the second molars. She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. She is very close to being a Class I cuspid on the right side but is a Class II end-on by probably about 2 to 3 mm on the left side. Upper lateral incisors look small in size. It appears as though she likely has a tooth size discrepancy. She has an anterior open bite of about 1 mm in the incisor areas and 2 mm in the lateral incisor areas. Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows all 4 third molars are absent. Sinuses appear clear. Right turbinate appears moderately enlarged. Septum appears fairly straight. Condyles appear a little bit flattened anteriorly particularly on the right side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the patient has some slight AP maxillary deficiency and some slight AP mandibular deficiency but an anterior open bite. Oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal. Anterior open bite is present in the occlusion.

BASIC DIAGNOSIS: Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Apertognathia.
Maxillary hypoplasia.
Mandibular hypoplasia.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Nasal airway obstruction??
Tooth size discrepancy.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies if necessary. Open 1 mm of space between the upper laterals and cuspids to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward and to help adjust for tooth size discrepancy.
B303 

Evaluate for nasal airway obstruction.
Use coordinated archwires to try to narrow the lower arch slightly and expand the upper arch slightly in the bicuspid molar areas. Surgery depending on orthodontic setup, either the maxillary or mandibular osteotomies may be eliminated, so only one jaw surgery may be required.)
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and help close the open bite.

Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Surgical correction of intranasal airway obstruction that may be present. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B303  Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation:
Coronal views were unreadable.
Left sagittal view shows a condyle with a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it. A little bit of anterior beaking but relatively minor. Some flattening on the anterior head. There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced and probably does not have much of a click as it appears it would be in early reduction. Over medial, it appears the disc may be in a little bit better position.

Right TMJ shows there appears to be a little bit more arthritis in this joint. A little bit of sclerosis in the anterior aspect of the condyle. The disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting more beneath the articular eminence. Out laterally, the disc is not evident indicative of perhaps medial displacement. There appears to be a little superior peaking in the condyle in the mid part.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that seems to exhibit decreased vertical joint space. It appears there is discal tissue displaced laterally. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with some arthritic changes. Significantly decreased joint space with possible bone-on-bone contact. Difficult to tell discal position.

Left TMJ opening shows good translation of the condyle and the disc appears to be reduced into good position although the disc is quite thick.
IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.

