B306 
B306 is 17 years old and referred by Dr.__.
Patient History
B306 has had her tonsils removed. Otherwise B306 is in good health with no major medical problems. B306 's jaw problems began she thinks about two years ago of unknown etiology. She has had no treatment for it except she got braces placed a week ago. She is on no medications. No problem with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. May have some allergy to pollen. No known problems with jewelry. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. She rates her headaches that she may get once every two weeks or so at about a level of 3. They probably occur in the temporal area. No TMJ pain. She rates her average discomfort in the head and neck area on a daily basis at about a level of 3. Rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 1, and disability at 3.

Patient Concerns
Bite is not comfortable
Bite and jaws are shifting
Difficulties eating and chewing
Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B306 has good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 0.5 mm to the left Chin may be about 2 or 3 mm to the left. Actually maxillary midline is a little bit to the left as well maybe 0.5 mm.

In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Chin-neckline is long. Chin appears a little bit prominent. Chin-neck angle is well-defined. Chin appears to be maybe about 3 to 4 mm strong. She has a slightly obtuse nasolabial angle.

Intraorally, B306 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She doesn't have her lower braces on yet. Lingual inclination of the lower incisors. They are almost trapped behind the cuspids. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has appliances on all the upper teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class III occlusion on the right side by probably 5to 6 mm. On the left side, she is about 2 mm Class III. Transversely, she has a cant in the maxillary and mandibular occlusal planes with the right side being probably almost 2 mm lower than the left side. She has a tendency toward a crossbite on the left side. She has a slight anterior open bite of about a millimeter. Once the lower teeth are aligned and leveled properly, she will have an anterior crossbite as well. Intraorally, oropharynx appears normal and healthy.

Intranasally, the left turbinate is slightly enlarged, and the right one is relatively normal. There still appears to be adequate airway.
Maximum incisal opening is 65 mm. Excursive movement to the right was 9 mm and to the left 8 mm. No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. On opening, she had some noise in the left joint, and somewhere around 35 mm she had a little bit of a glitch or click that was fairly consistent. Seems to be a rub in the joint indicative of perhaps a decreased lateral joint space. Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses appear clear and healthy. Turbinates appear moderate in size with the left one being larger than the right one vertically. Missing all four third molars, but they were previously removed. The rest of the teeth are present and appear healthy.

Right condylar head and neck appear longer in length on the left side, and the head of the condyle appears slightly larger on the right side as compared to the left side. Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa with decreased posterior joint space. Anterior part of the condyle appears a little bit flattened. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Could be a little bit of anterior beaking present but difficult to tell.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Joint space looks very good vertically, posteriorly, and anteriorly. Articular eminence is moderate steep. Length of the condylar head and neck appear longer on the right side as compared to the left side.

On opening, there is very good translation of the left TMJ and moderately good translation of the right TMJ.
Waters view shows the sinuses all appear clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size, and there appears to be adequate airway bilaterally.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class III relationship, but the incisors are at least in normal AP relationship. Tongue appears fairly large. There is a decreased posterior airway space at the base of the tongue measuring about 3.5 mm and at the soft palate measures about 3.5 to 4 mm. Pogonion appears a little bit prominent compared to the lower teeth. Occlusal plane could be a little bit low in angulation. Clinically, the tongue does appear a little bit large. She can even touch the tip of her nose with her tongue.

Basic Diagnoses
Mandibular deviated prognathism (off to the left)
Maxillary AP deficiency
Rule out bilateral condylar hyperplasia (right side worse than the left)
Class III end-on occlusion being worse on the right side as compared to the left
Developing crossbite on the left side
Progressive worsening occlusion Anterior open bite
Lingual inclination of lower incisors
Crowding, lower anteriors
Small maxillary lateral incisors
Significant tooth-size discrepancy with a probable 's difference of around 3 mm (teeth on the lower model were somewhat warped and provided inaccurate dimensions to do an appropriate tooth-size analysis)
Left TMJ articular disc dislocation Occasional headaches
Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
Reverse curve of occlusion, lower arch
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch. Consider opening about a millimeter of space around each upper lateral incisor to compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch. Try to extrude lower incisors slightly to eliminate the slight reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch

MRI of left and right TMJ
Re-evaluate growth to determine if condylar hyperplasia is present
Surgery
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Consider possible high condylectomies if active condylar hyperplasia is confirmed with serial tomograms and cephalograms
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back on the facial midline and move it posteriorly
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and level it transversely

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B306  EVALUATION Age: 19/F
Date of Birth:
Date of : Date of Interpretation:
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. There is a little sclerosis on the cortical bone of the condyle but not too bad. A little thinning of the cortical bone at a very coronal part of the condyle. Articular disc appears to be in position though perhaps just slightly forward. Posterior joint space may be decreased slightly at the lateral aspect of the joint. On opening, there is very good translation of the condyle and the articular disc and disc remains in position. Left TMJ sagittal view shows that the articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. There appears to be a little bit of fluid around the disc in both compartments. The disc is anteriorly displaced. There appears to be some compressed tissue up in the depth of the fossa overlying the top of the condyle. There appears to be decreased superior joint space particularly at the medial side and decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint. On opening there is good translation of the condyle with reduction in the disc and good translation in the disc as well.

Left TMJ coronal view, only T2 images were sent. The condyle has good mediolateral width. The condyle appears to extend slightly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. There may be just a slight osteophytic development out laterally. It is very difficult to determine any discal position or even to identify discal tissue. In some areas there appears to be a little bit of sclerosis of the cortical bone and in other areas there appears to be a very thin cortical bone across the top of the condyle and out laterally the condyle appears quite narrow anteroposteriorly.

Right TMJ coronal view T2 images only show a condyle with good mediolateral width. The condyle appears to extend a little bit beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Difficult to tell joint spaces and disc position on these T2 films.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. Right TMJ in fairly good position with some minimal arthritic changes of the condylar head.

B306  MRI Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. Significant downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa of about 4 to 5 mm. Joint space is decreased particularly at the lateral joint area. It appears that the disc is medial and anteriorly displaced on this side. Cortical bone appears to be intact.

Right TMJ coronary view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. Cortex appears to be intact. Vertical joint space appears a little bit decreased particularly at the lateral aspect. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly only about 2 to 3 mm. Discs may be medially displaced to a certain degree. It appears the discs may also be anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior aspect but not too significant. Articular eminence is moderately steep. At the lateral aspect of the joint the disc appears to be anteriorly displaced being anterior to the head of the condyle. More medially the disc appears to be in better position. Laterally, the vertical joint space is decreased. On opening, there is early reduction with good translation of the condyle and disc with the disc reducing on opening. A little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces but not too significant. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The disc appears to be in position though at the very lateral aspect of the joint the disc is difficult to see. However, in the rest of the joint the disc appears to be in normal position. Very minimal fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle disc.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ anteriorly displaced articular disc at the lateral aspect of the joint with early reduction. Right TMJ with normal position of the articular disc.



