B307 
B307 is 16 years old and is referred by Dr. __. B307 began her orthodontic treatment stage 1 7 to 8 years ago where she had a maxillary Schwarz appliance placed. Then she apparently had stage 2 which was a Bionator rapid palatal expander. Stage 3 was a bite plane and lip bumper. Then stage 4 began in 5 years ago and ended 2 years ago with fixed appliances. She currently wears retainers. She had some primary teeth removed and also had a gingivectomy performed in 2 years ago.

PRIMARY CONCERNS: Clicking, popping and occasional locking in the jaws.
Recessive jawline.
Appearance of long face.
TMJ pain and discomfort.
The only medication that B307 currently takes is SMZ/ 800-160 b.i.d. for acne.

To the best of B307 's knowledge, her TMJ problems began when she was about 12 years old when her jaws began to click and pop. She would occasionally have some locking. Etiology is unknown. B307 gets headaches about one time per week at about a level of 2 and occurs probably in the frontal and maybe the temple areas. She rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 4, diet at 0 and disability at 1. She has had a little bit of a problem with her shoulders in playing certain sports such as volleyball. Without playing this sport, her joints are fine. She is aware of clenching at nighttime.

In frontal view, B307 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. A little asymmetry in the lower third. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm. Maxillary dental midline appears to be off to the left side about 1 mm as does the mandibular dental midline. The chin appears to be fairly well aligned. The nasal tip may be 1 to 2 mm off towards to right side. In profile view, B307 has a C-shape curve to the upper lip. Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably about 3 to 4 mm. Chin appears to be retruded by probably 12 to 15 mm. Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined. Intraorally, B307 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled. She has fairly good attached gingiva although the labial frenulum is attached fairly high. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has an end-on Class II occlusion in the cuspid area by probably a couple of mm. She has an overjet of 2 mm. She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm. Oropharyngeal areas look good with the uvula and soft palate appearing normal and the faucial pillars just milder constricted. B307 tends to sleep with her mouth open. She herself is not particularly aware of any nasal airway problems. She does have some mild snoring and perhaps some mild to moderate daytime sleepiness although she does not have time to take a nap although she would like to. Intranasally, the turbinates appear to be maybe just mildly enlarged but not too significant. Anteriorly there appears to be open airway on both sides. The columella is somewhat wide and the nostrils are narrow. Lumina valve may be slightly constricted. TMJ joints seem to function relatively smoothly. B307 

To palpation, she has some very mild tenderness over her shoulders but no other tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly on opening. On excursive movements she die have some glitches that did occur. Maximal incisal opening is 56 mm. Excursive movement to the left is 11 mm and to the right 8 mm. There is a transverse cant to the occlusal plane with the right side being about 1.5 mm higher than the left side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the absence of the lower third molars but the presence at least the crown formation of the maxillary third molars x2. Sinuses appear relatively clear but difficult to tell. Condyles appear small in size.

Waters view shows that there is a little curvature to the bony nasal septum. Turbinates appear moderate in size with the right one appearing a little bit more obstructed than the left side. Sinuses are fairly small in transverse dimension but appear relatively clear. Frontal sinus is quite large.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have undergone some changes. There appears to be a little bit of anterior beaking. Joint space is actually reasonably good. Articular eminence is moderately steep. It appears there may be a little pseudocyst in the condylar head.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present. Joint space appears a little bit more decreased on this side compared to the opposite side. Pseudocyst is present in the condylar head. On opening, there is good translation with the condyles coming anterior to the articular eminences.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B307 has retrusion in the maxilla and mandible. She has a high occlusal plane angle. She has double images of the occlusal plane as well as the inferior border of the mandible. Oropharyngeal airway appears somewhat decreased with the dimension at the soft palate level of about 4 to 5 mm and at the base of the tongue. Dimension appears to move closer to about 8 or 9 mm. Appears to be just a slight Class II occlusal relationship and a Class II skeletal relationship. Nasal dorsum appears prominent. Upper lip supralabrale appears to be about 3 mm posterior to subnasale. Tooth size analysis reveals no significant tooth size discrepancy.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption with articular disc dislocations with significant degeneration. Vertical maxillary excess.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion. High occlusal plane angulation. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
B307  Page 3

Impacted maxillary third molars x2.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Predominately a mouth breather. Snoring. Daytime somnolence. TMJ pain. Headaches.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Place appliances on maxillary teeth back through the second molars.
Place appliances on the mandibular arch back through the second molars. Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly, advance it and decrease the occlusal plane angle. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomy to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Partial turbinectomies. Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy.
Surgical removal of impacted maxillary third molars x2.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B307  Evaluation DOB:
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. Top appears a little bit unusual. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 mm. There appears to be decreased lateral joint space. It appears there is discal tissue anterior to the condyle. There may be some discal tissue medial as well. Cortical bone appears to be intact.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit small in size and appears to have undergone some resorption with changes in the top of the condyle. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. Decreased lateral joint space. There appears to be discal tissue anterior to the condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of an unusual shape. It has flattening in the posterosuperior aspect in the condyle and some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is quite short anteroposteriorly and is significantly deformed. It appears to be significant erosion in the head of the condyle about midway across. Also, it looks somewhat eroded towards the medial aspect of the joint. Significant bony changes in the head of the condyle and in the fossa as well on some of the views. It appears there has been bone deposition at the posterior head of the condyle. On the T1 films, the joint space looks pretty good vertically and posteriorly. It is in the second and third frame of the T2 films and that seems to show decreased joint space. On opening, it appears the condyle translates moderately well but it does appear that the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have some erosion or loss of volume towards the lateral aspect of the joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is sitting beneath the articular eminence and it is extremely short anteroposteriorly. Disc does appear degenerated. A little bit easier identifiable on this side, however, than the opposite side. On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle. It appears that the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction.

