B309 
B309 is 17 years old. She gets headaches about one time per week and there have been other months where she gets them a lot more frequently but when she gets them they occur at about a level of 8 in the temple area and in the frontal area where it reflects as being behind the eyes. She rates her TMJ pain at 0, unless the joints are palpated. On an average day without headaches, she has no pain. With headaches she has a pain level of 8. She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 2, disability at 0. She gets frequent earaches and occasional tinnitus but no vertigo or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Bite has changed and shifted.
Headaches.
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints. Increasing difficulties in chewing.
She has no airway concerns or problems and no sleep apnea symptoms.

In frontal view, B309 has fairly good facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary, mandibular and chin midlines are all fairly well aligned with each other. In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is slightly posterior to subnasale. Chin appears retruded by probably 6 to 8 mm. She has a slight obtuse nasal labial angle. Upper lip may be retruded at the supralabrale by maybe 2 to 3 mm. Chin-neck angle is somewhat short and chin-neck angle is moderately defined. Intraorally, she has all her mandibular teeth back through the second molars. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch. She has some turbos. In the upper arch she has all her teeth back through the second molars. She has Class II occlusion bilaterally slightly greater on the right side by maybe 1 mm. She is Class II by probably 5 to 6 mm. She has an anterior open bite of about 1 mm and an overjet of probably about 4 to 5 mm. B309 in centric relation appears to occlude only on the first and second molars bilaterally. She also has bilateral posterior crossbites in the molar areas. Oropharyngeal tissues look good. Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all look normal. Tonsils appear normal. Intranasally, the septum looks relatively normal. Turbinates appear mildly enlarged but B309 reports no nasal airway obstructive problems. She breaths through her nose when she sleeps at night. To palpation, she has moderate tenderness over the masseter muscles, shoulders and milder tenderness over the posterior neck, temporalis and left . On opening, she has clicks in both joints on the left side about 30 mm, right side about 35 mm and closing click about 25 mm. She does have a little bit of crepitus in the right joint as she opens. Maximal incisal opening is 51 mm. Excursive movements are about 9 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars. There are 3 x 3 retainers in both the upper and lower anterior arches. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Difficult to evaluate the nasal airway. Condyles appear arthritic and with the right side appearing significantly smaller in size than the left side which also appears to be somewhat obliterated and resorbed.

B309 
Waters view shows the nasal septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side. Turbinates appear moderate in size but the left one seems seemingly larger than the right side causing some obstruction. Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic and small in size. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle appears to be sitting upwards and somewhat posterior in the fossa. The condyle appears narrow anteroposteriorly.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also appears to have undergone resorption in vertical height. It is a little bit better anteroposteriorly compared to the opposite side. Joint space is almost excessive vertically. Articular eminence is relatively moderate in slope and appearance. On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. The smallness of the right joint is really apparent.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B309 has a Class II skeletal relationship and a high occlusal plane angle with an anterior open bite. She is Class II skeletally and occlusally. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue. As mentioned before, she does not have any airway symptoms currently.

B309 has written an outlined history of events of what she has been through so far. The onset of her problems began 2 years ago to everyone's best knowledge. She has a lateral cephalometric radiograph taken when her braces were removed and it showed that she had a good Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship. Panorex taken around the same time showed it to be she was starting to develop some obvious bony changes on the right side and maybe some onset of problems on the left side but nothing real dramatic. She had her orthodontics from approximately 2 to 3 years ago. She changed dentists last yearand the new dentist noted the change in her bite. She was referred to Dr. __, a TMJ specialist, and he suggested changing retainers which were done. She also has been to see a surgeon by the name of Dr. __. She has been to see a rheumatologist who found no evidence of any active rheumatoid or connective tissue type of disease processes. B309 has no other joint involvement. She has no problems with rashes or other skin problems. B309's aunt had Still's disease and died at the age of 42.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption versus connective tissue autoimmune disease versus reactive arthritis.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxilla deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Anterior open bite.
Class II occlusion.
Occluding only on the first and second molars bilaterally with all other teeth out of occlusion.
B309 

Impacted third molars x4. Headaches. Myofascial pain. Bilateral posterior crossbites. High occlusal plane angle.
RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Treatment option 1:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, downgraft it posteriorly and expand. Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Treatment option 2: Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.
CT scan TMJ Concepts protocol.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, downgraft and expand the maxilla.
Bilateral coronoidectomies. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Treatment option 3:
Surgery stage 1.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
2. Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Reevaluate the TMJs to be sure that they are stable.

B309 
Treatment option 4:
Surgery stage 2.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, downgraft and expand.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Consider TMJ reconstruction if TMJs do not hold up well.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B309 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic and it appears there has been loss of volume. It appears towards the medial aspect of the joint the disc may be anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ shows a condyle sticking up off the condylar head. Joint space looks relatively normal but the discal tissue appears to be anteriorly displaced. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly maybe 3 to 4 mm. There appears to be some degenerative changes in the fossa moreso on this side than observed on the opposite side.

Left TMJ sagittal views a condyle that appears quite arthritic and there is loss of vertical volume. There appears to be some erosion in the posterior head of the condyle. Articular eminence has a relatively normal inclination but it appears a little bit long. Decreased posterior joint space but superior joint space appears normal. The disc is anteriorly displaced and it appears significantly degenerative. It appears very short anteroposteriorly. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint it is difficult to identify the disc which means it may be medially displaced as well as anteriorly. There is some significant fluid sitting beneath the articular eminence or some kind of inflammatory process there between the disc and the fossa eminence. On some views, the discs possibly could be salvageable. There is a fair amount of arthritic changes in the condyle more than what I would expect to see with AICR condition. On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyle but the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant resorption. The condyle appears very narrow anteroposteriorly. It appears smaller in size than the opposite side. Some anterior beaking is present. Decreased posterior joint space. There is an osteophyte sticking up in the middle of the condyle extending superiorly causing decreased space. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly dislocated and is actually seen best in the mid part of the condyle and it is obvious in the anterior aspect of the joint. This disc does appear as though it could be salvageable. It appears there could be a little degeneration on the articular eminence itself. On opening, there is greater restriction in translation on this side as compared to the opposite side. The disc though it does translate forward some remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis with significant condylar resorption and articular disc dislocations with degeneration, deformation and non-reducing.
Condition could be compatible with AICR and it appears that the disc may be salvageable.

