B314 
B314 is 12 years old. Birthday is __.
Patient Concerns
Primary concern that B314 and her family has is that she has a little bit of a gummy smile.

Clinical Evaluation
In frontal view, B314 has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is 6 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline.

In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency at the subnasale. Upper lip is a little bit protrusive. Lower third face appears a little bit long. There is some lip incompetence of about 7 or 8 mm. Chin-neckline is a little bit short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined. Lower lip is a little bit protrusive compared to the chin. Chin may be retruded approximately 10 mm or so.

Intraorally, she has her lower cuspids blocked out. She has a 6 x 6 anterior retainer to maintain the position of the lower incisors. She has some malrotations of the bicuspids bilaterally. Right first bicuspid is coming in a little bit. Upper left cuspid is still unerupted and lack of probably 3 to 4 mm of space on the left side for the cuspid. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She is fairly close to a Class I cuspid relationship and slightly Class II on the right side and on the left side a little bit Class II as well. She has about a 4-mm anterior overbite relationship. She has probably about a 2-mm overjet relationship.

She does have some problems breathing through her nose, and when she sleeps, she particularly breathes through her mouth. Oropharnyx looks clear. She does have tonsils present with the left one being a little bit larger than the right one. No evidence of inflammation. Faucial pillars are somewhat posteriorly positioned but no too significantly. Uvula looks relatively normal.

Intranasally, the turbinates are of moderate size but do not look too excessive. There appears to be a little bit better airway at least anteriorly on the left side as compared to the right side. Septum appears relatively straight. Tonsils may be a little bit constricted due to wide width of the lateral walls of the nose and to moderately wide columella.

TMJs function smoothly, and there are no symptoms. She has no myofascial tenderness around the head and neck area. Incisal opening is 54 mm. Excursive movements are 6 mm in each direction.

There is a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of almost 2.5 mm in the lower anterior arch, and each of the lower bicuspids is at least 0.5 mm larger than its counterpart in the upper arch.

Radiographic Evaluation
Radiographic evaluation demonstrates the presence of four wisdom teeth all developing but without adequate room for eruption. Left mandibular cuspid appears about ready to erupt in, although there is very narrow space to accommodate it. Right side is erupting in. In the upper arch, all the teeth are erupted in. Sinuses look relatively clear. Nasal airway looks good. Could be a little bit of flattening on the condyles but not too significant.

Right TMJ tomogram appears to have fairly good morphology with maybe a little bit of anterior beaking. As best I can tell, the joint space may be a little bit narrow but appears to be adequate. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with good morphology and good joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep.
Opening shows good translation of both TMJs. Condyles both appear to have fairly good form in the open view.

Waters view shows that sinuses appear relatively clear. Septum appears to be relatively straight with just a few little kinks in it. Turbinates are moderately enlarged.

Cephalometrically, she shows some anterior vertical maxillary excess. Moderately high occlusal plane angle. Chin appears more retruded. Appears to have some adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx area, but the mass is not too large and probably is resorbing as expected. Turbinate seems to end close to the posterior border of the hard palate. Oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal with an oropharyngeal dimension of about 8 mm at the base of the tongue.

Basic Diagnoses
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia.
Slight anterior vertical mandibular excess.
Slight Class II cuspid relationship (1 to 2 mm).
Anterior deep bite.
Mandibular left cuspid and maxillary left cuspid are blocked out of the arch.
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars.
Increased occlusal plane angle of 15 degrees (normal 8 degrees).
Constricture of nostrils.
Wide columella base.
Moderately hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction resulting in primarily mouth breathing particularly at night when sleeping.

Recommended Treatment
Surgery, Stage 1
Surgical removal of maxillary and mandibular third molars, if it is necessary to distalize posterior occlusionfrom an orthodontic perspective. If not, then third molars can be removed at the same time as the orthognathic surgery.

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth including the incisors and mesial of the cuspids removing approximately 2 to 2.5 mm of tooth structure. Also, strip the lower first and second bicuspids removing 0.5 mm of tooth structure from each tooth. Maximize posterior anchorage and retract the bicuspids. This treatment should minimize forward tipping of the incisors.

Surgery, Stage 2
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly and upright the anterior segment as well as decrease the occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
AP augmentation vertical reduction genioplasty.
Removal of third molars if they have not previously been removed.
Partial inferior turbinectomies.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B314 
Patient presents for further consultation. She is now 14-1/2 years old. She has about 5 mm of upper tooth-to-lip relationship. In profile, she is a little bit deficient in projection at subnasale, and chin is about 10 mm AP deficient. She is probably 3 to 4 mm AP deficient in subnasale. Upper incisors are somewhat overangulated. She has some airway concerns and does a lot of sniffing and does state that she gets obstructed a lot. She does have relatively narrow nostrils. She doesn't have any trouble with headaches, TMJ pain, clicking or popping in her joints, etc.

Orthodontically, her treatment is progressing fairly well. However, she has a reverse curve of Wilson involving the first molars. The second molars are not tied into the arch wire as of yet.

At this time, her diagnoses are as follows:
Vertical maxillary excess
AP mandibular deficiency
AP microgenia
High occlusal plane angle
Bony impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars (x 4) Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction
Reverse curve of Wilson, mandibular first molars
Bilateral posterior crossbites in the first molar area only
Overangulation of maxillary incisors

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Tie into the second molars and align them
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Tie into the second molars. Try to tip the first molars mesially to eliminate the reverse curve of Wilson

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior maxilla superiorly approximately 3 mm, posterior aspect inferiorly 1 mm, and upright the central incisors to decrease the overangulation
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction approximately 6 mm
AP augmentation genioplasty of 4 mm with slight vertical decrease in height of 2 mm
Partial turbinectomies Removal of four bony impacted third molars

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
I feel this would get B314 the best possible functional and aesthetic result.
B314 

The patient presents for reevaluation. B314 is now 15-1/2 years old. Her birthdate is __.
PRIMARY CONCERNS
Gummy smile.
Deficient lower jaw.

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo. No other joints bother her. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. She is a mouth breather. There are no problems with headaches or TMJ pain. No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. Occlusion is a good Class I and she has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch. She has lip incompetence of probably about 6 mm. In profile view, she appears to have some deficiency in projection adjacent to point A of about 2 to 3 mm. Upper lip supralabrale may be a little bit prominent by 1 to 2 mm. The chin is deficient by probably around 6 mm. The lower third face appears somewhat elongated. Dental midline and chin midline all appear to be fairly well aligned with each other. To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area. She has an incisal opening of 59 mm with excursive movement to right 7 mm and to the left 8 mm. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly except on excursive movement, she appeared to have some popping noises in the left joint.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of all 4 third molars that are impacted. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior teeth. A little bit of flattening on the anterior head of the left condyle.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has reasonable morphology. Articular eminence is moderately steep and somewhat elongated. There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space on this side indicative of possible anterior or medial displacement of the articular disc.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of sclerosis on the anterior aspect of the head. Joint space appears better balance. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is good translation on both condyles with the condyles coming anterior to the articular eminences.

Waters view shows that she has a little cloudiness in the left sinus compared to the right side. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged particularly on the right side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has overangulation of the maxillary and mandibular incisors. Occlusal plane is moderately high. There is some decreased oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue with a dimension of about 5 to 6 mm. The soft palate level dimension is about 6 mm. There is increased thickness of the soft tissue and of the pogonion area being 2 to 3 mm thicker than the upper lip thickness and lower lip thickness.

B314 
TREATMENT OPTION #1 (extractions)
MRI of left and right TMJ. Presurgical orthodontics.
Extract maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids. Align and level maxillary arch closing the extraction spaces. Align and level mandibular arch closing the extraction spaces. 3.	Surgery.
Maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly and level the occlusal plane angle. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance in a counterclockwise direction.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4. Bilateral turbinectomies. Articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors if MRI confirms that the discs are displaced.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

TREATMENT OPTION #2 (non-extraction)
MRI of left and right TMJ. Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly, upright the incisors and decrease occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Augmentation genioplasty. Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Bilateral turbinectomies. Articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors if MRI confirms that the discs are displaced. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I discussed these treatment options with Dr. __ and with B314. I will consult with an orthodontist in reference to the treatment options and see what they may offer. It is possible with performing the extractions that we may be able to do just an autorotation of the mandible instead of doing the osteotomies and then do a small chin augmentation. I will see what the orthodontist has to say.

B314 
Her upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 4 mm. In profile, she has some AP weakness in the subnasal area. Chin is weak AP-wise. She has an elevated occlusal plane angle. She has no problems with headaches, TMJ problems. Joints function smoothly. She has a normal incisal opening and excursive movements. No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. Transversely the occlusal plane is level. She does have some hypertrophied turbinates. I presented two treatment options for them.

TREATMENT OPTION 1.
Upright anterior maxillary 4 incisors with osteotomies.
Augmentation genioplasty.
Removal of impacted third molars.
This treatment plan could increase in the amount of tooth-to-lip relationship exposed, although it will fill-out the subnasal area and buildup the chin.

TREATMENT OPTION 2.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the entire maxilla upwards as well as upright the 4 incisors. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible upwards and in a slightly counterclockwise direction. Augmentation genioplasty. Removal of impacted wisdom teeth x4.
Partial reduction turbinectomies.

This would get probably the best overall esthetic result although it is definitely more surgery to go through. This was explained to the family. Reviewed all the risks and complications for the surgical procedures. The family will decide which approach they want to pursue.


B314 MRI EVALUATE 
DOB: 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good width. Difficult to identify discal tissue on this view. Joint space appears to be relatively normal.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. The joint space appears to be somewhat decreased. There may be some discal tissue medially but difficult to tell.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is fairly steep. The disc appears to be in position. Joint space appears fairly well balanced. A little bit of flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. There is a slight bit of fluid in the superior joint space but not significant. On opening, there is good translation of both the condyle and the disc.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with a little bit of flattening on the superior head. Articular eminence is steep on this side but is long. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint the posterior joint space appears decreased. Appears it might be just slightly anteriorly displaced. In the opening sequencing, the disc space is reduced, but on opening the disc is in a reduced position and looks relatively normal. In the closed view the disc it not seen. The disc may be medially displaced in the closed view and reduces upon opening.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ in relatively normal position of the articular disc. Right TMJ with some mild arthritic changes and probable medial displacement of the articular disc with reduction.


