B319 
B319 is almost 13 years old. Her birthday is . She was referred by Dr. __.
Patient History
She appears to be in good health. She takes Zyrtec-D 1 tablet b.i.d. She takes multivitamins and sodium chloride 0.5 mg 1 tablet every day. She also takes Proventil p.r.n. and uses it mainly when she has to run. She has some allergy problems to pollens, grass, cotton, mold, and just to shellfish. Not aware of any problems wearing jewelry. She has nasal congestion that she has been told is related to enlarged inferior turbinates. It has been recommended that she have radiofrequency treatment to reduce the side of the turbinates. She does have exercise-induced asthma, and this has been getting worse for her over the last couple of years. She began orthodontic treatment at the age of 10 and has had bioblock treatment that was just recently finished earlier this year. She had some maxillary expansion initially and then wore the bioblock for about two years approximately. She gets periodic headaches mainly in the temporal area that can escalate to about a level of 8, but these are periodic episodes. In using the bioblock, she is on a regimen where she is to clench her teeth a lot which is necessary to achieve the proper results with the bioblock technique. She has developed some mild masseter hypoplasia as a result of that. She rates her TMJ pain at 0, pain around the head and neck area on an average day at 0, jaw function at 0, diet at 1, and disability at 0.

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B319 has good facial symmetry and balance. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0. Maxillary and mandibular dental midline are fairly coincident with each other, all just a slightly to the left about 1 mm.

In profile view, she has an acute nasolabial angle. Upper lip supralabrale is probably about 5 mm anterior to subnasale. Chin actually has fairly good AP projection with just some very minor deficiency maybe about 3 mm but not too significant. Chin-neck is very well-defined, and chin-neck angle is well-defined. In centric relation, chin may be just slightly AP deficient by maybe 4 to 5 mm.

Intraorally, first molars are erupted in, but second molars are beginning to come in. Second bicuspids are erupting in as well. Some slight spacing around the bicuspid area. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth with a little less at the centrals.

In the upper arch, she has her teeth erupted but through the first molars. Second molars aren't quite in yet. She has a lot of spacing in the upper arch around the cuspids and first bicuspids and particularly between the cuspids and lateral incisors where she has probably about 4 mm of space on the left side and probably 6 to 7 mm of space on the right side. Has basically a Class I cuspid relationship bilaterally. She has a significant overjet of probably at least 3 mm and 0.5 overbite relationship. In centric relationship, her mandibular and chin midline are pretty much on the facial midline and just the maxillary midline is a little bit off to the left side about a millimeter. This goes along with the significant spacing present in the upper arch. With the retainer in, B319 tends to hold the lower jaw forward quite a ways. Probably holds it forward 3 to 4 mm.

To palpation, she has high moderate discomfort over the temporalis muscles and moderate discomfort over the posterior neck muscles with very minor tenderness over the masseters. No tenderness over the TMJs. TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly from the centric relation position. Incisal opening is 57 mm. It was difficult to get a good reading on the level of translation but to the right seemed to be around 5 mm and to the left it seemed like she may have gotten up to 7 mm. She does get a lot of problems with tenderness in the temporalis muscles, and her mother has to massage those periodically. She is on a regimen of chronic clenching for the bioblock therapy. This probably has resulted in the slight masseteric hyperplasia as well as the soreness in the temporalis muscles.

Oropharynx appears clear, and architecture looks relatively normal.
Intranasally, the right turbinate is quite large today and seems to block a good part of the airway. On the left side, the turbinate is more normal size and appears to be reasonable airway on that side. Could be cyclic enlargements occurring with the turbinates, but at least today the right one is enlarged, left one is not.

Radiographic Evaluation
Radiographic evaluation shows that B319 has the presence of no third molars as they are totally undeveloped. Her dad also did not develop third molars. Second molars are there but haven't erupted in yet. A lot of spacing present between the upper later incisors and cuspids, cuspids and first bicuspids, as well as some of the other posterior teeth. Sinuses look relatively clear. Nasal airway may be a little bit constricted. Condyles appear a little bit flattened on the anterior aspect.

Left TMJ tomogram shows increased vertical and posterior joint space, but this may be because B319 tends to posture her mandible forward. We may want to repeat these with B319 in a centric jaw position without her retainer in. Condyle may be just slightly flattened anteriorly but for the most part looks reasonably good. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit flattened on the posterior head. Condyle is postured way forward in the fossa with increased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep to a greater extent that the opposite side.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.
Waters view shows that the sinuses look relatively clear. Left nasal airway actually looks fairly good, but the right side appears as though the turbinate is enlarged and that airway seems somewhat blocked. Good development of the frontal sinuses. The septum has some minor deviations to it but nothing too significant.

Cephalometrically, the mandible is postured forward. Shows that there is a good airway. Will need to re-shoot a couple of x-rays here so we can better determine jaw alignment and jaw position.

Basic Diagnoses
Patient in active treatment orthodontically and just recently completing the bioblock therapy and in retainers in the upper arch
Essentially Class I cuspid relationship
Slight overangulation of the maxillary incisors
Spacing between the upper laterals/cuspids, cuspids/bicuspids, and then more minimal spacing between the rest of the posterior teeth
Hypertrophy of the right turbinate, although this could be a cyclic phenomena with only the right side being enlarged at the time of the appointment
Mild arthritic changes in the joints bilaterally, but discs may be in position
Absence of all four third molars
Second molars unerupted

Recommended Treatment
Continue on with orthodontic treatment
Continue to monitor TMJs
Considerations for orthognathic surgery only if there are aesthetic concerns following completion of the orthodontic treatment

B319  MRI Scan Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of :
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears to be small in size and perhaps has lost some vertical height. Condyle has a little bit of an abnormal shape to it. Decreased joint space over medially, but in some other areas it appears to be increased. Discal tissue may be anteriorly positioned. Cortical bone is thin but appears to be intact. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa being about 3 mm.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that likewise appears to be a little bit small in size. Some increased joint space particularly toward the superior and lateral aspect of the joint and decreased over medially. May be discal tissue anteriorly but difficult to identify. Cortical bone is thin but appears to be intact. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa being about 3 mm.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit of an abnormal shape to it with a little bit of anterior beaking. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Disc may be in fairly reasonable position; however, there does appear to be increased vertical joint space particularly toward the lateral aspect of the joint. Even toward the medial side, there appears to be increased joint space vertically and posteriorly. Disc may be in fairly reasonable position at this time.

Left open view shows that there is moderately good translation of the condyle where the condyle comes beneath the articular eminence. Disc appears to be positioned in the opened views.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that appears a little flattened on the anterior aspect, and the cortical bone is hard to see in the very anterior aspect. A little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular disc appears to be vertically oriented in the fossa. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Increased superior and posterior joint space. May be a little inflammation in the bilaminar tissues, and in the closed position it appears that the articular disc is anteriorly displaced on the right side.

On opening, there is moderate translation. Appears that the disc reduces and is in position.
Impression:
Left TMJ mild arthritis. It appears that the disc may be in reasonable position but increased joint space vertically and posteriorly
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated but with reduction


