B320 
is 46-year-old and referred by Dr. __.
Patient History
has had problems with asthma, and the only surgery she has had is a tonsillectomy at the age of 3. She does have some exercise-induced asthma problems but takes no medication for it. She takes Advil 400 mg p.r.n. She had an adverse reaction to amoxicillin, erythromycin, and clindamycin.

B320's problems began at an unknown time and of an unknown etiology. She was diagnosed at the age of 35 with having TMJ problems. At that time, an MRI was done, and it was noted that she had very small condyles, and she was told that her joints looked terrible.

B320's snoring is much worse when she sleeps on her back as compared to sleeping on her side. is aware that sometimes she will wake up having to catch her breath, but her husband, Tom, has not witnessed significant problems with apneic episodes. She tends to wake up with headaches in the mornings. She gets headaches in the temporal, posterior head, and top of the head area at about a level of 4 on a daily basis. She rates her TMJ pain at 3, overall average daily pain at 5, jaw function and diet at 5, and disability at 4.

Patient Concerns
Chronic pain particularly behind the lower jaw area, neck, shoulders, and back
Wakes up with pain, and this is usually worse with increased stress
Constant pain around the head and neck area
Difficulties eating and chewing
Chronically clenches and bruxes at night
Moderate to severe snoring
Moderate tiredness during the day
Difficulties breathing through her nose

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, has good facial symmetry and balance. A little increased fullness on the left side compared to the right side. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline. Right ear is probably about 4 or 5 mm higher than the left ear, although the eyes are fairly level with maybe just about a millimeter or 2 elevation of the right eye.

In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about mm. Mandible appears to be AP deficient by approximately 15 to 18 mm. Chin-neckline is short, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. Some slight lip incompetence of probably about 4 mm.

Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids. The rest of the teeth are fairly well-aligned. Some minimal attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.

In the upper arch, she also is missing first bicuspids. Has a slight Class II end-on occlusion. She is Class II on the right side by probably 2 to 3 mm and on the left side by probably 2 mm. She has an overjet of about 2 mm. She has a vertical overbite of about 1 mm. She occludes only on the second molars bilaterally, and all other teeth are out of occlusion. Oropharynx appears healthy. Uvula may be a little bit enlarged but not too significantly. Soft palate might be a little bit bigger than usual but not too significantly. Faucial pillars may be just slightly constricted but again not too significantly.

Intranasally, the left turbinate is quite large today and seems to be blocking a good portion of the airway. Septum appears relatively straight. Right turbinate appears enlarged but not as significantly as the left side.

To palpation, she has high moderate pain in the styloid areas and shoulders as well as the posterior neck. Moderate pain in the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, SCMs, and mild pain in the medial pterygoid area. Right joint seems to function relatively smoothly. In the left joint, there is a glitch at about 10 mm of opening but no closing discernible click or pop. Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm. Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. Maxillary sinuses appear clear. Left turbinate appears larger than the right turbinate. Has restorations only in the maxillary first molars and in the buccal pits of the mandibular first molars. Has significant arthritic changes in both joints with the left side being worse then the right side. Left condyle looks quite small compared to the right side. The right side has significant anterior beaking and both show evidence of condylar resorption.

Waters view shows that the turbinates both appear enlarged at the inferior aspect. Sinuses do appear clear. There is a different in vertical height of the ears bilaterally.

Left TMJ tomogram is probably taken with the mandible postured forward and shows there is an increased superior and posterior joint space. Significant resorption is occurred with this condyle, and the condyle is very narrow anteroposteriorly and seems to have lost significant vertical height. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a pseudocyst in the head of it and some anterior beaking present. Significantly decreased joint space vertically and posteriorly with essentially no joint space at all.

On opening, there is fairly good translation bilaterally but with decreased joint spaces in both joints.
Cephalometrically, the mandible is posterior forward slightly. has retrusion of the maxilla and mandible. She has a high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airways measures about 5.5 mm at the base of the tongue and at the soft palate level of about 3.5 to 4 mm. She has a high occlusal plane angle and high mandibular plane angle and has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis (left side worse than the right side) with articular disc dislocations and nonreducing with significant deformation of the articular discs
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Missing all four first bicuspids
Class II end-on occlusion
Occluding only on the second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion
High occlusal plane angle
Open bite extending from first molars all the way around to and including all the incisors
Overjet of 3 to 4 mm
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction
Significant snoring problems
Sleep apnea symptoms
Daytime somnolence
TMJ pain
Headaches
Myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment
Testing at the to rule out hypersensitivity to the materials used in the prostheses
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch Align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with the TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction
Bilateral inferior turbinectomies
Bilateral coronoidectomies Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B320  MRI Scan Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of :
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is quite small in size mediolaterally with significant evidence of condylar resorption that has previously occurred. Cortical bone appears to be intact at this time. Disc appears to be medially displaced. Width of the condyle is probably half to a third of normal size. Minimal downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa of only 1 to 2 mm. Decreased joint space particularly out laterally. Over medially, there appears to be more of an amorphous kind of tissue within the joint space.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has undergone significant resorption and recontouring, although the condyle probably has twice the volume as compared to the left side. Significantly decreased joint space vertically. Appears to be discal tissue medially displaced. Head of the condyle is completely uncovered. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa of probably about 3 mm at the very most. Joint space seems to have a greater decreased dimension perhaps laterally as compared to the rest of the condyle, although the joint space is severely decreased.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that demonstrates severe resorption. Condyle is small vertically and anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is relatively shallow and long in length. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence and the lower posterior slope of the eminence. No particular inflammatory response seen around the joint.

On opening, there is fairly good translation, but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. The disc has undergone some significant degenerative changes and is quite short anteroposteriorly and has been out of place for a consider time period. Questionable salvageability of the articular disc. Translation of the condyle, however, is fairly good.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has some significant anterior beaking and appears to have lost some vertical height of the condyle. Decreased joint space superior posteriorly and anteriorly. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and severely degenerated. It is sitting beneath the articular eminence area. No particular inflammatory process seen.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle, but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. There is significantly decreased joint space in the open view between the eminence and the condyle.

Impression:
Left TMJ severe condylar resorption with articular disc dislocation with severe deformation and nonreducing
Right TMJ significant arthritis (not as severe as the left), but articular disc anteriorly displaced with significant degeneration and nonreducing
High probability the discs are nonsalvageable
Probable candidate for bilateral total joint prostheses
Probable TMJ changes secondary to idiopathic condylar resorption as a teenager

