B321 
B321 is 49 years old.
Patient History
His primary concern is chronic ringing in the ears. The ringing began in about 6-7 years ago, left side greater than the right side. It creates difficulty with his sleeping. He also has sleep apnea symptoms and significant snoring problems. B321 is very much aware of nocturnal clenching and bruxism in fact to the point that he has fractured some of his teeth. Currently even during the daytime he does some clenching and bruxism.

B321 had orthodontic treatment for six years as a teenager. 11 years ago, he had his tonsils removed and turbinates reduced and a nasoseptoplasty. Earlier this year, he began orthodontic treatment with Dr. __ using orthotic devices. Other joints that bother him include his right shoulder, his knees click but are not painful, and his left ankle is weak but no particularly painful. He gets headaches in the temporal area at a level of about 8. Two years ago they used to occur almost daily. Currently they occur about once a week. No pain specifically in the TMJ area. On an average day, his facial pain and headache level is about a 1. He rates his jaw function at 2, diet at 4, and disability at 4.

Patient Concerns
Ringing in the ears
Difficulties sleeping
Severe snoring
Clicking in the jaw joints
Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B321 has good facial symmetry and balance. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0. Maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted probably 1 to 2 mm to the left. Lower dental midline and chin are fairly well-aligned with each other, and both are just slightly off to the left side.

In profile view, B321 has pretty much right angle nasolabial angle. Has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 mm. Chin may be about 10 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is not well-defined. Has a slightly head postured forward neck position. As B321 postures the mandible forward, it does increase the chin-neckline and does improve the overall facial symmetry and balance.

Intraorally, he is missing the right probably first bicuspid and on the left side may be missing a molar and has a space opening up between the two bicuspids. It may be actually the second molar missing on the left side and the second bicuspid missing on the right side. In the upper arch, he is probably missing the second bicuspids, and spaces are being opened but has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars. He is missing all four third molars. B321 has a slight Class III cuspid relationship currently. Has about a 1-mm overbite relationship. Has some spacing around the upper anterior teeth.

On opening, joints seem to function relatively smoothly. On excursive movements, he has crepitation in both TMJs. Maximal incisal opening is 51 mm. Excursive movements are about 12 mm in each direction. He has moderate to severe snoring problems. He is quite tired during the day. He feels he has moderate sleep apnea problems and does wake up at times startled. B321 has a relatively normal-appearing intranasal airway. He does have some septal spurs on both sides of the nose, but turbinates appear fairly well-reduced. B321 has some significant constricture of the luminal valves in both nares, and this may be contributing to the significant difficulties breathing through his nose and requirement for breathing through his mouth. He says at times he tries to prop a pillow or blanket underneath his chin to hold his mandible forward and to keep his mouth closed. He tends to sleep on his side. When he sleeps on his back, he has significant snoring problems immediately. When I opened his nose with the speculum, he could breathe much better.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, the left mandibular second molar, the left maxillary second bicuspid, and right maxillary and mandibular second bicuspids. Sinuses appear clear. Can't evaluate the airway. Can't really effectively evaluate the condyles.

Waters view shows that the airway actually looks fairly clear. Middle turbinates are moderately enlarged but do not appear to be contributing significantly to the airway. The spurs are evident on the septum.

Left TMJ tomogram shows some significant flattening on the anterior head of the condyle and some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Disc could be in a vertical orientation within the joint space. The tympanic fissure is fairly prominent.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit better morphology on this side, although there are some minor changes and a little bit of anterior beaking present. Joint space may be slightly decreased posteriorly but not too significantly. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

On opening, there is moderate translation of both condyles. In the open view, there is flattening on the anterior heads bilaterally with a little bit of anterior beaking bilaterally. Vertical joint space between the condyle and articular eminence appears somewhat reduced.

Cephalometrically, he has a skeletal Class I position. Maxilla and mandible appears to be AP deficient. Nasopharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 8 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 15 mm. Tongue fills a good part of the oral cavity and between the palate and top of the tongue measures only about 4 to 5 mm.

Basic Diagnoses
AP maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations at the lateral aspect of the joint
Class III end-on cuspid relationship
Missing bilateral maxillary second bicuspids, right mandibular second bicuspid, left mandibular first molar, and missing all four third molars
Spaces being opened between the bicuspids and molars in the maxilla, right mandible, and between the two bicuspids in the left mandible
Sleep apnea symptoms
Severe snoring
Daytime somnolence
Severe tinnitus
Constricture of luminal valves
Decreased nasal airway function
Headaches
Myofascial pain
TMJ pain

Treatment Options Would Include the Following:
Treatment Option #1:
Continue to align and level maxillary arch opening up the appropriate spaces
Consider possible orthognathic surgery
Advance the maxilla
Advance the mandible
Consider bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
Reconstruct luminal valves
Bone graft to lateral aspect of nose to support and eliminate the closure of the nasal valve

Placement of osseointegrated implants
Dental reconstruction
Treatment Option #2:
Consider bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors

Consider bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies
UPPP procedure
ADDENDUM:
Discussed with him his treatment options. Injected his left TMJ since the tinnitus was far worse on the left side than the right side. Within about 10 minutes after the injection, he had more balanced tinnitus where it seemed to be better balanced and far less dominance of the left side. He is to keep account of how things progress in reference to his tinnitus. The left side of his tongue got a little bit numb as did his left cheek. No facial nerve involvement at least at this time. He is to return tomorrow, and we will determine his progression.

B321  MRI Scan Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of :
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears a little flattened across the top but not too bad. Appears to be discal tissue in position. Lateral rim of the fossa has very minimal downward curvature. Cortical bone all appears to be intact.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows slightly greater downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. Slightly decreased lateral joint space. Disc appears to be in position but may be displaced. The lateral third of the condyle appears to be uncovered.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Out laterally, the disc may be anteriorly displaced, but toward the medial side, the disc appears to be in good position. No particular inflammatory process seen in the left TMJ. There is moderately good translation of the condyle. The disc seems to translate well with the condyle and appears to be in good position on opening. A little difficult to see the disc in the closed views, but it is in proper position in the open views.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with fairly good morphology and with some mild changes. Medially, there appears to be some flattening of the head of the condyle, and the cortical bone seems thin. Out laterally, there appears to be some mild anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep but not quite as steep as the opposite side. Over medially, the disc appears to be in good position, but out laterally the disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. No significant inflammatory response seen in the area, although there is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space anteriorly.

On opening, there is moderately good translation. Articular disc appears to be reduced and in position.
Impression:
Left TMJ mild arthritic changes and articular disc appears to be in position except for one questionable image, O sag L46.1, where it appears to be slightly anteriorly displaced
Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc that may be anteriorly displaced at the lateral extent of the joint




