B322 
B322 is 30 years old and referred by __. He is in __.
Patient Concerns
Clicking in the right jaw joint
Headaches
TMJ pain
Pain in the jaw muscles
Pain down through the neck and shoulders
Teeth don't fit together properly
Difficulties eating and chewing

Patient History
B322's problems with her joints began at the age of 12. She had orthodontics done at the time, and she had ortho on for about 18 months. She has had clicking in her jaw joints for more than 10 year. She wore a splint for about six months early on but didn't seem to help her at all. She takes no medications. She gets earaches sometimes but no tinnitus and occasional vertigo but no hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her neck and her right wrist. No known allergies and no problems wearing jewelry. She does feel that she does have clenching and bruxing at nighttime. She gets headaches about two or three times per week in the frontal, temporal posterior head, and on top of the head at about a level of 6, but it can get worse. She rates her TMJ pain at 8, worse on the right side than the left side, and overall daily facial pain and headaches at a level of 8. She rates her jaw function at 4, diet and disability at 2.

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B322 has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin midline are all fairly well-aligned with each other. Nasal tip is a little bit off to the right side about 2 mm.

In profile view, she has fairly good facial balance. Upper lip could be just slightly AP deficiency by perhaps mm. Chin, however, has fairly good projection. Chin-neckline has good length, and chin-neck angle is well-defined.

Intraorally, she is missing the first bicuspids bilaterally. She has residual spacing there of probably about 4 mm on each side. She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she is also missing the first bicuspids, and the spaces appear to be fairly well closed up. She has an anterior open bite of about 3 to 4 mm. She has bilateral posterior crossbite tendencies. She has an end-on incisor AP relationship. She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship and a Class II molar relationship. Appears that she occludes on the right second and third molars and on the left second molars with the rest of the teeth out of occlusion. Uvula is a little bit hyperplastic. Soft palate looks relatively normal. Transverse width of the faucial pillars looks relatively normal. Turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the right side, but she reports no difficulties breathing through her nose. She is not aware of any snoring problems. She is tired during the day and can fall asleep very easily. Right joint seems occasionally will have a little bit of a glitch opening up at probably 20 mm. On closing, however, she can have sometimes even an audible closing click at about 15 or 20 m of opening. Left side seems to function relatively smoothly. Incisal opening is 57 mm. Opening without much discomfort is 45 mm. Excursive movements are about 9 mm in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation
On Panorex evaluation, sinuses look clear. Right turbinate appears fairly large as does the left one. Missing maxillary probably second bicuspids and mandibular first bicuspids. All four third molars are absent. Residual spacing between the lower cuspids and second bicuspids. The roots appear somewhat short on the anterior teeth, particularly the incisors. Right condyle looks somewhat flattened and appears to have less cortical bone on top of it as compared to the opposite side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows decreased posterior joint space and superior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Flattening of the superoposterior head of the condyle and anterior beaking present.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Superior joint space may be decreased as well.

On opening, there is good translation of both joints.
Waters view shows that the nasal airway appears okay. Sinuses appear clear.
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla appears somewhat AP deficient. There is an anterior openbite of about 3 mm. Oropharyngeal airway looks good, although the head is tipped up slightly. Sinuses look clear. She has a skeletal Class III and occlusal Class III jaw relationship. Upper incisors are a little bit overangulated as are the lowers. B322 does demonstrate a tooth-size discrepancy with a 's difference of 1.5 mm. Upper lip length is almost 20 mm, but tooth-to-lip relationship is mm. In smiling, she shows probably about 5 mm of tooth structure but is far short of showing any gingiva. B322 does have a reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch with the lower incisors being about 2 mm downward from where they should be. The upper arch has an accentuated curve of occlusion with the incisors being at least a millimeter above where they should be for a flat plane.

Basic Diagnoses
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with significant deformation and degeneration
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation but with very early reduction
AP maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Apertognathia
Occluding only on the right first and second molars, left second molars
Large edentulous spaces in the lower first bicuspid area
Bilateral posterior crossbites
Anterior end-on occlusion but with the open bite
Large residual spacing between the mandibular cuspids/first bicuspids
Slight reverse curve of occlusion, lower arch
Slight accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
Tooth-size discrepancy with a 's difference of 1.5 to 2 mm
Headaches TMJ pain Myofascial pain
Earaches Vertigo
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism
Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies Align and level mandibular arch. Try to extrude the lower incisors slightly to correct the reverse curve of occlusion. Strip lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure. Try to open up the spacing between the cuspids and first bicuspids to closely approximate about a 6-mm space. Consider trying to distalize the molars and bicuspids again to help open up the space anteriorly

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance and rotate the entire mandible inferiorly
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, expand, and maximize occlusal fit

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B322  MRI Scan Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of :
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. A little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Appears there may be discal tissue anterior to the condyle. Joint space looks reasonably good. Discal tissue may be in a little bit better position anteroposteriorly on the medial side as compared to the lateral side.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width although maybe slightly more narrow than the opposite side. Just a slightly bit increased downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa on this side compared to the opposite side. A little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Joint space looks reasonably good. Difficult to tell where the discal tissue, but it could possibly be anterior.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is a little bit flattened on the head, and there is a little bit of anterior beaking but not too significantly. Articular eminence is fairly steep and almost at a right angle to the horizontal plane. Out laterally, the articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. It is in a vertical position at the lateral side of the fossa. As we approach the medial aspect, the disc is in better position. Very minimal fluid in the upper joint space.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle, and the disc does reduce.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep but not quite as steep as the opposite side. A little bit of anterior beaking is present. Some flattening of the superoposterior head of the condyle at the medial aspect of the joint. The disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. It is significantly deformed and extremely short anteroposteriorly. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space but not too significantly. No significant inflammatory process seen.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle, but the disc appears to be anteriorly displaced without reduction.
Impression:
Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation with immediate reduction. Disc has greater anterior displacement at the lateral aspect of the joint as compared to the medial Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and significant deformation

