B323 
B323 is 13 years old. Her birthday is . She was referred by Dr. __.
Patient History
B323 has had a previous thyroid biopsy, but everything turned out okay. She has had some ear tubes. She has had a previously fractured elbow, and she has also had some sinus surgery, but otherwise B323 is in good health. She takes Flonase and Allegra. She is not aware of having any allergies. Five years ago B323 had some orthodontic treatment that included headgear and a palatal expander. That treatment was done by Dr. __.

B323 has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or any significant hearing loss. She may have some tonal loss in one ear. The joints that bother her include her left hip that pops, she has some problems with her knees, and she has some difficulties with ankle swelling. She is not aware of any allergies. She has some problems with earrings where she would get some inflammation and then she would have difficulties putting the pierced earrings in and out.

She had orthodontics for five to six years with Dr. __. This included headgear and maxillary expansion. The date of onset of her jaw problems was about 1-1/2 years ago of unknown etiology. She has no trouble with headaches. She has no specific TMJ pain per se. She rates her overall daily pain levels at about a 6. She rates her jaw function at 1, diet at 0 (although she only chews on the left side and does not chew on the right side because a couple of teeth on that side are painful to chew on), and she rates disability at 1. Incisal opening is 47 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 9 mm and to the left 7 mm. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly, although she felt she could hear a little bit of noise in there.

To palpation, she has mild to moderate discomfort over the temporalis muscles, right TMJ, and mild tenderness over the right masseter and moderate discomfort to palpation over the styloid areas, SCMs, and posterior neck area.

B323 wakes up in the morning with jaw pain, and this is fairly often that she wakes up with jaw pain indicative of nocturnal clenching and bruxism. They have tried an over-the-counter splint, but this has been ineffective to date.

Patient Concerns
Pain through the jaw areas
Teeth don't fit together
Teeth pain on the right side
Difficulties eating particularly on the right side
Deviated nasal septum

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B323 has a little bit more fullness on the left side of the face as compared to the right side, probably 4 to 6 mm increased fullness particularly in the masseter area. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -1 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted off to the right side about 2.5 mm. Chin is probably 4 to 5 mm off to the right side.

In profile view, she has fairly good projection of the chin. Chin-neckline looks fairly good, and chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. Lips are somewhat protrusive compared to the chin and subnasale area.

Intraorally, B323 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has a significantly accentuated curve of occlusion ___________. She has some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. She has fairly good attached gingiva except she has a high attached labial frenulum and a little bit of stripping around the left central incisor.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the first molars erupted. In centric occlusion, she is basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side but about 5 mm Class III on the left side. She has an anterior end-on incisor relationship and a crossbite on the left side involving the lateral incisor and cuspid. Posterior teeth are not in a crossbite. Has an increased curve of in the upper arch. She has a 0 overbite relationship.

She has a deviated nasal septum with it posteriorly being deviated off toward the right side. However, more anteriorly and at the base of the septum, there is a deviation toward the left side. Turbinates are relatively moderate in size, and she does appear to have an adequate airway as best as can be seen. She gives no history of mouth breathing and feels that she breathes predominantly through her nose when she sleeps. When she was younger, she had chronic ear infections, and when she was about 2-1/2 or so began speech therapy that was felt to be affected because of the ear problems. Speech therapy lasted a little bit over 2 years.

She does have a slight open bite on the left side on the posterior aspect of probably 1 to 2 mm. She may be hitting a little bit prematurely on the right side in the first molar/second bicuspid area as these teeth are somewhat tender for her, probably exacerbated because of the nocturnal clenching and bruxism. She does have a transverse cant in the occlusal plan on the mandible with the left side being 1 to 2 mm lower than the right side. The maxilla at this point in time is still fairly level.

B323's grandfather actually has a Class III skeletal relationship. He is fairly symmetric. The grandfather apparently had at least orthodontic treatment and currently has a very strong chin. The grandfather is 75 years old.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the presence of unerupted maxillary second molars and developing maxillary third molars. She also has a developing mandibular right third molar but no left third molar.

Waters view shows that the left sinus appears a little bit cloudy compared to the right side at the inferior aspect. Nasal septum appears deviated significantly off to the right side. Other sinuses appear relatively clear. Frontal sinus is fairly large.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condylar head that appears fairly long in length. Though it is difficult to see the cortical bone, the condyle appears to have fairly good confirmation. Appears there may be decreased joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Appears that the condyle may be posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condylar head and neck appears longer on the left side as compared to the right side.

Opening views show better translation on the left TMJ as compared to the right side where the condyle approaches the posterior aspect of the articular eminence. On the left side, the condyle comes down onto the inferior aspect of the articular eminence. This may go along with the fact that as she opens, the mandible tends to shift off toward the right side some.

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class III occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway looks good. May have a slightly increased occlusal plane angulation.

Basic Diagnoses
Left mandibular condylar hyperplasia
Right TMJ articular disc dislocation Mandibular deviate prognathism
Maxillary hypoplasia
Class I cuspid relationship on the right side but Class III end-on cuspid relationship on the left side
Anterior end-on incisor relationship and crossbite in the right cuspid-bicuspid area
Mandibular dental midline shifted 2.5mm to the right of the maxillary midline and facial midline
Impacted maxillary third molars and mandibular right third molar
Unerupted maxillary second molars
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Transverse cant in the mandibular occlusal plane with the left side being 1 to 2 mm lower than the right side
Left lateral open bite
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism Periodontal defect, left mandibular central incisor
Crowing, lower anterior arch

Recommended Treatment
Medications
Klonopin 0.5 mg 1 tablet q.h.s. to help prevent nocturnal clenching and bruxism
Continue to monitor facial growth and development

MRI of TMJs to be acquired in approximately one year
Periodontal evaluation for possible gingival grafts of lower anterior arch particularly around the left central incisor

Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Left TMJ condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors Possible right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor if disc is confirmed to be dislocated
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back on the facial midline
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxillary and downgraft it
Removal of impacted third molars x 3

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B323  MRI Evaluation 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is fairly large mediolaterally and also vertically. It fills most of the fossa. Significantly decreased joint space between the condyle and fossa. It appears there is discal tissue displaced medially. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa of about 2 to 3 mm. Cortical bone appears to be intact. It appears there may be bone-on-on bone contact towards the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ coronal view shows an odd shaped condyle and a lateral wall that curves inferiorly fairly significantly probably 4 to 5 mm. The lateral aspect of the condyle is quite flattened in vertical direction. There is decreased joint space vertically though not quite as severe as the opposite side. There appears to be discal tissue displaced perhaps medially but the disc is extremely hard to identify in this view.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condylar head and neck that has a little bit odd shape to it where it is in the mid portion and the condyle appears pinched inward with slightly wider width down in the neck and also the head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Disc appears to be posteriorly displaced and sitting behind the condyle in vertical joint space. The open views are basically unreadable so it is difficult to tell if the disc is reduced or not. It appears that the disc remains posteriorly displaced on opening.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that also appears to be long in length with a lot of medullary space. The condyle has a funny shape to it as it is narrower in the condylar head than in the neck. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced and sitting in front of the condyle. Decreased superior and posterior joint spaces are present. The posterior head of the condyle is quite flattened and the condylar head has a hockey stick shape to it particularly at the medial aspect. On opening, it appears that the disc does reduce although the translation is somewhat limited in this joint.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ posteriorly displaced articular disc.
Left TMJ possible condylar hyperplasia. Right TMJ arthritic changes and articular disc anteriorly displaced with reduction.



