B324 MRI Scan Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of :
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is quite broad in width. Lateral pole seems to extend beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa of about 3 mm. Decreased joint space at the lateral aspect. Appears that there is discal tissue toward the medial side of the joint. Discal tissue is also seen anterior to the condyle. Cortical bone appears to be intact, although there is a little bit of an odd curvature and shape to the head of the condyle.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is much smaller in size vertically as well as mediolaterally compared to the opposite side. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa of about 3 mm. Decreased lateral joint space. Condyle seems to fit better within the fossa compared to the opposite side. Discal tissue is seen anteriorly.

Axial views show that the left condyle is a little bit wider mediolaterally than the right side, but the right side appears a little bit thicker anteroposteriorly at least at the level of the CT scan cuts.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with reasonable anteroposterior dimension. There may be a small osteophyte on the posterior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is best seen medially. Disc is anteriorly displaced and deformed. Not any significant inflammation in the joint area.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle in the fossa and good translation of the disc, but the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows the condyle appears to have more of a bird's head shape to it. There is slightly decreased joint space vertically and posteriorly. Disc is anteriorly displaced. Disc is sitting beneath the articular eminence. Disc is quite short anteroposteriorly. Disc looks significantly smaller on this side than the opposite side.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle, and the disc appears to translate fairly well. However, the disc remains degenerated and nonreducing.

Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
Probably salvageable left TMJ articular disc Questionable right TMJ articular disc. Right TMJ articular disc appears nonsalvageable
d
B324 
B324 is 32 years old and referred by Dr. __.
Patient History
B324 has had previous surgery on her shoulder. She has had her left ankle operated on twice, right ankle once. Her injuries are mainly sports-related with softball for her right shoulder, car accident for her left shoulder, and ankles for soccer injuries. The ankle surgeries have all been in the last two years.

B324's jaw joint problems she believes began as early as in elementary school of unknown etiology. She remembers back then that her jaws would lock, and she would have difficulties opening them. She underwent orthodontic treatment from the age of 7 years to 10 years that included palatal expansion and headgear among other treatments. From 16 to 18 years of age, she had full braces and also had growth appliances and interarch elastics trying to pull her lower jaw forward. In addition, she is missing four first bicuspids, and also she only developed two wisdom teeth, and they were removed. 2 years ago, she had braces reapplied again, this time by Dr. __. She has had problems throughout the years with her jaw joints. She has had many splints and at least four as a teenager. In her 20s, she was on splint therapy for at least five years but was able to use the same splint because her jaw was not growing or moving. 2 years ago, she had bilateral TMJ arthrocentesis by Dr. __. This made no improvement for her whatsoever. She did see Dr. __, who did an equilibration on her of this likewise did not help her. In the past she has had physical therapy, massage therapy, TENS, and ionophoresis. Currently she is not in any splint therapy. B324 doesn't remember any specific trauma to her jaws as a child except when she was about 3 she got hit by a seesaw underneath the chin, and it caused a pulpal hemorrhage on one of her primary teeth. She was in a car accident as a teenager but already had the joint problems prior to that. Therefore, the etiology of her joint situation is basically unknown.

She gets significant problems with earaches, tinnitus, and has severe vertigo that can cause nausea and vomiting. She is not sure if she has any hearing loss or not. Other joints that bother her include L4-L5 disc pathology, neck, shoulders, left elbow (rarely), knees, and ankles. She has an allergy to CODEINE and to onions. She cannot wear cheap earrings as this causes irritation, inflammation, and sometimes infection in her ears. She is aware of clenching at nighttime and may do it some during the day but not as much as she is more aware of it and can better control it. She gets headaches daily in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area at an average level of about 7. However, these can escalate to 10. She has been previously treated on several occasions for migraine headaches, but the treatment has not helped her. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, overall pain around the head and neck area on an average daily basis at 7, jaw function at 7, diet at 5, and disability at 4.

Current Medications
Concerta for ADHD
Lexapro 10 mg for anxiety
Antivert for her severe vertigo
Advil and Tylenol for pain and discomfort
She does have a lot of asthma medications but currently does not take them because it makes her feel worse relative to dizziness and nausea and so forth
Clinical Examination

In frontal view, B324 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm. In the lower third face actually B324 has some facial asymmetry. The maxillary midline is shifted to the right about a millimeter. Mandibular dental midline is shifted to right a millimeter. Chin is to the right probably about 2 to 3 mm.

In profile view, B324 has some prominence of the nasal dorsum. Upper lip is retruded by probably about 4 to 5 mm. Mandible appears retruded about 12 to 15 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short, and chin-neck angle is not defined. As B324 postures her lower jaw forward and the upper lip is filled out, it does improve her overall facial symmetry and balance. Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids and has the rest of the teeth back through the second molars. Teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and leveled. In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids. May have just a slight reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch but not too bad. Has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship being about 2 mm Class II on the right side and about 3 to 4 on the left side. Has about a 3 mm vertical overbite relationship. There is a slight cant to the occlusal plane with the right side being about a millimeter higher than the left side in both the upper and lower arches. Oropharyngeal tissues look good. Uvula looks relatively normal in length. Soft palate appears may be a little bit posteriorly positioned and perhaps elongated. Width of the faucial pillars appears relatively normal.

Intranasally, the base of the septum is deviated a little bit off toward the right side. Turbinates are moderately enlarged with the left side being more enlarged and inflamed than the right side with a little bit greater blockage of the left side of the nose as compared to the right side at least anteriorly at this time.

To palpation, B324 has high moderate pain in the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, styloid areas, and mild tenderness over the SCMs.
On opening, B324 has loud audible double clicks in the right joint beginning about 15 to 20 mm and then closing clicks at about 5 to 10 mm. On the right side, could perhaps feel a closing click at about 10 mm but could not interpret or identify an opening click on that side. Maximal opening is about 34 mm. She could open about 20 without significant pain. Excursive movements to the right are 5.5 mm and to the left 4.5 mm. Shifting to the left caused a significant amount of pain. With the simple manipulations that we have done so far, B324 has begun to develop a fairly significant headache over her eyes.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows that the maxillary sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear enlarged particularly on the left side, which seem to obliterate most of the nasal airway. Missing all four third molars, and it appears that the lower first bicuspids are missing, and in the maxillary arch she may be actually missing the second bicuspids. Right condyle has fairly good size to it. Left side appears to be significantly more arthritic with flattening on the anterior head and some anterior beaking present. Condyle is much more narrow anteroposteriorly in this radiograph.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some flattening on the anterior head and some anterior beaking present. Condyle has sort of a hockey stick shape to it. Articular eminence is relatively short in length and moderately steep. Posterior joint space may be decreased some, but the rest of the joint space doesn't appear too bad.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a significant hockey stick shape to it. Joint spaces may be decreased some. Articular eminence is moderately steep and appears a little bit longer on this side than the opposite side. There may be some flattening off the posterior head of the condyle.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles.
Waters view shows that the bony nasal septum is deviated off toward the right side. Turbinates are large and appear to obliterate most of the nasal airway with the left side being more obstructed than the right side. Otherwise, all the sinuses appear relatively clear. Inferior border of the mandible appears to be higher on the right side than it is on the left side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she does have her head tipped up. Maxilla and mandible both appear retruded, and she appears to be just slight Class II skeletal position and Class II end-on occlusal position. Oropharyngeal airway is significantly reduced with the dimension at the soft palate level only being about 2.5 mm and at the base of the tongue being about 5 mm (normal 11 mm). There is a difference in the vertical position of the angle of the mandible with the right side likely being the short vertical component.

B324 demonstrates a fairly significant tooth-size discrepancy with a 's difference of 2.5 mm. Also, there is about a 0.5 mm tooth-size discrepancy in the bicuspid area. B324 did say that when she weighed more that she did have some problems with snoring. B324 does state that when she does exercise that she turns purple, and she believes that is related to the fact that she can't get enough air when she is breathing and when she exercises. B324 has significant problems now with car sickness that she didn't used to have, and this condition is getting worse for her. She can't ride in a car unless she is driving. If she turns her head from side-to-side, that can make her quite nauseated and dizzy.

Basic Concerns
Severe headaches
Severe TMJ pain
Pain through the jaw muscles
Pain down through the neck and shoulders
Difficulties eating and chewing
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints
Airway breathing problems
Difficulties breathing through the nose
Difficulties catching her breath particularly with exercising

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with reduction on the left side and without reduction on the right side
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency Class II end-on occlusion
Tooth-size discrepancy with a 's difference of 2.5 mm
Hypertrophied turbinates
Partial nasal airway obstruction
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of 2.5 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm)
Severe headaches
Severe TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Earaches Tinnitus
Vertigo
Masticatory dysfunction
Missing all four first bicuspids and third molars

Recommended Treatment
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Open up space around each of the upper lateral incisors to equal about a millimeter to correct the tooth-size discrepancy Continue to align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ total joint prostheses Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from abdomen)
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and downgraft it posteriorly rotating it in a counterclockwise direction
Partial inferior turbinectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
Restorative dentistry to build up the lateral incisors to meet the requirements of dental positioning and eliminate residual spacing

r
