B326 
B326 is 42 years old and referred by Dr. __.
Patient History
Except for TMJ problems, B326 is in good health. She does have an allergy to mosquitos. Blood pressure runs a little bit low.

B326 had previous orthognathic surgery on which included a LeFort I maxillary osteotomy to move the maxilla superiorly and bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to advance the mandible, and she also had a sliding genioplasty. This was performed by Dr. __. On , she had reconstructive surgery to include the nose, eyelids, and implants under the eyes. On , she had bilateral cheek suspensions, removal of buccal fat pads, submental plication with neck suspension, and insertion of a specialized chin implant.

B326's TMJ problems began when she was in about the third or fourth grade of unknown etiology. She noticed a significant difference in the position of her lower jaw, that it was becoming more retruded. This continued on for quite some time. When she was 17, she was an ice skater and had a bad fall, and she hit the back of her head and had a concussion. She can't remember if this aggravated her jaw joint problems. On , she had Le Fort maxillary osteotomy and mandibular sagittal split osteotomies and chin augmentation by Dr. __. Prior to that, she began orthodontics 5 years ago, and the orthodontics was completed 2 years ago. Since the orthognathic surgery, her TMJ problems have gotten significantly worse. Initially she wasn't aware of any increased TMJ problems, and over time, however, her TMJ problems have gotten significantly worse. For a while after surgery she could function much better than she currently can.

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor hearing loss. She gets occasional vertigo. No other joints bother her. She does have an allergy to mosquitos, but she also has an allergy to NICKEL and cannot wear any type of cheap jewelry. She is aware of nighttime and daytime clenching and bruxism. She gets headaches about once a month that occur in the temporal area that are probably related to the TMJ, and she rates them at a level of 8. She has constant TMJ pain at about a level of 3, but it can exacerbate to a level of 10. Overall pain is about a level of 3 on an average day. Jaw pain, diet, and disability are all at a level of 7. From a disability standpoint, there are times where she cannot work at all since she can can't talk because of the pain problems. Last year, she had a severe attack where she just fell on the floor in severe pain, and she was taken to Dr. __'s office, and he injected some local anesthetic and perhaps some steroid into the left TMJ, and this gave her some temporary relief for a couple of hours.

Current Medications
Orthocept
Vioxx 25 mg q.d.
Hydrocodone 7.5/650 mg p.r.n. Glucosamine/chondroitin
Multivitamins and extra vitamin E and vitamin C
Patient Concerns

TMJ pain
Jaws feel fatigued frequently
Face feels as though it is frozen
Difficult eating and chewing
Decreased mouth opening
Periodic headaches
Clinical Examination

In frontal view, B326 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted to the right about a millimeter. Chin is shifted to the right probably 2 to 3 mm.

In profile view, she does have some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 mm. Chin appears to be AP deficient by probably 12 to 15 mm. Chin-neckline and chin-neck angle are fairly well-defined. She has a high mandibular plane angle facial morphology. Has a slight obtuse nasolabial angle. Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids extracted for orthodontic reasons most likely. Third molars also appear to be absent. She appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. May have a slight accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch. In the upper arch, she is also missing the first bicuspids. Appears to have a slight reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Her teeth appear to be slightly vertical in orientation. Appears to occlude more on the left side than the right side with the right side being open just slightly extending from the lateral incisor back through and including the first molar. Second molar may be in occlusion. Has a slight Class II end-on occlusion on the right side but a little bit closer to Class I on the left side. Has an anterior deep-bite of about 2 mm. Right maxilla appears to be up 1 to 2 mm compared to the left side. On re-evaluation, compared to the ears and eyes, maxillary midline is a little bit off to the right side probably about a millimeter. Nasal tip is also just slightly off to the right side 1 to 2 mm. Oropharynx appears clear. Appears to be decreased distance between the soft palpate and the posterior pharyngeal wall. There is a history of snoring that has gotten more obvious in the last six months.

Intranasally, the septum may be deviated a little bit off toward the right side. There appears to be a spur off the right side. Right turbinate is in direct contact with the septum, and there could be a little synechia joining the septum to the right turbinate. Left turbinate is quite enlarged, but the airway is better on that side since the septum is deviated off toward the right side.

Maximal incisal opening is 26 mm but only about 18 mm with reasonable comfort. Excursive movements are 5 mm in each direction. To palpation, she has severe pain at a level of 10 over the temporalis area. Moderate pain at a level of 5 over the masseters and 6 over the TMJs. She has minimal discomfort to palpation over the styloid area. She does have some numbness in her chin area, but her lower lip is fine, and the other facial structures are fine.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the presence of four bone plates in the maxilla with four screws in each of the L plates anteriorly, and it appears that there are four screws in the posterior plate on the right side but just three screws on the left side. She has interosseous wires in the mandible. Difficult to tell, but there could be a little cystic area in the left mandibular third molar area. There is a bone plate in the chin area. It appears that it might be cut. Condyles appear severely degenerated.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear, although the right one may be just a little bit cloudy compared to the left one. Other sinuses appear clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows condyles that have undergone severe resorption and are severely degenerated. Does not appear to be any significant joint space vertically. Slightly increased posterior joint space. Interosseous wires are seen in the mandible. Sigmoid notch appears to be very close to the articular eminence.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also has undergone severe condylar resorption. Severely decreased vertical joint space. Articular eminence appears to almost touch the sigmoid notch area. Condyle is very narrow anteroposteriorly.

On opening, there is restrictive translation of both condyles with neither one clearing the articular eminence. Significant condylar resorption is again appreciated in the open views bilaterally.

Cephalometrically, B326 has what appears to be AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency. Upper incisors are in significant vertical inclination. Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with the airway at the base of the tongue only being about 3 mm and at the soft palate level may be only about 2 or 3 mm. She has a very high occlusal plane angulation. Apparently there is some kind of chin implant present but it appears to extend below the chin and is some kind of alloplastic material. Cannot discern the thickness of it. B326 does have a significant sleep disorder now. She just doesn't sleep well at all, she is very restless. Whether that is due strictly to the pain problems or the fact that she has a severely decreased oropharyngeal airway is unknown at this time. She has a lot of daytime somnolence.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocations with severe deformation and nonreducing
AP mandibular deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Class II end-on occlusion on the right, Class I on the left
Open-bite tendency on the right side extending from the right lateral incisors back through and including the first molars
Missing maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids (removed for orthodontic reasons)
Vertical inclination of maxillary incisors
High occlusal plane angle of 21 degrees (normal 8 degrees)
High mandibular plane angle
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 11 mm)
Severe TMJ pain
Severe myofascial pain
Headaches Nasal septal spur on the right side
Hypertrophied right inferior turbinate with probable synechiae attaching it to the septum
Right nasal airway obstruction
Chin implant
Tooth-size discrepancy with a 's difference of approximately 2 mm
Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up a millimeter of space around each of the upper lateral incisors to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy.
Align and level mandibular arch.

CT scan of the TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest graft from the abdomen)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and downgraft the posterior aspect with bone plate stabilization and hydroxyapatite grafting
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Remove septal spur and excise synechiae
Partial right inferior turbinectomy

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
Restorative dentistry to bond the maxillary lateral incisors to eliminate the spacing
B326  MRI Evaluation

Date of Acquisition: Date of :
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is extremely small and appears to have undergone significant condylar resorption. Appears that part of the articulating area is severely resorbed with a small amount of articulation. Difficult to tell if on the medial side there is discal tissue displaced or whether there is exophytic bone formation off the medial aspect of the condyle. Lateral rim of the fossa is extremely shallow. Decreased vertical joint space. Appears to be an osteophyte extending out laterally from the condylar head. Bone in the fossa appears to be intact. Appears to be discal tissue anterior to the condyle.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is narrow mediolaterally but has a slightly greater width than the opposite side and appears to have a little bit better morphology, although there is significant evidence of condylar resorption. Severely decreased joint space vertically. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly slightly perhaps 1 to 2 mm. Appears that there is discal tissue anterior to the condyle. Cortical bone in the fossa appears to be grossly intact.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is quite small anteroposteriorly. The condylar head and neck appear to be severely sclerotic. Appears to be some decreased vertical joint space. Articular disc is anteriorly positioned sitting beneath the articular eminence. Disc appears somewhat deformed but could be enough substance there to reposition it. Articular eminence is moderately steep and fairly long in length. There is some fluid in the superior joint space at the posterior aspect of the superior joint space. Could be a little bit of inflammatory process in the bilaminar tissue. Appears to be some restriction in translation. Disc appears to be nonreducing. Appears there may be some translation of the disc but not too significant indicative of perhaps adhesions present of the disc to the articular eminence.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is small in size. Decreased vertical joint space. Condylar head and neck appear quite sclerotic although not quite to the extent of the left side. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is quite short anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep, although not quite as steep as the opposite side. A little bit of fluid in the posterior superior joint space. Fossa appears grossly intact. Out laterally, the articular disc is extremely short anteroposteriorly and thickened. This disc appears less salvageable than the opposite side.

On opening, there is restricted translation, and the articular disc appears to remain anteriorly displaced without reduction.
Impression:
Right TMJ severe condylar resorption with sclerosis and articular disc dislocation without reduction with degenerative changes present
Left TMJ severe arthritis and sclerosis with the articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction and with significant deformation (right side greater than the left side)
Questionable salvageability of both discs, although the left one appears to have greater salvageability than the right side

