B327 
B327 is 12 years and 4 months old. She is referred by Dr. __.
Patient History
B327 is in good health with no major medical problems. She is 4 feet, 10-1/2 inches and weighs 88 lb.

B327 has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is allergic to cats and dogs. She has no known allergy to jewelry. She gets headaches that range from 3 to 8 in the frontal and temporal areas, and these occur one to two times per week. Sometimes she will get light sensitive, and the headaches can cause nausea. She is not aware of any nocturnal clenching or bruxism. Prior to being placed on the atenolol, she would get headaches about every other day. Now she gets headaches just once or twice a week. Her headaches are beginning to increase again, and she feels that the atenolol is not being as effective anymore. She rates her TMJ pain at 7 and overall pain at 7 on an average day. She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 5, and disability at 6.

Her problems began about four or five years ago when she began getting headaches, but they were infrequent. In the fourth grade, she started to get the more frequent migraines. In sixth grade is when she was placed on the atenolol. She does have some problems with both her thumbs. About the first of April, she jammed her right thumb and tore some ligaments in it, and it is still tender and sore for her. In June, she hurt her left thumb playing volleyball, but it is better now and doesn't seem to bother her. She has been told that she has loose joints.

Patient Concerns
Headaches
Difficulties eating and chewing
Lower jaws become more retruded
Her overbite has increased during the last couple of years
Her head is postured forward more than it used to be
Pain in the jaw joints
Noises in the jaw joint
When she wakes up in the morning, her jaws are sore (over her masseter muscles)
She has pain when she yawns in the masseter muscle and TMJ area
Predominant mouth breather when sleeping

Current Medications
Atenolol 25 mg, 1 q.d.
Allegra p.r.n. Ibuprofen for her headaches
Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B327 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetric. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 5 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is a little bit to the left, and chin is about 2 mm to the left.

In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose. Chin is retruded probably about 15 mm. Soft tissues may be retruded by a couple of millimeters.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Some hypereruption of the lower central incisors. Some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. Has good attached gingiva around the anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a slight Class II end-on occlusion by probably about at least 3 to 4 mm. She has an overjet of probably 2 mm. She has a vertical overbite of probably about 4 mm. She has a slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the left cuspid being about 1.5 to 2 mm higher than the right cuspid, so the left cuspid is elevated 1.5 to 2 mm higher than the right cuspid.

Turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the left side, and this might cause some breathing problems as she states she breathes predominantly through her mouth when she sleeps. Oropharynx appears clear. Tonsils are present but are of moderate size. To palpation, she has some mild to moderate pain over the masseters, TMJs, and styloid area with the right side being a little bit worse than the left side. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly, although she would occasionally hear a glitch in the right joint. Maximal incisal opening was 33 mm but only 28 mm with reasonable comfort. Excursive movements were 8 mm to the right and 7 mm to the left, but it was painful on the right side for her to do the excursive movements.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows that the sinuses appear reasonably clear, although there is a little fuzziness in the left one. Turbinates look moderate in size. Has all of her teeth back through the second molars, except she has no lower third molars but appears to be developing maxillary third molars. Condyles appear to have undergone some significant bony changes and resorption. No other significant pathology noted.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear reasonably clear with the left one showing some material in it. Frontal sinuses are better developed on the left side than the right side as are the ethmoid sinuses, but they all appear relatively clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle has undergone some significant resorption. Very minimal joint space available. Condyle is postured forward in the fossa somewhat. Appears to be significant loss of vertical height of the condyle. Articular eminence is relatively shallow.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that there has been considerable condylar resorption that has occurred. Appears to be an osteophytic formation extending posteriorly on the condylar head causing decreased posterior joint space as well as decreased vertical joint space. Articular eminence on this side likewise is extremely shallow. The condylar head is quite flat, and there appears to be significant vertical loss of condylar bone with the resorption process.

Translation shows minimal translation of the joints.
Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class II relationship. Oropharyngeal airway appears good, but her head is postured forward, and her head is tipped up. Turbinates extend posterior to the hard palate. She has a little bit of nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue but not too significant. Oropharyngeal airway with the head posture projected shows that the airway is fairly good.
Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis with reactive pannus surrounding the articular disc and with possible lateral disc displacement.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
AP microgenia
Class II end-on occlusion Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Tooth-size discrepancy with a 's difference of about 1 mm
High occlusal plane angle
Developing maxillary third molars (impacted x 2)
Moderately hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction with predominant mouth breathing particularly at night when sleeping
Headaches TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Light sensitivity with severe headaches

Recommended Treatment
Splint therapy to try to unload the joints
Medications - Anti-inflammatory to see if this will improve comfort and decrease the progression of the condylar resorption
Celebrex 100 mg q.d. but may increase to 200 mg q.d. Consider possible Klonopin ½ mg, 1 tablet q.h.s. if morning headaches are persistent

Evaluation at the to rule out hypersensitivities to the materials in the prostheses
Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Keep upper lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally in case interdental osteotomies are necessary Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing at least 1 mm to 1.5 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy

Surgery
Bilateral condylectomies and debridement of the joints and reconstruction with mandibular advancement utilizing TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to decrease the occlusal plane angle
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Fat grafts to bilateral TMJs (harvested from abdomen)
Surgical removal of impacted maxillary third molars x 2
HTR implant to anterior mandible
Partial turbinectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion I gave B327 a prescription for Celebrex 100 mg tablets, disp. 20 tablets, 1 tablet q.d, refill x 5.
B327  MRI Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Reading: 
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow mediolaterally. Slight downward curvature of the articular eminence. Joint space is decreased vertically. More toward the anterior part of the joint, it appears that there is some kind of material displaced out lateral to the condyle, head, and neck area. Cortical bone appears intact, although there may be evidence of condylar resorption.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears narrow mediolaterally. Mediolateral pole of the condyle is significantly taller than the medial aspect of the condyle. More significant downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. It appears there has been some condylar resorption. Discal tissue not easily seen except there is some kind of tissue extending out lateral to the condylar head that could indicate a laterally displaced disc.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that doesn't show up really prominently radiographically. Cortical bone appears to have undergone degenerative changes on top of the condyle. Articular eminence is long but moderately shallow. Articular disc appears to be in position, although the posterior osteophyte extends posterior to the disc. Appears like there almost could be a pannus around the disc, probable reactive pannus, around the disc. Condyle appears in about two or three of the cuts.

On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle. Disc does not seem to move very well and could possibly be adhesions to the articular eminence. Condyle comes down along the posterior slope of the eminence but does not go beneath it.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with a very similar morphology. Appears to be loss of vertical height, but there is an osteophyte extending posterior to the head of the condyle. Disc appears to be in proper AP position, but there is tissue surrounding the disc itself as one would see in a pannus.

Right TMJ, open views, show that the condyle translates moderately well. It appears that the disc remains in its original position indicative of possible adhesions to the fossa.

Impression:
Bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis with pannus surrounding the articular discs and possible lateral displacement

