B328 
B328 is 34 years old. B328 is in great health except for her current jaw joint problems. Currently, she takes Celebrex 200 mg at bedtime and Darvocet 400 mg at bedtime.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches predominately on the right side.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Jaws and teeth do not meet.
Severe right earache.
Drooling particularly at night (she has never had this problem before the accident.)

B328 was involved in a motor vehicle accident recently. A dog ran out in front of B328 's car and she stopped the car to keep from hitting the dog and then was hit from behind by another vehicle traveling at a very high rate of speed. Her head was bent forward at the time of impact and she had a whiplash injury throwing her head backwards and then she slammed forward into the steering wheel striking her face and lower jaw. She did have a little bit of bleeding out of her nose following the injury. She immediately noted ringing in her ears, sinus bleeding and jaw pain. She fractured ribs 3 and 4 and had a separation of rib 5. She was told she had compression fractures that were essentially nondisplaced in the mandible. She has received physical therapy but has had no other treatment. She does have constant earaches, occasional tinnitus, no vertigo and no hearing loss. The only other joints that she has problems with are her knees. She is very much area of clenching her teeth at night time and during the day as well. This clenching has occurred just since the accident and she is not aware of that being a problem before. She has some significant pain in tooth and she has been told that the nerve is probably dying and that is the reason for the hypersensitivity there.

B328 gets headaches that average about a level of 5 and they are predominately on the right side in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area. These headaches can escalate to 8. She has TMJ pain at a level of 6 with the right side being greater than the left side. Average daily pain is at 6, jaw function is at 8, diet at 9 and disability at 7.

In frontal view, B328 has good facial symmetry and good vertical facial balance. In profile view, B328 has good facial balance. Intraorally, B328 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth also back through the second molars. There is basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship and she has an anterior deep bite of about 5 to 6 mm. There is actually a Class II end-on on the left side and closer to Class I on the right side. To palpation, B328 has high moderate pain over the temporalis styloid areas, moderate pain over the left temporalis, left SCM and high moderate to severe pain over the masseters, TMJs and right medial pterygoid area. On opening, she has a click in the left joint about 20 mm and closing click on that side probably around 5. The right side was relatively smooth. The patient notes, however, on some occasion when she opens wide, she will get locked open on the right side and unable to close and has to manipulate her jaws in order to get it closed up. This open locked situation has occurred about 10 times for her.
B328 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex of poor quality x-ray, but it shows the absence of all 4 third molars, but all the other teeth are present. Sinuses look relatively clear.

Waters view shows significant nasal septal deviation and hypertrophied turbinates. Sinuses look clear.
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa and moderately steep articular eminence.
Lateral cephalogram shows basically a Class I occlusal relationship. Airway looks acceptable. Slightly increased occlusal plane angle, but not too significant.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction.
Relative mandibular hyperplasia.
Bilateral TMJ severe pain.
Severe headaches.
Severe myofascial pain.
Severe right earaches.
Masticatory dysfunction.
Slight end-on Class II occlusal relationship.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to correct the occlusion.
Further surgical and physical therapy if necessary to correct the jaw problems.

I did give B328 a prescription for Klonopin 1 mg tablets dispensing 30 tablets 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x2. She is to let me know how she does.
B328  MRI Evaluation 

Date of acquisition: 
Date of interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows as condyle that appears to be somewhat arthritic. A little sclerosis on the cortical bone. Decreased lateral joint space. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa probably about 3 to 4 mm. Difficult to identify discal tissue above the condyle, but there does appear to be some over-medially. There may be some discal tissue anterior as well. The condyle appears to have adequate mediolateral width. The fossa appears to be intact.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of sclerosis perhaps on the top of the cortical bone but not as significant as the opposite side. Significantly decreased lateral joint space is present. There may be discal tissue over-medially. There may be discal tissue anterior as well. The fossa appears to be intact. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa probably 3 to 4 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head and some sclerosis on the top of the condyle. There appears to be an osteophyte extending superior in the condyle joint area. Articular eminence is quite steep and long in length. Articular disc appears to be vertically oriented within the joint space probably acting as a wedge pushing the condyle posterior. Decreased posterior joint space is evident. Out laterally, there is no discal tissue seen essentially and the condyle is in close approximation to the lateral rim of the fossa. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint, the disc appears to be more anteriorly displaced. No significant inflammatory response except a little bit in the bilaminar tissue seen. The condyle is quite flattened on the anterior superior aspect going towards the lateral aspect of the condyle. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and disc does appear to reduce into position. The condyle does look as though it has better morphology in the open views as compared to the closed although both of them still exhibit arthritic type of changes.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head. A little sclerosis on the top of the condyle, but not nearly as significant as the opposite side. Although there are arthritic changes here it does not seem to be as progressive as the left side. There is flattening of the anterior head and a little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is steep, but not quite as steep nor as long as the opposite side. Articular disc is vertically oriented within the fossa and anteriorly displaced very similar to the opposite side. Decreased posterior joint space. Disc is probably functioning as a wedge pushing the condyle posterior into the bilaminar tissues. There could be a little inflammation of the bilaminar tissues and perhaps a little bit more so than the opposite side. Significantly decreased joint space towards the lateral aspect of the joint as compared to the mid and medial aspect of the joint. In the open view, there is good translation of the condyle and disc and the disc does reduce into position.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. Disc in a vertical position just posterior to the steep articular eminence.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction and disc oriented in vertical position being just posterior to the articular eminence. Discs appear salvageable and the patient should be amendable to bilateral disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.

