B331 
B331 is 57 years old and referred by __, one of our patients, and __ and Dr. __.

Patient History
B331 has had some previous surgeries, which included a hysterectomy, tonsillectomy, cyst removed from the breast, and cyst removed from top of nose. B331  in good health except for the jaw joint problems. She does take some natural medications to manage her hormone factors. She takes no other medications.

B331's problems began with her jaw joints sometime back in her 20s and particularly became more noticeable in her early 30s. Her jaw joint problems began of unknown etiology. The joints just began clicking back at that time. The only real treatment she has had is she has had a bite splint, and then more recently she has had a buildup of her teeth, which has helped to significantly control her symptoms. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, nor hearing loss. She has no known allergies. Cheap earrings sometimes will bother her ears but not always. She may have some nocturnal clenching and bruxism. She has no particular problems with headaches except she does get some pains occasionally in the posterior aspect of her head at a level of 2. She gets a little bit of pain and discomfort in the left jaw joint at about a level of 1, overall pain on an average day is about a level of 1, jaw function is at 5, diet at 0, and disability at 0.

B331 likes to keep chewing gum in her mouth, although she doesn't really chew it, but she feels that it helps her from biting and clenching as much when she has it in their. She has temporary bridges in place and by doing this helps her decrease her stress and the stress loading to the bridges. Before B331 got the bridges built up, she did have periodic episodes of pain and discomfort in her jaw joints. Building up the bridges has helped eliminate that particular problem. She has had two TMJ adjustments by Dr. __, who did adjustments on the TMJs. B331 had the first adjustment done 4 years ago and then had an additional adjustment done in the summer of last year. She did find that these adjustments helped her.

Patient Concerns
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints
Jaw joints get hung at times during jaw function
Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B331 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is probably about -4 mm. Maxillary midline and chin are pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline may be just about a millimeter off toward the right side but not too significantly. In profile view, B331 has good facial balance vertically and anteroposteriorly.

Intraorally, B331 has temporary bridges on both sides of the lower jaw. On the right side, she is missing the right mandibular second bicuspid and first molar with the second and third molars drifted extremely far forward. On the left side, she is missing the second bicuspid, first and maybe the second molar, and the second and third molars are drifted and tipped forward into the second molar position. In the upper arch, she is missing both first bicuspids. She is missing the maxillary left second and third molars and the right third molar. She has an end-on Class II cuspid relationship on the right side and a Class I cuspid relationship on the left side. She has an anterior overbite of about 1 to 1.5 mm. Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level. To palpation, she had just some very mild tenderness over the right TMJ and no tenderness over any of the other areas in the head and neck area. On opening, she had significant crepitation bilaterally in both joints and particularly the crepitation was audible in excursive movements. On straight opening, she did have crepitation in both joints but had a pop in the right joint at about 25 mm of opening and a closing click at about 15 mm of opening. Maximal incisal opening was 49 mm, and she could open to about 25 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movement to the right was 7 mm and to the left 5 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex reveals the sinuses look relatively clear, although there could be a little mucous retention cyst perhaps in the left sinus but difficult to tell. Missing maxillary first bicuspids and the third molars as well as the maxillary left second molar. In the lower arch, missing mandibular right second bicuspid, first molar, with the second and third molars drifted extremely far forward into the first and second molar spaces. On the left side, missing the second bicuspid and first molar and the third molar. The second molar has a root canal as does the right second molar. There are temporary bridges on both sides in the lower arch filling the gaps of the missing teeth. Right condyle appears a little bit arthritic and has a pseudocyst in the head of the condyle. A little area of sclerosis on the superior aspect of the condyle. Right joint shows a condyle that has undergone some significant degenerative changes with significant changes in the trabecular pattern. Condyle on the left side appears to have lost significant vertical dimension as compared to the condyle on the right side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears very sclerotic. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Almost absence of joint space vertically, posteriorly, as well as anteriorly. Probable perforations could be present in this joint. Difficult to evaluate the quality of the fossa area and articular eminence.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is flattened on top and appears to be some degenerative changes on the head of the condyle. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is steeper on this side. Disc could be in a more vertical orientation.

On opening, there is good translation of both joints. On the left open view, it shows that there is a lot of sclerosis in the head of the condyle and some significant anterior beaking. Minimal joint space between the condyle and the articular eminence. On the right TMJ, the condyle also looks somewhat sclerotic, but there is better translation when the condyle comes out anterior to the articular eminence. The slope of the right articular eminence is much steeper than the left side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Nasal airway appears adequate. Jaws appear reasonably symmetric.
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B331 has basically a Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship. Oropharynx airway looks good with an airway dimension from the posterior pharyngeal wall to the soft palate of 10 mm and from the base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall of 9 to 10 mm. Appears to have good angulation of the teeth.

Basic Diagnoses
Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe deformation and degeneration and a nonsalvageable disc
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc degenerative changes but the disc is reducing and may be salvageable
Mild TMJ pain
Clicking and popping in the right TMJ and crepitation in both TMJs indicative of perforations
Missing mandibular right second bicuspid, first molar, with significant mesial drifting of the second and third molars and missing mandibular left second bicuspid, first molar, and third molar
Missing maxillary first bicuspids and third molars as well as the left second molar
Temporary bridges in the lower posterior arches replacing the missing teeth
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism (I placed her on Klonopin 0.5 mg, disp. 1 tablet q.h.s. with three refills)
Recommended Treatment

Treatment option 1
Dental reconstruction to establish the occlusion at the current vertical dimension
No TMJ surgery
Treatment option 2
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ arthroscopy to debride the joint and hopefully displace the right articular disc further anteriorly to eliminate the clicking and popping

Dental reconstruction to establish the occlusion at the current vertical dimension
Treatment option 3
Surgery
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Left TMJ meniscectomy and reconstruction with sternoclavicular disc graft to replace the severely deformed articular disc Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion and allow the condyles to move inferiorly to make room for the disc surgeries

Treatment option 4
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, meniscectomies, debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)

Dental reconstruction to establish the occlusion at the current vertical dimension
At the end of our consultation, she asked about her nose and the fact that she wanted me to evaluate her deviated nasal septum. She has a septum that is deviated off toward the right side, and there is a septal spur at the base of the septum. I told her that she could see an ENT doctor and have the septum straightened, or if she decided to come here and have surgery, we would be able to fix it for her. If she decides to have arthroscopy by Dr. __, then she could check with him to see if he could do the septoplasty at the same time. I do not believe she is interested in surgery at this time at all but did tell her that if she does develop worsening problems, we would be happy to work with her.

B331  MRI Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition:	
Date of Reading:
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears to show some evidence of loss of volume. A lot of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Altered trabecular pattern within the condylar head. Lateral rim of the fossa curves very minimally inferiorly only about a millimeter or so. Significantly decreased joint space and possibly some areas of bone contact present. This joint looks much worse than the opposite joint as far as degenerative changes are concerned. Some medial beaking present. It appears there is some rough bone on top of the condyle toward the middle medial side. There may be discal tissue out anteriorly.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Condyle actually extends out beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Relatively minimal downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa being only probably 1 to 2 mm at the most. Appears to be decreased joint space out laterally and over medially. Appears to be discal tissue anteriorly to the condyle.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has significant degenerative changes within the condylar head showing major alterations of the trabecular pattern and sclerosis within the condylar head. Anterior beaking is present. Significantly decreased vertical joint space where there is probably bone on bone contact. Anteroposterior width of the condyle is fairly good. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Appears to be some rough bone on the fossa as well as on the condyle. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and significantly degenerated. It is thickened and extremely short anteroposteriorly. A little bit of inflammatory tissue may be present in the joint space.

On opening, there is some restricted translation, and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. There is greater bone degeneration out laterally as compared to medially.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with a little bit better morphology than the opposite side. A little bit of anterior beaking present but not too bad. Decreased posterior joint space. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. The articular disc is anteriorly positioned and somewhat deformed, but over medially it has a little bit better shape than out laterally.

On opening, there is fairly good translation, and the articular disc does reduce. The articular disc does appear quite thick in the open view when it is reduced. In the mid medial portion of the condyle, there appears there is some erosion and some depression in the posterior head of the condyle and more unevenness on this side in the bone at this particular area.

Impression:
Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and probable perforation through the bilaminar tissues
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction

