B335 
B335 is 16 years old. She is referred by Dr. __.
Patient History
B335 is in good health and has no major medical problems. has had about 2-1/2 years of orthodontics with Dr. __. She went to see Dr. _about six weeks ago. B335 's joint problems began maybe about a year-and-a-half ago of unknown etiology. Her joints started to click and pop at that time. She had ortho from the ages of 11 through 13, had her braces off for about three or four months and had them put back on for another two months. She is now in retainers. Last year, she had a mouth guard made because she was told that she was clenching and grinding her teeth. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, hearing loss, and has no other joint problems. Allergy to PENICILLIN and to pollen. No problems wearing jewelry. Takes Flonase one time per day usually at night, and she takes Zyrtec for seasonal allergies. She has no problems with headache, no TMJ pain, and my myofascial pain. Rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 0, and disability at 0.

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 5 mm on the left and 6 mm on the right. Maxillary midline is off to the left side about a millimeter. Mandibular dental midline is off to the right side about a millimeter. Chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.

In profile, has a C-shaped curve in the upper lip. She has some slight AP maxillary deficiency up at subnasale by probably mm. Chin in AP deficiency by probably about 15 to 18 mm. Chin-neckline is short. She has fullness in the submental area, and chin-neckline is moderately well-defined. She has some mild lip incompetence of probably about 6 to 7 mm.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Has fairly good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch, although the labial frenulum is attached a little bit high. She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch being a little bit greater on the right side than the left side. Slight vertical difference in the height between the cuspid and first bicuspid on the right side. In the upper arch, has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. Appears to have some transverse dimension in the bicuspid area. In centric relation, she has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and Class II end-on on the left side by probably mm. Actually, she is end-on Class II bilaterally. She has an overjet of about 3 mm. She has an anterior open bite on the left side of about 1 to 2 mm in the central and lateral incisor area. In the lower arch, the right cuspid is probably 1 to 1.5 mm posterior to the left cuspid, so the right cuspid and posterior to the left cuspid. Maxillary left cuspid may be a millimeter posterior to the right cuspid. In centric occlusion, she has an open bite extending from the left first bicuspid around to probably the second bicuspid on the right side. Transversely, there is a cant in the occlusal plane with the left maxillary cuspid being 3 mm higher than the right side and mandibular left cuspid being about 1 to 1.5 mm higher than the right side.

Intranasally, the right turbinate appears moderate in size at least anteriorly. On the left side, the turbinate is quite a bit larger and seems to block a good part of the airway. Septum may be just slightly deviated off to the right side but not too significantly. does have a history of probably some moderate snoring. She is moderately tired during the day. She feels she has difficulties breathing through her nose and is predominantly a mouth breather.

To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck areas. On opening, joints seem to function relatively smooth. On excursive movements, she has a pop in the left TMJ fairly consistently but the right side remains relatively smooth. Incisal opening is about 39 mm. Excursive movements are about 8 mm to the right and 8 mm to the left.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows that she has a 3x3 retainer in the lower arch and 2x2 retainer in the upper arch. Sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged. She has an impacted mandibular left third molar, but the other third molars are not seen anywhere. Could be some osteoarthritic changes in the TMJs but difficult to tell on these views.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly. Appears to be an osteophytic formation on top of the condyle. Decreased joint space superiorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Appears there is a slightly decreased anterior joint space. Condyle may be a little bit short vertically.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit flattened on the anterior aspect. Articular eminence appears a little bit flattened compared to the opposite side, although it is fairly long in length. Joint space may be just a little bit decreased vertically.

On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints with the left side being a little bit more restricted than the right side. Condyles look a little bit small particularly on the left side, and the left side also appears to be a little bit more sclerotic.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. She has quite large frontal sinuses. Left turbinate appears to be fairly large and almost touching against the septum. Right turbinate appears large, but there does appear to be some airway around it.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that has a skeletal Class II relationship. She may not have been in central relation when this was taken. Has a little bit of an open bite anteriorly. She has a skeletal Class II relationship. High occlusal plane angle facial morphology is present. She has a large adenoid mass in the posterior pharyngeal wall area and has about a 2-mm airway between the adenoid tissue and the posterior aspect of the inferior turbinate. Tonsils take up a portion of the oropharynx. Airway dimension between the adenoid tissue and turbinate is less than 2 mm. The soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall airway is 5 mm, and at the base of the tongue the posterior pharyngeal wall is about 5.5 to 6 mm. There is a slight tooth-size discrepancy with a 's difference of about 1 mm.

On dental model analysis, there is an accentuated curve of occlusion posteriorly being greater on the right side than the left side up to the cuspid. Then the four anterior teeth are slightly lower than the occlusal plane at the cuspid level. There is a significant accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper jaw with an increased incisal position by probably 3 to 4 mm over the normal dimension.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ probably idiopathic condylar resorption with articular disc dislocation without reduction
Anterior vertical maxillary excess
Transverse maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
AP microgenia
High occlusal plane angulation
Anterior open bite
Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
Slight reverse curve of occlusion in the lower incisors
Class II end-on occlusion
Slight tooth-size discrepancy with a 's difference of about 1 mm
Overangulation of lower incisors
Vertical inclination of maxillary incisors
Hypertrophied turbinates
Hypertrophic nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue
Decreased nasopharyngeal airway
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway
Impacted mandibular left third molar
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the maxillary left side being 3 mm higher than the right side and the left mandibular plane being 1 mm higher on the left than the right side

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch in three segments:
Segment 1: Left cuspid through left first molar
Segment 2: Left lateral incisor through right lateral incisor
Segment 3: Right cuspid through right first molar
Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Place a compensating step in the arch wire to align the four incisors in an elevated level and to extrude the cuspids 1 to 2 mm to get them in better vertical position relative to the posterior teeth. Place brackets on the second molars but do not engage in the arch wire
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract. Try to elevate lower incisors about a millimeter and depress the cuspids about 1 mm on each side

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly, level the occlusal plane transversely and anteroposteriorly, and expand
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Small augmentation genioplasty
Surgical removal of impacted mandibular left third molar
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B335  MRI Scan Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of :
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. Appears to have been some osseous changes occurring in this condyle. Lateral rim of the fossa curves significantly inferiorly probably mm. Appears to be a decreased joint space toward the medial aspect of the joint. Disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. Fossa appears to be intact.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with moderately good mediolateral width. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly fairly significantly probably 4 to 5 mm. Decreased lateral joint space. Disc may be anteriorly displaced. Cortical bone appears to be intact.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has flattening on the anterior aspect. Articular eminence is fairly long and fairly steep. Increased joint space vertically and posteriorly as well as anteriorly. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and significantly foreshortened anteroposteriorly. Disc is sitting beneath the articular eminence. Some fluid in the superior joint space.

On opening, there is restricted translation, and the disc remains nonreducing. The disc demonstrates minimal translation indicative of perhaps adhesions of the disc to the articular eminence. There are some bony changes in the condylar head.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with flattening on the anterior head and some anterior beaking present. Perhaps slightly increased joint space vertically and anteriorly. Some sclerotic or fibrotic soft tissues in the joint. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and significantly foreshortened anteroposteriorly. Medially in the head of the condyle the cortical bone becomes extremely thin. Articular eminence is not quite as steep as the other side, although the slope is still fairly long. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space.

On opening, there is restricted translation of the condyle, and the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.
Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
Could possibly be idiopathic condylar resorption
Questionable salvageability of the articular discs but probably still are salvageable

