B336  MRI AGE: 28/F
DOB:
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. The disc appears medial and anteriorly displaced. Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that may be just slightly larger than the left side. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. The disc appears to be anteriorly and medially displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little bit arthritic with some peaking over the top of the condyle and some sclerosis on the head of the condyle. The disc is in a vertical orientation within the joint and I think there is a wedge pushing the condyle posterior in the fossa. There is decreased posterior joint space. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. The disc is in a pre-click position. There appears to be a small osteophyte off the top of the condyle. On opening, there is reduction of the articular disc and good translation of both the condyle and the articular disc. The articular eminence is fairly steep. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of peaking of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced, particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint more so than the medial side. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is probable early reduction and good translation of both the condyle and disc. IMPRESSION:

Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with probable early reduction. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with early reduction.

B336 
B336 is 28 years old and she is referred by Dr. __. Primary concerns that B336 has include the following:
TMJ problems.
Gummy smile.
Overbite.
Chin wrinkles.
Lips do not touch without stress.

She takes no medications. She has had a splint since earlier this year. Prior to that, she had increased problems with TMJ pain and headaches. The splint has helped decrease those. She wears the splint just at night. She is aware at night of clenching her teeth, but she does not do that during the day. She rates her headaches at a level of 1 in the temporal areas, TMJ pain at 1, average daily pain at 1, jaw function, diet, and disability at 1. She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. The only joints that bother her are her back.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B336 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 6 mm. The maxillary midline may be about 0.5 mm off to the right. The mandibular dental midline and chin appear to being close to the facial midline. Lip incompetence is about 9 mm. In profile view, she has some slight AP deficiency at subnasale at 2-3 mm. Upper lip appears fairly full. Chin is retruded about 12-15 mm. Chin neckline is a little bit short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined. Intraorally, B336 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. The left cuspid is about 1-2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. She is missing the maxillary right first molar, but the second and third molars have drifted forward. The other three third molars are absent. B336 is basically a Class I cuspid on the right side and Class II end-on cuspid on the left side by probably 2 mm. She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm. The right cuspid is about 1 mm lower than the left one. Intranasally, turbinates appear moderately enlarged. The septum as best as I could see it seems reasonably straight. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the masseter muscles and the shoulders. On opening, she has a click in the left joint at about 20 mm and a closing click at 10 and on the right side, the opening click is at probably 30 mm and closing click about 15. Maximal incisal opening is 52 mm and excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular third molars bilaterally and the maxillary left third molar. She is missing the maxillary right first molar and second and third molars have drifted forward with some residual spacing present. The turbinates appear enlarged. Coronal view shows that she has hypertrophied turbinates. The septum appears a little bit wide. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates are quite large and appear to block off a major part of the airway. Left TMJ coronal tomograms show that there appears to be decreased vertical joint space and decreased lateral joint space. Lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 2-3 mm. Right TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle with fairly good morphology. There is decreased lateral joint space. Lateral rim curves inferiorly a little bit greater on this side probably about 4-5 mm. Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show that the condyle has flattening along the posterior head and is sclerotic. There is decreased posterior joint space and increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is fairly steep in some of the views. Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of sclerosis. Joint space appears a little bit more balanced on this side. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B336 has a high occlusal plane angle and a skeletal Class II jaw relationship. Oropharyngeal airway is a little bit constricted with an AP dimension at the soft palate level of about 7 mm and at the base of the tongue of about 7-8 mm.

Basic diagnoses for B336 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia but with anterior maxillary vertical hyperplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Crowding of lower anterior arch.
Mild crowding of upper anterior arch.
Class I occlusion on the right, slight Class II end-on occlusion on the left.
Missing right maxillary first molar with the second and third molars drifted forward.
Tooth size discrepancy with a 's difference of about 2.5 mm.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Slight cant in the occlusal plan with the right side being 1-2 mm lower than the left side.
Lip incompetence of about 9 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots slightly mesial and cuspid roots slightly distal to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary. Upright and advance the maxillary right second and third molars.
Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2.5-3 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward and to correct for the tooth size problem.
Surgery. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

