B337 
B337 is 25 years old, referred by Dr. __. has had no previous surgeries. She is in good health.
MEDICATIONS:
Yasmin.
Doxycycline.

She gets nauseated when taking minocycline but has no other known allergies.
PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Left TMJ locking.
Difficulties eating. Pain worse on the left side.
Wakes up with pain in the mornings. Decreased mouth opening.
Jaw and bite may be changing. Speech changes.

B337 's problems began about 4 to 5 years ago when she first noted clicking. Etiology is unknown. However, she was eating a bagel about 5 years ago and that is when the pain problems first began. She had Invisalign orthodontic treatment 5 years ago that took about 9 months. She has had equilibration and splints x2. She had an arthrogram of the left TMJ last year. The arthrogram was just of the left joint and showed that the disc was displaced.

B337 has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She has no known allergies and no problems wearing jewelry. She is however, very much aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at night but does not believe she does it during the day.

B337 gets headaches once or twice a week predominately in the left frontal area and the temple area behind her eye at about a level of 6. She used to get these more often but they have decreased some maybe due to the splint wear. She rates her TMJ pain on an average day at about 8 and particularly when she wakes up in the morning when it is the worse. With function, it can go up to a 9. The pain is much worse on the left side as compared to right side. She rates her average daily pain around the head and neck a level of 5. She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 5, disability at 5.

In frontal view, has good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 5 mm. She has a little bit more fullness in the right mandibular angle area as compared to the left side by maybe a couple of millimeters. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is off to the left about 1 mm and chin is off the left maybe 2 mm. In profile view, she has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip. Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to the subnasale by a couple of mm. The maxilla may be AP deficient by probably about 3 to 4 mm. Chin is retruded by probably about 15 mm. B337 

Chin neckline is somewhat shorter though the chin-neck angle is well defined. has lip incontinence of probably about 8 mm or so. Intraorally, has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. A little amount of crowding in the lower anterior arch but not too bad. She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, has all of her teeth back through the second molars. In centric occlusion she has slightly reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch with the incisors being 1 to 2 mm lower than they should be. Upper arch looks relatively flat. She has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship being about 3 mm on the left side and 2 mm on the right side. Anterior open bite is about 2 mm. In centric relation, tends to occlude on the left side and in and around the second bicuspid, first and second molar area. As opens, she does deviate towards the left side probably about 3 to 4 mm. Intraorally, the uvula may be just mildly elongated but not too significant. Soft palate and faucial pillars look fairly normal. The tonsils are present and appear normal. Intranasally, the turbinates appears maybe mildly enlarged but not too significant. The septum is reasonably straight. Nasal airway appears good. Columella is wide and the nostrils are somewhat narrow. Luminal valves appear relatively normal. To palpation, she has high moderate pain over both TMJs, moderate pain over the masseters, shoulders and milder tenderness over the temporalis muscles and styloid area. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly. Maximal opening is 28 mm but only 20 mm without pain and discomfort. Excursive movement to the right 4 mm, to the left 3 mm. did have her wisdom teeth taken out when she was about 16 years old. Transverse occlusal plane appears fairly level. It is possible that the right side could be down just slightly compared to the left side. There is some vertical asymmetry in the incisors but the cuspids appear fairly level. Left central and lateral is slightly elevated compared to the right side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
: Panorex shows presence of all the teeth except for the four third molars. Teeth appear to be relatively nicely aligned and with reasonably good root formation. The sinuses appear clear. Nasal airway appears clear. Articular eminences are moderately steep. The left condyle appears a little bit more arthritic than the right condyle. The right condyle appears a little bit larger than the left condyle.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates are moderate size. The septum is fairly straight in the bony area. There appears to be passable airway bilaterally.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterosuperior aspect of the head. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present but not too much. Could feel a little bit of an osteophyte on the superior aspect of the condyle. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On one view it appears there could a little bit of erosion in the fossa area.

B337 
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is superiorly and posteriorly positioned in the fossa. There could be a little bit of an osteophyte sticking up off the top of it. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There could be a little bit of sclerosis around the head of the condyle. On opening, there is restricted movement in both joints with perhaps a slight greater decreased translation on the left side compared to the right side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that has some AP mandibular deficiency with an anterior open bite. It appears there may be a cant in the occlusion as there is a difference in vertical position of the occlusal surfaces and inferior border of the mandible. Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat decreased with the distance in the base of the tongue to posteropharyngeal wall of about 3 to 4 mm and from the soft palate to posteropharyngeal wall about 5 mm. She shows some vertical maxillary excess. She demonstrates lip incompetence of about 10 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and significant degenerative changes.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP maxillary deficiency, AP mandibular deficiency.
Anterior open bite.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. Headaches.
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism.
Reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch. Slight accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Anterior open bite of 2 mm. Masticatory dysfunction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications:
Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s. Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally. Try to extrude the upper cuspids at least 1 mm. Align the four incisors at an elevated occlusal plane by placing a step in the archwire.
Align and level mandibular arch. Try to extrude lower incisors at least 1 mm to help correct the reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch.

B337 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superior, level the curve of Spee and correct any transverse discrepancies that may be present.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B337 MRI Evaluation 
Date of Birth: 
Age: 25
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation: 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat arthritic. There is an osteophyte sticking up off the top of the condyle and some anterior beaking present. There are some areas of sclerosis on the condyle a little bit towards the front side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Anterior disc is anteriorly positioned and sitting beneath the articular eminence. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint the disc is quite narrow anteroposteriorly. More medial it does have a little bit better forward-backward dimension but it is still foreshortened over the normal dimension. There is decreased superior and posterior joint space between the condyle and fossa. On opening, there appears to be restricted translation with possible closed lock on this side. There appears to be some fluid in superior and inferior joint spaces surrounding the disc. Arthritic changes in the left joint look worse than the right side.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit larger than the opposite side. There is some flattening on the anterior head. Decreased superior and posterior joint spaces. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly positioned and sitting beneath the articular eminence. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is better translation on this side and the articular disc appears to reduce into position.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated with deformation and probable closed lock situation. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.


