B338 
B338 is 17 years old and referred by Dr. __. Dr. __ also has seen B338.
Patient History

Previous surgeries included a rhinoplasty and some sinus surgery. B338 has had her nose broken a couple of times previously. 2 years ago, B338 had surgery to straighten her nose up and also to open up her frontal sinuses and her maxillary sinuses. She has done well since then. B338  broke her nose at the age of 5 rollerblading.

B338's problems began about three or four years ago of unknown etiology. She had orthodontics beginning toward the end of her seventh grade in about 4 years ago and had then removed in 2 years ago. About three or four weeks ago, Dr. __ placed an appliance for B338 . This has helped her some.

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, but does get some vertigo. She has a congenital neck deformity with a slipped disc in the neck that has been treated with physical therapy, and it is doing fairly well now. Her hips pop but don't really cause any other pain. She does have some problems with her knees secondary to dislocated kneecaps, and she gets pain occasionally. B338 is a dancer. She danced competitively prior and now is on her high school drill team. She attributes some of her knee problems to wearing pointe dance shoes from the ages of 11 to 13. She is aware of clenching and bruxism particularly at night. She used to do it during the daytime also but appears to have that under control. She used to chew a lot of gum, ice, and straws but has eliminated that in the last three or four weeks. During her orthodontics, B338 did wear Class II elastics, and this was only required for a short duration.

Patient Concerns
Popping in the left jaw joint
Pain in the left jaw joint
Current Medications
Aleve for TMJ and knee pain p.r.n. Allegra for her allergies

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B338 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Tooth-to-lip relationship is 5 mm. Maxillary dental midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline.

In profile, she has good facial balance. Chin-neckline is well-defined, and chin-neck angle is also well-defined.
Intraorally, she has retained primary E's but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. In the upper arch, she has a retained primary E on the left side, and she has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship. She has about a 4 to 5-mm anterior deep bite relationship. Oropharynx appears clear. She is not aware of having any problems breathing through her nose. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the left TMJ but no other tenderness around the head and neck area. On opening, right joint is relatively smooth. In the left joint, she has an opening click at less than 10 mm and a closing click at probably around 5 mm. Maximal incisal opening is 60 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 11 mm and to the left 12 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the sinuses look fairly clear. Some deviation of the nasal septum. Turbinates appear moderate in size. She has impacted maxillary third molars. She has retained maxillary left E and bilateral mandibular E's. Low condensing osteiitis at the distal aspect of the mandibular left first bicuspid. Condyles look relatively normal. Articular eminences look a little bit steep. On review, it shows that the nasal septum is deviated. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged. Otherwise, face appears to have reasonably good symmetry, although the right side could be just slightly longer than the left side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that may be a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly but not too bad. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space is well-balanced and defined.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology although a little bit of peaking superiorly. Decreased superior joint space, although the posterior joint space doesn't look too bad. Moderate steepness to the articular eminence. Decreased joint space certainly could be compatible with a decreased disc on that side.

Translation is excellent in both joints.
Sagittal view shows there may be some vertical asymmetry. She swallowed during the x-ray, so we cannot determine the oropharyngeal airway space. She does have a significant adenoid mass still remaining in the nasopharynx. Transversely, there is a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the right cuspid being about 2 mm lower than the left in the upper arch and about 1 mm difference in the lower arch.

Basic Diagnoses
Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction
Left mandibular hyperplasia
Left TMJ pain
Impacted third molars
Vertigo
Headaches

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics A.	Place appliances on the maxillary arch
B.	Place appliances on the mandibular arch. Work up to surgical level arch wires

Surgery
A.	Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
B.	Left mandibular ramus osteotomy with bone screw stabilization
C.	Surgical removal of third molars

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
Restorative dentistry to build up anterior teeth
B338  MRI Evaluation

Date of Acquisition:
I believe the MRI is questionable as the mandible is postured significantly forward in the closed views where the condyle is about two thirds the way down the articular eminence. Also, no coronal views are available.

Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is postured downward and forward in the fossa. Disc appears to be between the condyle and the fossa area. On one view, it appears to be medially positioned. Condyle is a little bit narrow mediolaterally. Minimal downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is much wider in mediolateral width. Seems to have some medial beaking present. Increased joint space vertically. Disc appears to be in position. Minimal downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. Lateral pole of the condyle appears to extend almost lateral to the lateral rim of the fossa.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows the condyle postured significantly forward in the fossa. Out laterally, the condyle has fairly good anteroposterior width, but over medially it is extremely narrow anteroposteriorly where it almost comes to a point. Significantly greater hockey stick shape formation medially as compared to laterally. On some views, disc appears to be in position and in others it appears that it may be anteriorly positioned. A little bit of joint fluid anteriorly. Most likely the disc is in position in the protracted position of the mandible. On one view it appears that there is almost an osteophytic formation off the posterior aspect of the articular eminence that extends posteriorly into the fossa. On oblique views that were taken, the disc does appear to be in better position. There is maybe some inflammation in the bilaminar tissues. There is some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence appears more shallow on the oblique views as compared to the sagittal views.

In the opening views, it appears that the condyle starts out at a more retruded position as compared to static views. In the closed views, the condyle appears to be more posteriorly positioned in the fossa, and the disc is anteriorly displaced although it appears to reduce on opening.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, the same situation holds for the sagittal views where condyle is postured forward significantly but only about halfway down the articular eminence. It appears that discal tissue is in position on these views. A little bit of fluid in the inferior joint space above the condyle. There is a little of fluid in the superior joint space.

On opening, translation is not quite as good as the opposite side, but it appears to translate with the condyle. Oblique views show that the condyle is postured forward, although the disc appears to be in position. Condyle appears wider in dimension out laterally and gets narrower over medially similar to the opposite side. Hockey stick shape to the condyle more medially. Significantly increased joint space noted on these views. In the opening views, the condyle is postured forward on this side throughout. We had no views of the right side in a more centric relation position.

Impression:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis, possible articular disc dislocations, but only evident on one side because of the extreme forward position of the condyles within the fossas

