B339
B339 is 36 years old and is referred by Dr. __. She has been diagnosed with asthma in the past. She had some nose surgery after a severe break. She has had hepatitis in the past. Besides the asthma factors, she is in fairly good health.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Prozac 80 mg daily.
Wellbutrin 100 mg daily.
Singulair 10 mg daily.
Flexeril p.r.n. Xanax p.r.n. Albuterol p.r.n. Pulmicort p.r.n.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Headaches.
Neck and shoulder pain.
Difficulties chewing. Popping and grinding noises in the joints.
PREVIOUS TREATMENT:
Orthodontics age 14 to 18.
Splint therapy from the age of 21 to the present.
Physical therapy from 9 to 4 years ago.

She said that when had the previous nasal surgery she also had reduction of the turbinates.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
: In frontal view, B339 has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 to 3 mm. Nasal tip is also probably a couple of millimeters. Mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline slightly to the left as well. There is a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1 to 2 mm higher than the right side. In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency by probably about 8 mm or so. Chin-neckline is short and submental area is somewhat full. Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids and 3rd molars. She has adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch she is also missing first bicuspids. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side by probably at least 5 mm but on the left side she is closer to a Class I, maybe just 1 to 2 mm Class II. She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm. Intranasally, the right turbinate is fairly large but there still appears to be adequate airway around it. The left turbinate appears small as though there was a better reduction of the turbinate on that side. The columella is moderately wide and nostrils are narrow. B339 is not aware of snoring. To palpation, she has mild to moderate pain throughout the head and neck area with the worst pain being in her shoulders and her left TMJ area. On opening, the right side functions fairly smoothly because of the extremely early reduction of the disc. On the left side, she has an opening click of about 28 mm and closing click of probably about 15 to 20 mm. B339 

Maximal incisal opening is 37 mm but opening without pain only about 14 mm. Excursive movements are 8 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the absence of all four first bicuspids and all four third molars. The sinuses look relatively clear. Difficult to evaluate the condyles but the left one looks more sclerotic. It also appears shorter in vertical length of the head and neck compared to the right side. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch and a root canal in the maxillary right central incisor.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is fairly steep. The condyle may be a little bit sclerotic.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is somewhat small in size. There is some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The condylar head and neck length is extremely short compared to opposite side. On opening, there is moderate translation of both condyles with it coming down onto the base of the articular eminence.

Waters view shows that she has significantly deviated bony septum with the spur coming off the left side. The right turbinate appears enlarged. Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she may have just some slight AP deficiency in the maxilla and mandible. Slight increased occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 8 mm at the base of the tongue probably similar to that at the soft palate level. She appears to have a slight Class II skeletal relationship. Actually she has a tooth size discrepancy of almost 4 mm, in part due to the fact that the maxillary lateral incisors are small and the left central is also small compared to the right one. She does have asymmetry in the maxillary arch with the left cuspid being at least 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. The lower arch is a little bit more symmetric.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: Left TMJ significant arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction. AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Maxillary asymmetry with the left cuspid being 2 to 3 mm posterior to the right cuspid.
Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars.
High occlusal plane angle.
TMJ pain, left side greater than right side. Headaches. Myofascial pain. Chronic clenching and bruxism. Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4 mm.

B339
RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Open up 1 mm of space between each maxillary lateral incisor with 1 mm distal and 1 mm mesial to correct for the 4 mm tooth size discrepancy. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. Surgery.
Treatment option 1.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and down graft it posteriorly.
Bilateral fat grafts to TMJ (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoid plasties. Treatment option 2.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it slightly and down graft it posteriorly.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to build up maxillary lateral incisors.

B339 MRI EVALUATION 
AGE: 
DOB: 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears narrow mediolaterally. There appears to be some discal tissue displaced medially. The condyle appears sclerotic. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly.

Right TMJ shows abnormal morphology on the superior aspect. Both condyles appear to have undergone significant degeneration. It is fairly flat with a downward curvature of only about 1 mm. Difficult to identify discal tissue in these views.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone degenerative changes. There is significant anterior beaking and sclerosis. Out laterally, the condyle appears arthritic. The disc appears short anteroposteriorly with thickening of the disc. Articular eminence is moderately steep.
On opening, there is fairly good translation. It appears to be remain anteriorly displaced without reduction. In the open views the disc appears to be significantly deformed.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little sclerotic on top and a little flattening present. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Articular disc is vertically positioned within the fossa. There is a decreased posterior and posterosuperior joint space. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there appears to be early reduction of the disc and there is fairly good translation of the condyle and the disc.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ significant arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction with significant deformation. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced but with early reduction.

