B340 
Date of Birth: 
B340 is 59 years old. Her doctor is Dr. __. She has arthritis. She has had previous surgery including two knee replacements and also a hysterectomy. B340 was referred to me by Dr. __ who she only saw once and told her it was more than he could handle and referred her here and is not involved in her treatment. The two knee replacements that B340 previously has had are working out very well for her. One knee replacement was done 8 years ago and the other one done 6 years ago. The hysterectomy B340 had was performed 30 years ago.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS
Premarin 0.625 mg q.d.
Folic acid 1 mg x2.
Detrol LA 4 mg (bladder control.)
Celebrex 200 mg q.d.
Plaquenil 200 mg x2.
Methotrexate 2.5 mg x8 x1 week. Methocarbamol 750 mg p.r.n. (Robaxin.)
Darvocet p.r.n.

ALLERGIES: Iodine, penicillin and sulfa.
B340's problems began about 20 years ago of unknown etiology. She has worn splints for approximately 15 years. She has had her current splint for about 3 years. Dr. __ has been managing her for awhile. She has had previous TENS treatment but this was ineffective. The bite splint does help her significantly although she still has fairly significant pain. Without it, her pain would probably be close to intolerable. She gets earaches, ringing in her ears and has hearing loss but no vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her knees that had been replaced with total joint prosthesis and are functioning very well. Also, she has problems with her neck, back, right shoulder, right elbow, wrists, hands fingers, hips and her left big toe. She is aware of clenching and bruxism particularly at night and she does some during the day as well. She gets headaches about 1 time per week and they occur predominately in the worst area in the back of the head and up towards the top and some up towards the temple area at about a level of 7. She rates her average TMJ pain at about a level of 6, average daily facial pain at 5, jaw function 8, diet 7, disability at 5. When she does get her headaches they sometimes will last for several days. These come several days in a row, and then she may go awhile without having one. These seem to occur in groups. She does snore when she sleeps. She has moderate tiredness during the day but she is not aware of having any sleep apnea symptoms. She has moderate nasal airway obstruction. She says that when she wakes up in the morning her mouth usually feels quite dry as though she has been breathing through her mouth most of the night.

In frontal view, B340 has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 2 mm. Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the right. In centric occlusion and centric relation, B340 has a 4 mm anterior open bite.

B340 
In profile view, B340 has fairly good projection of the maxilla, cheeks and nose. Chin appears retruded and chin-neck line is not well defined. Chin is probably about a good 10 to 12 mm AP deficient. Intraorally, B340 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars on the left side and to the third molar on the right side. She has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. In the upper arch she likewise has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. In centric relation she occludes only on the right second molars. All other teeth are out of occlusion. She initiates on the right side and then the left side will come together in the second molar area. She has basically a Class II cuspid relationship being of with greater Class II on the right side than the left side. She has probably a 5 mm Class II on the right side and 3 mm on the left side. Oropharynx appears clear. The uvula appears relatively normal as does the soft palate. Faucial pillars appear relatively normal. Luminal valves are a little bit constricted. Holding the nose open, she could breathe easier. The septum is relatively normal and turbinates actually appear somewhat small in size. The bite can actually be positioned into reasonable occlusion, just a little bit of prematurity in the bicuspid area on the left side. Transversely, the maxilla is reasonably leveled. Maximal incisal opening is about 38 mm. Excursive movement to the right 8 mm, to the left 10 mm. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the right temporalis muscle and right shoulder. She has crepitation in the right TMJ although the left side seems relatively smooth.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
The sinuses appear reasonably clear. Actually there could be a little cloudiness in the left one. Severe arthritis is present in both TMJs. The 4 wisdom teeth are gone. She has a root canal of the maxillary second molars. She has crowns on most of the bicuspids and molars.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are actually fairly clear. Turbinates are fairly small. Septum is reasonably straight though there may be septal spur off the left side in the bony part of the septum.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that there is fairly significant arthritis present and bone-on-bone contact. There appears to be degenerative changes in the fossa as well as the condyle.

Left TMJ tomogram shows severe arthritis as well with some sclerotic bone on the head of the condyle and minimal joint space vertically. Articular eminence is moderately shallow just as it is on the other side. On opening, there is a little bit better translation of the right condyle compared to the left condyle.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has an anterior open bit of about 5 to 6 mm in centric relation. Oropharyngeal airway is quite narrow and an airway dimension of only about 2 mm at the base of the soft palate and base of the tongue. She has a high occlusal pain angle of the mandibular arch. She has a skeletal Class II relationship.

B340 
BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ severe resorptive arthritis.
Severe apertognathia with an open bite of approximately 5 mm. Class II occlusion. TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. Occludes only on second molars and all of the teeth are out of occlusion.
Severe masticatory dysfunction.
Tinnitus. Earaches.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Evaluation by Dr. __to be sure patient is medically ready to undergo surgery when it is eventually scheduled. Bilateral TMJ maxillary and mandibular CT scans (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction in counterclockwise rotation of the mandible utilizing TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.
Postsurgical physical therapy if necessary.
Removal of arch bars probably 4 to 6 weeks post surgery.

I did discuss with B340 potential risks and complications including infection, nerve injury and bleeding problems that could require transfusion. I suggested that B340 contact her physician in reference to evaluating blood levels, bleeding times etc., to be sure it would be safe for us to proceed on with the surgery.

B340 
Age: 
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is narrow mediolaterally. There is significantly decreased joint space. There is osteophyte formation in the condyle. Minimal downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa no more than a couple of mm. Difficult to identify discal tissue. There possibly could be some towards the medial side of the joint.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little bit more width than the opposite side but significant degenerative changes. There is sclerosis on the top of the condyle. There appears to be an osteophyte extending down from the fossa. There appears to be very narrow joint space and likely bone-on-bone contact with perforations. Mild downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa being probably about 2 mm or so and a little bit greater than the opposite side.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite narrow as it shows open on 3 images. There are significant changes on the head of the condyle. There may be some breakdown in the cortical bone across the head of the condyle. There also is degeneration of the roof of the fossa. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Significant degenerative changes of both condyle and fossa are present. Probable perforation with probable bone-on-bone contact. The condyle appears quite flattened across the top. The posterior aspect of the condyle head extends relatively sharply posteriorly. No significant inflammation seen. On opening, there is suprisingly reasonable translation of the condyle. The condyle comes out towards the inferior aspect of the articular eminence. Again the eminence is extremely flat. There appears to be just a lot of degenerative changes present in the fossa as well as the condyle. The patient may have had previous surgery. In the T2 images, there is some funny material around the ear canal. One would suspect a possible cholesteatoma.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with severe arthritic changes. There is severe anterior beaking and sclerosis on the head of the condyle. The condyle is extremely flat across the top. Articular eminence is extremely flat. There are some degenerative changes in the fossa indicative of perhaps significant degenerative change or previous surgery that had been done on this joint. On one there appears that there may be some discal tissue sitting underneath the articular eminence but difficult to tell. For the most part no discal tissues were evident in the joint. No evidence of any significant inflammation. On opening, there is again surprisingly reasonable translation with the condyle coming forward underneath the articular eminence. There is virtually no joint space at all indicative of bone-on-bone contact.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ severe osteoarthritis with difficulty identifying any discal tissue.
Possible left middle ear cholesteatoma.
Right TMJ severe arthritis and no significant evidence of discal tissue present. The patient may have had previous surgery to include bilateral discectomies and eminectomies.
The patient is a candidate for bilateral total joint prostheses.

