B341 
B341 is 18 years old and referred by Dr. __.
Patient History
She has had previous back surgery 6 years ago and 4 years ago. She also had some stomach surgery in 6 years ago. The back surgery was related to a fracture of her vertebrae secondary to a car accident. Her abdominal surgery was also related to the car accident.

SHE HAS HAD A REACTION TO CODEINE.
She had her wisdom teeth removed last October. She has been placed in a bite splint. It doesn't give her any significant relief at all. It actually worsened her symptoms.

Current Medications
Her only medication is BCPs.
Patient Concerns
Primary concerns that B341 has include the following:
Difficulty opening her mouth.
When she does open her mouth to a certain point she does get clicking and popping in her jaw joints.
She gets headaches.
Neck pain.
Pain in the jaw joints.
Pain through the jaw areas.
Earaches.

Last year the problems were exacerbated when she broke her nose when she caught an elbow during cheerleading.
The onset of B341 's TMJ problems may have begun as far back as 6 years ago related to the automobile accident she was in. The trauma to her nose that really set off the worsening of her situation occurred last year. B341 has had previous orthodontics with the work being done predominantly on the lower teeth.

B341 was involved in a motor vehicle accident in 6 years ago. She noted TMJ symptoms immediately after that accident. She had pain and had some clicking in that joint after the accident. However, the severe pain problems did not exacerbate themselves until the more recent trauma. She did have chronic pain in that left jaw before the second traumatic injury where she got hit in the nose and jaw area. Therefore, the onset of the TMJ problems appears to be related to the MVA 6 years ago and was exacerbated by the trauma sustained last year. MRI confirms that the arthritis and displaced disc in the left TMJ have been present for much longer than last year.

Clinical Evaluation
In frontal view, she has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Angle in the right mandible is a little bit more prominent than the left side by probably about 4 mm or so. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary and mandibular dental midlines as well as the chin are fairly well-aligned on the facial midline.
In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Chin is a little bit retruded. Chin-neckline is somewhat short. Chin-neckline is not well-defined nor is the angle.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva though it is short in vertical dimension. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship and has about a 3 to 4-mm overbite relationship. She is Class II end-on in centric relation with about a 2 to 3 mm overjet. Oropharynx is clear, and the tonsils are present but small in size. Turbinates are fairly good size particularly on the right side. Left side is a little bit smaller and appears to be a little bit better air way on the left, although the turbinate still appears quite large. To palpation, she does have some mild tenderness over the right styloid area.

On opening, she has a click in the left joint at about 20 mm and a soft closing click at about 10 mm. Right joint seems to function reasonably smoothly. Could be some crepitation in that left joint. Maximal incisal opening is 28 mm, but excursive movements are 10 mm in each direction. Although she reports clicking in both joints, only the left side is clicking today. In excursive movements, she has a noise in the left joint. Transversely, there is a cant in the occlusion with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side. The prominence in the right mandibular angle area may be related to some masseteric hyperplasia. The dental arches seem fairly well oriented transversely.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex demonstrates the absence of all four third molars. Sinuses appear relatively clear, although could be a little mucocele in each sinus, but difficult to tell from this view. The nasal airway actually looks reasonably good on both sides. Condyles look relatively normal, although there is some flattening on the left side, and it appears slightly smaller than the right condyle.

Waters view shows that the sinuses all appear relatively clear. Vertical asymmetry in the jaw structures is evident with the left side being vertically shorter than the right side by probably 4 to 5 mm. Increased thickness in the masseter muscle area is obvious on the right side as compared to the left side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit of sclerosis on top of it. Articular eminence is moderately steep, and it appears that it may be a little bit sclerotic as well. Decreased joint space superiorly and posteriorly. May be some anterior beaking development.

Right TMJ shows a joint with a little bit better morphology. Disc may be vertically oriented in the joint. Superior and posterior joint spaces appear a little bit better on this side than the opposite side. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

On opening, there is some moderate restriction of translation with the condyles coming down only to the inferior aspect of the articular eminence.
Cephalometrically, the difference in vertical position of the mandible angles is obvious as is the differentiation in the occlusal plane level. She does have a moderately high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway looks good.

Basic Diagnoses
Based on clinical, radiographic, and dental model analysis, B341 's diagnoses are as follows:
Left TMJ reactive and resorptive arthritis with articular disc dislocation with significant deformation.
Right TMJ arthritis and a medially displaced articular disc.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency and asymmetry.
Mandibular AP deficiency and significant asymmetry.
AP microgenia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side.
Right masseteric hyperplasia.
Severe TMJ pain with the right side being worse than the left side.
Moderate to severe headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Significantly limited jaw opening and function.
Earaches.
Difficulties eating and chewing. Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament with Mitek anchor and probable discoplasty.
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it slightly, downgraft it, and level it transversely with bone plate stabilization and hydroxyapatite grafting.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward and transversely shift it into the midline.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy with bone screw stabilization.
Partial turbinectomy.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B341  MRI Evaluation
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is narrow mediolaterally. There appears to be evidence of condylar resorption. Fossa appears to be intact for the most part. Joint space appears decreased particularly over medially. There is just a slight downward turn of the lateral rim of the fossa. There is maybe some discal tissue medially and anteriorly.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with better size and morphology without any significant evidence of resorption. Lateral rim of the fossa curves downward a little bit more so than the left side. May be some decreased joint space out laterally. There appears to be discal tissue evident medially.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is undergoing osseous changes with anterior beaking. An osteophyte is coming out superiorly towards the medial aspect of the joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep, but it appears that the bone structures are in good shape. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. Disc is foreshortened anteroposteriorly. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space, but no significant inflammation is seen.

On opening, the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. Joint space is quite narrow in the open position indicative of possible perforation.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with some flattening on the anterior head. The articular disc is in a vertical orientation. Out laterally is not seen indicative of probably medial displacement. No fluid seen in the joint space.

Open films not available.
Impression:
Left TMJ resorptive arthritis (possible ICR versus reactive arthritis) and articular disc dislocation without reduction.
Right TMJ arthritis and medial displacement of the articular disc.
Both discs appear to be salvageable.

