B342 
B342 is 48 years old, referred by Dr. __. B342 has had previous detached retinas in both eyes and had surgery 17 and 15 years ago to control that situation. She smokes one pack of cigarettes per day and has done that for 25 years. She otherwise is in fairly good health. She does have thyroid problems and takes Synthroid. She also takes Prefest and Aciphex.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Difficulty eating.
Headaches.
TMJ pain. Jaw tiredness.
Retruded lower jaw.
She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her left shoulder, right hip and neck. Her neck problems are from an MVA she sustained about 20 years ago. She is aware of clenching during the day.

TMJ problems began about 20 years ago. She had an MVA approximately 20 years ago and she is not sure if this initiated or exacerbated the pain problems. She thinks she did have headaches prior to the MVA accident.

She has had ortho for the past two years and she has a splint that she wears 24/7 and has done this for about 7 months. She has had chiropractic treatment for 23 years but for the last 2 years primary focus was on the TMJs. She does not have any overt pain in the TMJs themselves. She rates her average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 5, diet at 6, disability at 3.

In frontal view, B342 has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face. There is some slight asymmetry in the nasal tip. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm. Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right side. Chin is probably 2 to 3 mm off to the right side. On profile view, B342 has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm. Mandible is retruded by approximately 15 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short and chin-neck angle is off in the submental area with no definition posteriorly. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Some slight asymmetry in the lower arch with the right cuspid being about 1 mm to 2 posterior to the left cuspid. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. The left cuspid appears to be about 2 mm lower than the right cuspid. There is orbital dystopia with the right eye being about 2 mm higher than the left eye. The upper arch appears a little bit more symmetric anteroposteriorly. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally maybe being just slightly worse on the right side. She is probably a 3 to 4 mm Class II on the left side and a 4 to 5 mm Class II on the right side. There is about a mm vertical overbite and about 5 mm AP overjet. As she slides the lower jaw forward she has a little bit better Class I cuspid position. Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably good. Uvula is relatively normal or slightly mildly enlarged. Soft palate may be a little bit elongated.

B342 
Faucial pillars look relatively normal. B342 feels that she is predominately a mouth breather particularly when she sleeps be her throat is always dry when she wakes up in the morning. Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged. The septum is acceptably straight. Maximal incisal opening is 45 mm but about 30 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movement to right 5 mm, to the left 7 mm. To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area except moderate pain over the right styloid area and milder pain over the shoulders and the left styloid area. She hits predominately on the first and second molars and most of the other teeth are out of occlusion. She also has about a 1 to 2 mm anterior open bite in centric relation. In centric relation she occludes on the first and second molars.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex reveals the absence of all four third molars. There appears to be decreased vertical height of the mandible posteriorly particularly on the right side a decreased dimension from the inferior border to the apices of the teeth. Sinuses appear to be clear. Condyles appear arthritic particularly on the right side.

Waters view shows that the bony septum is reasonably straight although there is some deviation of the bony septum at the upper portion. The left turbinate appears enlarged compared to the right side. Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit sclerotic and a little bit arthritic. Decreased posterior joint space. Articular eminence appears moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows what appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact between the condyle and the fossa. The fossa is a little bit more shallow on this side as compared to the opposite side. Slight increased posterior joint space with decreased superior and anterior joint spaces. On opening, there is better translation in the left joint than the right side with more restriction on the right. The styloid process is evident and elongated on the right side. On the left side I cannot make it out as well.

Lateral cephalometric radiographic shows that the patient has a premandibular retrusion, Class II skeletal and occlusion relationship and a severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with airway space of only about 2 to 3 mm at the soft palate level and about 2 mm at the base of the tongue level. Upper incisors appear over-angulated as do the lower incisors. There is a vertical discrepancy at the inferior border of the mandible with one side being significantly higher by probably 6 to 7 mm as compared to the opposite side. At the occlusal surface, there is probably only about a 2 to 3 mm vertical difference.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction (right side with more arthritis and degeneration than the left side.)
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency and transverse asymmetry.

B342 
AP mandibular deficiency and transverse asymmetry. Class II end-on occlusion. Over-angulation of lower incisors.
TMJ pain. Headaches. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Snoring. Sleep disorder.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1.5 to 2 mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tips distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
CT scan of jaw and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Postsurgical orthodontic to refine occlusion.

B342  MRI Evaluation
Age: 48/Female
Date of Birth: 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic with areas of erosion and other areas that appear to have sclerosis. Some osteophyte formation may be present off the condyle. Significantly decreased joint space with what appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa. There may be discal tissue medial to the condyle.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that likewise has undergone significant arthritic changes. There is osteophytic development extending up from the top of the condyle. Significantly decreased lateral joint space. There may be discal tissue over medial to the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly in a moderate amount and it appears there could be bone-on-bone contact at the lateral aspect of the fossa.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some anterior beaking present. A little bit of sclerosis on the anterior head. Decreased superior and posterior joint spaces. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and degenerated. It is short anteroposteriorly and somewhat thickened. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Out laterally, the discal tissue is not quite as evident. The disc, however, does appear that it may be salvageable. There is a little bit of inflammation posterior to the condyle. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle but the disc appears to remain anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some significant arthritic changes particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint where the condyle appears to be somewhat short vertically. More medially, the disc is a little bit larger in size though there may be some erosions on the anterior aspect of the condylar head and there may be some little osteophytic formations within the joint. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is quite short anteroposteriorly. It does not appear that it is adequate to cover the head of the condyle if it were to be repositioned. There appears to be some inflammation perhaps in the bilaminar tissues. On opening, there is actually fairly good translation of the condyle but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction although this disc may still be salvageable. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and with significant deformation of the articular disc.

