B344 
B344 is 23 years old. We had originally seen B344 2 years ago.
Patient History
Since we initially saw B344 , she underwent surgery with Dr. __ that included the following:

Bilateral temporomandibular joint arthroplasties with meniscus repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
LeFort maxillary osteotomies
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies Internal and external nasal septal rhinoplasty and partial bilateral inferior turbinectomies

The surgery was performed on 2 years ago. B344 has no really significant problems with headaches at all and no specific TMJ pain per se. She does get pain predominantly in the right masseter muscle area. On an average day, this will be around a level of 5, but it can escalate to 8. She rates her jaw function at 8, diet at 4, and disability at 3. She can only chew on the right side, and she essentially cannot chew on the left side. She takes Wellbutrin and Concerta. She gets right earaches but no problems with tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her neck, in which she gets some popping noises, as well as her shoulders and hips. She has no known allergies and no known problems wearing jewelry. She apparently used to clench and grind her teeth at night, but she is not aware of that anymore. She does have a retainer that she wears.

Patient Concerns
Can't open widely
Pain in the right jaw area
Pain when she tries to open wide or yawns
Can't chew on the left side
When she jumps up doing aerobics, she gets an unusual sensation in the left cheek/base of nose area

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B344 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Maybe some slight increased fullness on the right side as compared to the left side. Profile is fairly good.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Teeth are nicely aligned and leveled. A little bit of stripping around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship with about a 1 to 2-mm overjet relationship. She has an overbite relationship of about 3 mm. Teeth on the right side appear to come together fairly well, but she has a little bit of an open bite on the left side. In the first molar area, the open bite is probably about 2 mm. In the second molar area it is about 1 mm. She has a significant tooth-size discrepancy in the bicuspid area just by clinical examination. Upper lateral incisors look small in size. Has a cant in the occlusal plane with the right maxilla being probably about 3 mm lower than the left side. The lower arch is a little bit more level with the left side about a millimeter higher than the right side. Midlines all appear to be pretty much aligned with each other which include the facial midline, dental midline, and chin.

When she opens her jaw, she has pain, and the pain seems to be almost directly over the condylar head. She seems to have fairly good translation of the condyle on opening, but she has this increased pain level over the TMJs. When palpating in that area as she is opening, she registers at a level of 7 on the right side and 2 on the left side, and she doesn't really have much discomfort on the left side.

The pain she gets on the right side is a little bit in the masseter muscle but most of if where she has identifiable spot pain is on the posterior aspect of the lateral portion of the posterior border of the mandible. It feels like almost a vessel or a lymph node in that area. It you touch it, it is extremely painful for her. Again, it appears to be just posterior to the masseter muscle. Her pain may be exacerbated by the fact that she chews only on the right side, and since her posterior teeth on the left side don't touch, the left-sided muscles of mastication essentially do not function. Her significant limitation in jaw opening could be due to one of the following problems:

Pain with splinting, thus creating a decreased opening
Fibrosis or calcification within the masseter muscle or medial pterygoid muscle
Her maximal incisal opening is 28 mm. On opening without pain is 18 mm. Right excursive movement is 9 mm and left excursion is 6 mm. To palpation, she has mild to moderate pain over the TMJs, right styloid area, and minimal tenderness over the SCMs and posterior neck area. Direct palpation over the masseter muscles and temporalis muscles yield no pain or discomfort. Relative to her nose, she feels that it pulls off to the right side. Inspection shows she still has a deviated nasal septum. She also has some synechiae in the right nostril. Septum appears to still be deviated off toward the right side which may cause some of the deviation of the nasal tip off to the right side.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the presence of four bone plates in the maxilla. Looks like she might have a root fracture associated with the maxillary left second bicuspid. She has three bone screws in each ramus body area in the sagittal split level, and she has a Mitek anchor in each TMJ. Right condyle looks larger than the left condyle.

Left TMJ seems to have fairly good condylar morphology. Joint space appears to be reasonably good. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Good posterior joint space is present. Posterior occlusion appears to be apart in these teeth by probably a couple of millimeters.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Joint space looks very good. In fact, the joint space is greater superiorly and posteriorly on this side than it is on the opposite side. Mitek anchor is in position. Occlusion is together on this side.

On opening, there is restricted translation of both joints.
Waters view shows that the sinuses appear about equal in opacification. Difficult to tell the status of the turbinates. Posterior open bite can even be seen on this view on the left side as compared to the right side. Transverse cant in the occlusion can be observed as well.

Cephalometrically, she has good oropharyngeal airway. High occlusal plane angle is still remaining. Differences in the vertical dimension of the occlusal plane on the two sides.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reductions
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency and AP deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Transverse asymmetry with the left side being vertically shorter than the right side by 2 to 3 mm
Class II end-on occlusion
Tooth-size discrepancy Left posterior open bite of 1 to 2 mm extending from the bicuspids to the molars
Two-mm overjet
High occlusal plane angle
Pain over the lateral aspect of the posterior border of the ramus
TMJ pain to palpation

Recommended Treatment
Medications
Celebrex 200 mg tablets, disp. 30, 1 tablet q.d. to control pain and discomfort
Re-evaluate incisal opening to see if pain is a major factor in limited incisal opening

Complete workup which could include the following:
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch. Consider opening space around the upper lateral incisors to help correct for the tooth-size discrepancy NEED TO EVALUATE MODELS
Align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Reconstruct TMJs by one of the following methods:
Consider possible bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Consider possible sternoclavicular disc grafts
Consider possible total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to downgraft the posterior aspect of the maxilla, correct any transverse problems, as well as consider correcting the AP deficiency
Mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible if TMJ management #1 or #2 is chosen from above or advance the mandible with total joint prostheses if that procedure is necessary

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B344  MRI Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition:	 Date of Reading:

Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. Joint space appears reasonable in size. Anchor can be seen in the midportion of the condylar head. Appears there may be some slightly decreased space toward the lateral aspect of the joint. There appears to be a bone growth extending out even with the lateral rim of the fossa. Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. Cortical bone appears to be intact over the top of the condyle. Appears to be some slightly decreased joint space toward the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. Anchor can be seen in the condylar head. Joint space looks fairly good vertically. Difficult to tell if the disc is in proper position. Minimal downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with fairly reasonable morphology. May be an osteophyte in the mid medial aspect of the condyle. Anchor is in position. Difficult to identify discal tissue over top of the condyle, but there definitely is discal tissue anterior to the condylar head. Appears that the discal tissue is still anteriorly positioned. There does not appear to be any significant inflammatory process.

On opening, she has moderate translation of the condyle. Articular disc appears to remain anteriorly displaced. Some mild arthritic changes present.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Joint space appears pretty good. Articular eminence is a little steeper on this side as compared to the opposite side. Articular disc appears to be deformed and anteriorly displaced. Anchor is seen in position. Disc is anteriorly displaced sitting beath the articular eminence. The disc is very short anteroposteriorly. Appears to be a little fluid anterior to the condyle in the superior joint space.

On opening, the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.
Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction

