B345 
B345 is now 62 years old. My surgery date for her was 10 years ago, and I did bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. B345 is on numerous medications, and there is a list attached to my evaluation sheet in reference to those medications. The primary problems she has at this time include the following:
Muscle twitching in the face, lips, and left eyebrow
At night, back and lower back pain wakes her up frequently, and she has severe pain in her back
Lying down her jaw feels better, but in the upright position, she has more pain and discomfort
Clenching
Difficulties eating and chewing
TMJ pain
Facial pain
Difficulty swallowing
Increased fullness in the left side of the face
Right TMJ reflex dystrophy
Can't sleep on the right side
Chronically postures the mandible forward
Earaches, left greater than the right
Tinnitus
Vertigo

B345 states that her spine has been off for two decades. Some of her PT therapists feel that it is a relation between her hip problems and her jaw problems. She said her spine has been off for over two decades. Her left shoulder is lower than the right side, and this has been present for quite a few years. She has multiple painful other joints. She has osteoporosis. She has severe psoriasis and multiple joint involvement with psoriatric arthritis. She has double vision. This also has been present for a long time. She had a bite splint made by Dr. __, and this has help reduce some of her jaw pain, and also she feels it has improved her vision.

B345 had a left total hip joint prosthesis done 2 years ago. She had some problems in healing because of the osteoporosis. She has a bone stimulator for the left hip to aid in the healing process. Current joints that bother her include the following: Neck, back, shoulders, elbows, wrists, hands, fingers, hips, knees, left ankle occasionally, and her toes. She has constant headaches on the left side in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area at about a level of 7. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, overall average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 6, diet at 7, and disability at 8. Incisal opening is 43 mm. Excursive movements are 6 mm in each direction. To palpation, she has mild to moderate pain over the right temporalis, left masseter, right SCM and posterior neck, and left styloid area. She has severe pain to palpation over the left TMJ, but the right joint is relatively asymptomatic. B345 tends to posture her mandible forward, and when she does so, she hits primarily on the anterior teeth, and she has bilateral posterior open bite extending from the cuspids on back. In centric relation, she can go into a pretty stable bite relationship, basically a Class I. She has a crossbite on the left side, but for the most part in her centric relation it appears that most of the teeth do come together. B345 states she has had about $15,000 worth of dental work done since her surgery.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows that she has had extensive crown and bridgework with crowns on all of the upper teeth. She is missing second bicuspids bilaterally replaced by pontics. In the lower arch, she is missing the left first bicuspid and right first and second molar most likely. She has a root canal on the mandibular right second bicuspid and mandibular left second molar. Appears to have some fairly large carious lesions around the maxillary left molars involving both of them. Also there may be some other lesions perhaps around the molar teeth on the right side but not nearly as evident. Sinuses look relatively healthy. Condyles and the joints actually look pretty good. Mitek anchors are seen bilaterally. Cortical bone appears to be intact on the condylar heads.

B345 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a little bit of an anterior deep bite of 3 to 4 mm but basically a Class I skeletal type of relationship. Is fairly well-balanced vertically bilaterally. Good oropharyngeal airway is seen.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are all clear. Septum appears fairly straight. Turbinates are moderate in size.
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears fairly well-centered in the joint. Some mild arthritic changes probably present. Anchor is in place. Joint space looks fairly well-balanced throughout the joint. Difficult to tell if there is a little shadow in the joint or whether there is some reactive bone that has developed in the posterosuperior aspect of the fossa. This does decrease the joint space in that image, but the actual image of the fossa appears to have fairly good soft tissue balance. There could be some reactive bone perhaps from the psoriatic arthritis involving the fossa.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone some bony changes most likely. May be a little reactive bone in the fossa along the posterior aspect of the fossa. Vertical joint space looks fairly good. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

On opening, there is minimal translation bilaterally, but clinically she has fairly good translation movements of 6 mm in each direction. Again, there may be some reactive bone in the open views along the posterior wall of the fossa bilaterally being a little bit greater on the left side than the right side. Considering the presence of psoriatic arthritis, the condyles actually look reasonably good. The left condyle is larger than the right condyle vertically and anteroposteriorly. B345 has some very slight crepitus maybe on the left side with an amplifying stethoscope.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ psoriatic arthritis (worse on the left side than the right side
Reactive heterotopic bone in bilateral TMJs (greater on the left side than the right side
Generalized psoriasis
Psoriatic polyarthritis
Headaches Myofascial pain
TMJ pain
Earaches Tinnitus
Vertigo

Recommended treatment:
Dental treatment to eradicate dental caries particularly involving the maxillary left molars and any other involved teeth
Consider Klonopin 1 mg tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., to help determine if clenching is contributory to her pain problems

Consider Botox injections to muscles of mastication particularly on the left side to see if this reduces her pain levels
Surgery
Left TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis
Left TMJ fat graft (harvested from the abdomen)




