B346 
B346 is 57 years old. Referred by Dr. __.

B346 has had clicking and popping in her right TMJ since childhood. However, it was only earlier this year that she had developed excruciating pain in the right TMJ the day after eating a steak. She did have a splint that she wore around 30 years ago, but since developing the severe pain earlier this year she has been on day and nighttime splints with some relief, but without elimination of her problem. She also has had acupuncture and she also has had cranio-sacral treatment. She also did have a splint for 2 years prior to this episode.

Primary concerns that B346 has includes the following:
Pain in the right jaw and jaw joint area. Cannot open the mouth very wide. Earaches on the right side. Airway decreased with difficulties in breathing.

She currently takes the following medications:
Lexapro 10 mg b.i.d. Wellbutrin 100 mg q.d.
Tylenol PM p.r.n. Tylenol p.r.n.
B346 gets headaches on the right side at about a level of 6 that affect the frontal and temporal area. She gets a headache about once a week at about a level of 6 in the right frontal and temporal area. She gets TMJ pain at a level of 5, average daily pain at 1, jaw function at 8, diet at 6, disability at 4. She gets earaches on the right side and has severe tinnitus that appears bilaterally. She has no problems with vertigo. No other joints bother her. She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at nighttime and also during the day. She does get pain down through the right shoulder into the right arm area. She does get nausea when flying and also on boats. B346 does have a history of psoriasis that affects her elbows, her scalp, and around her ears and she also has a small area on her back. The psoriasis started 27 years ago. She has a path around her hairline almost all the way around where the psoriasis is involved. She also has it inside her ears.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B346 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is zero. The maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin are all fairly well aligned with each other. In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency probably about 3-4 mm in the lip area, and the chin appears to be retruded by probably 10-12 mm. Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not defined. Intraorally, B346 has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a crown on the mandibular left first and second molar as well as a second bicuspid. On the right side, she has a crown on the first bicuspid. She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. She has a good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has a slight Class III cuspid relationship and an end-on incisor relationship in part due to the splint therapy that she has had. She has a tendency towards a crossbite on the left side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and root canals on the mandibular right first bicuspid, left second bicuspid, and maxillary left second bicuspid. She has crowns or large restorations on most of the posterior teeth. Right condyle appears a little erosive. Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology and good joint space. Right joint shows erosions and arthritic changes in this joint. Articular eminences are fairly steep in both joints. Left TMJ coronal tomogram shows fairly good condylar morphology. There appears to be decreased lateral joint space. Right TMJ coronal view shows erosions in the condylar head. Lateral rim of the fossa in both joints curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm. Coronal facial x-ray shows that there is a little bit of fluid in the left sinus, but the right sinus is clear. Turbinates are fairly large in size. The bony septum looks relatively straight. Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderate in size. Left sinus has fluid and the right one appears clear. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a Class I skeletal occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway measures about less than 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue.

Basic diagnoses for B346 would be as follows:
Right TMJ psoriatic arthritis. Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. Right TMJ pain. Right earache. Right-sided myofascial pain. End-on incisor relationship.
Significant crowding in the lower anterior arch. Mild crowing upper anterior arch.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them too far forward. Try to expand the lower arch some if possible to better accommodate the anterior teeth. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints. Surgery. Right TMJ reconstruction with mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Left mandibular sagittal split osteotomy to advance the mandible.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly. Right TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).
Right coronoidotomy. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B346  MRI 
AGE: 57/F
DOB: 
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat arthritic but has fairly good mediolateral width. There appears to be some fluid in the superior joint space on the medial side. It is difficult to tell where the discs are in this imaging, but they may be anteriorly displaced. Joint space may be slightly narrowed, but not too significantly.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. It appears there may be some loss of vertical volume. Joint space looks slightly increased. It is difficult to tell where the articular disc is.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. The disc appears to be in reasonable position. It could be just slightly anteriorly displaced at the very lateral aspect of the joint. Articular eminence is fairly steep. There is some fluid in the superior joint space and to a lesser extent in the inferior joint space. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc reduces and translates well along with the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears quite arthritic and it appears there are erosions on the condylar head. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence and is severely degenerated. There are osteophytic formations on the condylar head likely related to the erosions that are present. At the lateral aspect of the joint, the condyle shows a significant erosion in the mid part and also on the anterior aspect of the condyle. There appears to be decreased joint space vertically. There appears to be some inflammation in the bilateral tissues. On opening, there is moderately good translation, but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION:
Relatively normal left TMJ. Right TMJ reactive arthritis with articular discs dislocated without reduction with significant deformation and significant erosions in the condylar head.

