B347 
B347 is 23 years old. B347 's problems began when she was somewhere around 14 or 15 or early in high school of unknown etiology. She had orthodontics in the 3rd grade and then from the 6th to the 9th grade she had orthodontics performed again. She states that she had an underbite to begin with and this was treated orthodontically. She has worn splints at night for at least six years. She has really had no other treatment.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: LoEstrin (BCP.)
Concerta 54 mg occasionally. (Interestingly this makes her jaw situation worse.)
Aleve.
Multivitamins.
She has no trouble with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, some vertigo but no hearing loss. She can pop her ankles, in fact, quite loudly and can do the right one better than the left one but neither is causing her any significant pain problems. She does have an allergy to cats. She has difficulty wearing cheap jewelry and it is possible that she may have a nickel allergy.

She is very much aware of clenching and bruxing at night and also during the daytime. She rates her headaches at a level of 5 when she gets them. This is about once every two weeks and those headaches occur behind her eyes. They occur more commonly on the right side than the left side. She rates her TMJ pain at about a level of 4. On an average day she may have some discomfort about the level of 2 and other days particularly without the splint her pain can go to a level of 5. She rates her TMJ pain at 4, jaw function at 6, diet at 3, disability at 0.

In frontal view, B347 has some very good symmetry to middle and upper third face but has some asymmetry in lower third face. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 4.5 mm. Maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are pretty much on the facial midline. Actually mandibular dental midline is about 3 to 4 mm off to the right. Nasal tip is just a little bit off to the right also about 2 mm. In profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency probably about 3 to 4 mm. She has some lip incompetence of probably about 7 to 8 mm. Chin is retruded by about 15 mm. Chin-neckline is short but the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined. She has some eversion of the lower lip. She does have mesenteric hyperplasia perhaps being a little bit more prominent on the right side as compared to the left side. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. She has good attached gingiva of her lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class II end-on occlusal relationship being a little bit worse on the right side than the left side. She has an anterior open bite about 1 mm. She has about a 3 mm Class II on the left side and probably about 4 to 5 mm Class II on the right side. In centric relation she occludes first on the right second molars and all the rest of the teeth are out of occlusion. When she bites a little bit harder her mandible shifts a little bit towards the left side and her left posterior teeth come into contact. The first molars may touch a little bit as well but all other teeth appear to be out of occlusion on initial contact. Oropharyngeal structures look relatively normal. The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all look normal. Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side. B347 

The left turbinate appears large and appears to block the airway more than the other side and she notices that as well. The right turbinate is moderately enlarged but there appears to be a passable airway at least anteriorly. There is a cant in the transverse occlusal plane of about 2 to 3 mm with the right side being shorter vertically as compared to the left side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows presence of all the teeth except for the third molars which are all absent. The sinuses look clear. Both joints look a little bit arthritic with some flattening on top. Condylar head and neck are significantly shorter on the right side as compared to the left side. Styloid process extends down and overlaps the posterior border of the mandible and come forward almost to the inferior border of the mandible. The left turbinate appears larger than the right side. There appears to be some deviation in the nasal septum. The sinuses are clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle has some sclerosis and a little flattening on the head in one of the views. Decreased posterior joint space. Moderate inclination of the articular eminence.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is somewhat arthritic. There is some anterior beaking present. There is some flattening of the articular eminence. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. On opening, there is good translation of both joints slightly greater on the left side. The right side has significantly less joint space between the condyle and the articular eminence as compared to the left side on the open views.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has an anterior open bite and a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship. Moderate increase in the occlusal plane angulation. The mandible appears somewhat retruded. The mandible may be a little bit long vertically. Oropharyngeal airway space, however, looks fairly good. B347 has had problems recently with getting staph infections. She had one in her nose, one involving her eyelid that she had to have drained. She had another one in her eyebrow that had to be I & D'd. To palpation, the left TMJ seems to function relatively smoothly. The right joint has some crepitation in it. Did not experience reduction of the disc on opening. B347 has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 4.5 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation being significantly worse on the right side than the left side.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Vertical maxillary excess.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 to 3 mm shorter vertically than the left side.
Anterior open bite.
Premature contact on the posterior teeth on the right side.B347 

Class II end-on occlusion being worse on the right side as compared to the left side.
Moderate high occlusal plane angle.
TMJ pain.
Hypertrophied nasal turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible and rotate it back on the facial midline.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it superiorly and correct the transverse occlusal plane.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. AP augmentation genioplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B347 MRI Evaluation 
Age: 23/F
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. Decreased joint space medially as well as laterally. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa of about 3 mm. It appears that the disc is anteriorly displaced and is displacement laterally.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is much smaller in size mediolaterally. A little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. It appears that there may have been some bone resorption that may have occurred. The condyle looks a little knobby. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows out laterally the disc is anteriorly displaced perhaps even mildly laterally displaced. More medially the discs is in a little bit better position but medially the disc is not seen which would go along with a slight lateral displacement. There is significant fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. On opening, the disc does reduce and there is good translation of the condyle beyond the articular eminence and there is good translation with the disc as well. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that demonstrates significant arthritic changes. There is some anterior beaking. There appears to be a little bit of erosion on the superior head where the head is quite flattened with maybe a small osteophyte sticking out towards the medial side. Articular eminence is relatively flat compared to the opposite side. There is decreased superior joint space. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and fairly significantly deformed short anteroposteriorly. There appears to be some degenerative changes in the fossa as well towards the lateral aspect of the joint. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle and there is significant beaking on the anterior head. The articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction and with significant deformation.

Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Right TMJ arthritis (right >left) and articular disc dislocation without reduction and significant disc deformation.


