B348 

B348 is 16 years old and referred by Dr. __.
Patient Concerns
Pain in the jaws
Headaches Difficulties eating and chewing some foods
Lower jaw is becoming retruded
Teeth don't fit together properly
Predominantly a mouth breather

Patient History
B348's jaw joint problems began to the best of her knowledge about three years ago when she became aware of clicking and popping in her joints. The etiology is unknown. However, her mother does have TMJ problems also. She has had no treatment to date. She does take Motrin 1 tablet t.i.d., and she has been on this for about a week for costochondritis. She is doing much better in reference to that. She has no trouble with earaches, gets some tinnitus particularly when she goes to concerts, and she gets occasional vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her lower back and her hip joints. She says her mother tells her that she does grind her teeth at night.

She gets headaches about two times per week, and they occur predominantly in the posterior head area at about a level of 4. She rates her usual daily TMJ pain at about 5, but it can escalate up to 8. On an average day, her overall pain levels are about at a level of 3. She rates her jaw function at 6 and diet and disability at 4.

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B348 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm to the left. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly well-aligned with each other.

In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably 3 to 4 mm. Chin is probably 15 mm or so AP deficient. Lower lip is protrusive compared to the chin. Chin-neckline is short, although the chin-neck angle is moderately well-defined.

Intraorally, B348 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. She has some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. Has some thin attached gingiva around the lower incisors. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side of probably about 2 mm and on the left side she is probably closer to 4 mm Class II cuspid. She has a slight accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. She has an anterior open bite of about 2 to 3 mm. She has an overjet of about 3 mm. Transversely, the occlusal plane is relatively parallel to the papillary plane as well as to the ears. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is moderate size.

Nasal septum is deviated off toward the right side. She has a spur at the base of the septum on the right side. The right turbinate is moderately enlarged, and there appears to be some decreased airway on that side. On the left side, the turbinates are moderately enlarged, but the airway appears much better since the septum is deviated off toward the right side.

In her centric relation, she does have a tendency toward a crossbite on the left side.
To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the left masseter, left TMJ, and left styloid area. Maximal incisal opening is about 40 mm, but she could open comfortably to about 18 mm. Excursive movement to the right is about 7 mm and to the left about 5 mm from her centric relation. In centric occlusion, it would be about 6 mm in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the presence of four bony impacted third molars, and she has a supernumerary tooth between the left second molar and third molar. The rest of all the other teeth are present. Could be a mucous retention cyst possibly in the right maxillary sinus. Left sinus looks pretty clear. Turbinates don't look too large. Condyles appear extremely flattened, and they have lost significant vertical height, being a little bit greater loss on the left side as compared to the right side.

Left TMJ tomogram appears as though it wasn't taken in centric relation but postured forward a little bit. However, the condyles are extremely flat. Articular eminences are fairly shallow. There is increased superior and posterior joint space but a decreased space between the articular eminence and the anterior part of the condyle. Again, the condyle may be postured forward in this view.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have a large pseudocyst in it and is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is quite shallow on this side.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the left TMJ, but in a forward position, it appears that there is a lot of eburnation of the condylar head. On the right joint, there is restricted translation of the condyle. A significant amount of arthritic changes is noted.

Waters view does show that there is a large mucous retention cyst in the right sinus. Turbinates appear that they are moderate in size. May be causing some airway obstruction.

Cephalometrically, I am not sure she is in complete centric relation but does show she has an anterior open bite and a high occlusal plane angle and mandibular plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue measures about 6.5 mm and at the soft palate measures about 7 mm.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ severe resorptive arthritis (possibly of connective tissue autoimmune origin)
Severe AP mandibular deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Slight transverse deficiency
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Mild crowding, upper anterior arch
High occlusal plane angulation of 22 degrees (normal 8 degrees)
Hypertrophied turbinates
Deviated nasal septum
Nasal airway obstruction
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Large lesion (2 x 2 x 2 cm) in the right maxillary sinus
Impacted bilateral maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4 plus an impacted supernumerary tooth in the maxillary left posterior quadrant located between the second and third molars

Recommended Treatment
Removal of maxillary and mandibular third molars and supernumerary molar on the left side
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary

CAT scan of the jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol)
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomy, debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ coronoidectomies
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it and downgraft it posteriorly as well as correct any transverse discrepancies
Removal of lesion, right maxillary sinus
Turbinectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B348  MRI Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition:	
Date of Reading: 

Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears to have lost considerable vertical height, at least 2/3s of the condyle appears to be missing. Fossa appears to be intact but is quite thin. Curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa with it coming down probably about 2 or 3 mm. Appears to be some type of dense tissue in the fossa area that could possibly be discal tissue. There is perhaps some reactive tissue between the disc and the head of the condyle. Cortical bone, although thin, appears to be intact over the head of the condyle.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle where the lateral aspect of the condyle is significantly higher vertically than the medial side. Also appears to be significant loss of condylar bone although not quite as significant as the left side. Significant slope downward toward the medial side of the fossa as compared to the opposite side which was more of a minimal downward slope. There is tissue between the condylar head and the fossa but difficult to tell if it is discal tissue or not. Minimal downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. Cortical bone appears to be intact in both the fossa and the condyle.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is severely deformed with what appears to be a large amount of condylar resorption associated with it. Condyle is a little bit larger toward the medial side, but toward the lateral side, it is severely deformed. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On one view, it appears that there is almost a discontinuity through the roof of the fossa toward the medial side of the fossa. The articular disc appears to be in position between the condylar head and the articular eminence. Condyle appears to be postured forward in the fossa. Appears that there may be a thin reactive pannus around the disc. Toward the medial aspect of the joint, the disc is not as clearly defined, but there appears to be increased vertical height of soft tissue. On T2 films, there appears to be a white shadow surrounding the disc in both the superior and inferior joint spaces.

On opening, there is moderate translation of the condylar head. The discal mass appears to move slightly with the condyle. There may be adhesions here as the disc has fairly minimal movement. As the condyle translates forward, the joint space appears to increase in thickness.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is larger and in better condition than the opposite side. Decreased superior and posterior joint spaces. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced on this side. Disc appears fairly degenerated. There is the appearance of some reactive tissue perhaps around the disc. There is a fairly significant depression on the anterior head of the condyle toward the lateral aspect of the joint. Articular eminence toward the medial side is fairly shallow.

On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle. Discal tissue seems to move with the condyle but difficult to tell if it reduces or not.
Impression:

Left TMJ resorptive arthritis but appears that the disc is in position, but there may be a reactive pannus around it and major evidence of condylar resorption
Right TMJ resorptive arthritis but appears that the disc is in position, but there may be a reactive pannus around it and major evidence of condylar resorption but not as severe as the left side

