B350 
B350 is 57 years old. B350 has had TMJ problems since about the age of 32 in 17 years ago when she developed pain on the right side. Her pain in the left joint has been there for about a year now. B350 believes that the etiology that started the right joint occurred because she was fitted with 3 crowns that did not fit well and it threw her bite off and initiated the TMJ problems on the right side. Since then, she has had significant treatment including at least 5 splints, one by Dr. __ 14 years ago, Dr. __ 9 years ago, Dr. __ last year, and Dr. __ 7 years ago. She has had equilibrations and heating pad treatment. She has also had physical therapy with no results as well as TENS. She has been on anti-inflammatory medications and numerous other medications without relief. She had orthodontics from 11 to 9 years ago. She had orthodontics by Dr. .

B350 has been diagnosed as having:
Psoriatic arthritis.
COPD.
Sleep apnea.
Factor IV Lieden. TMJ. Hypertension.
Previous surgeries include the following:

17 years ago hysterectomy. 11 years ago anterior neck fusion.
14 years agobreast augmentation. 10 years ago left knee arthroscopy.
9 years ago anterior neck fusion redone involving C2 -3 and C4-5.
Last year cataract surgery on the left eye.

The type of arthritis is not clear. She has been given 3 different diagnoses to include:
Psoriatic arthritis Sero-negative arthritis.
Reactive arthritis. In addition, B350 has been diagnosed with fibromyalgia and osteoporosis.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B350 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is to the left about 2 mm. The chin is pretty much on the facial midline. In profile view, B350 has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose. Chin appears retruded and chin neck angle is not defined. It may actually be deficient by 2 to 3 mm, but the chin is deficient by 10 to 12 mm. B350 does have a head postured forward neck position. She has been on a CPAP machine for about a year and a half. B350 does have a history of snoring and severe daytime somnolence. She has moderate sleep apnea. She breathes predominantly through her mouth at night time and also during the day. She does clench to try to make herself breathe through her nose, and this may be causing some of her pain problems. She has a head postured forward neck position, and, as mentioned before, she is on a CPAP machine. Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular right first molar, mandibular left second and third molars. She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch, but does have good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she appears to have all of her teeth back through the first molar on the left side and second molar on the right side. She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with just a slight Class II tendency on the left side by probably about 2 mm. She has an end-on increase relationship. Actually, in centric relation, she has about a 2 mm vertical overbite. Oropharyngeal tissues looks healthy, but uvula appears elongated and the soft palate appears elongated. Fascial pillars and tonsils appear normal. Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged. The septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side. She probably has some moderate nasal airway obstruction, but will evaluate her x-rays to determine that. Columella and nostrils appear relatively normal. To palpation, she has severe pain over the left TMJ, moderate pain over the retromandibular area, and left masseter area, and milder pain over the right TMJ, left shoulder, and minimal tenderness over the temporalis muscles. She has crepitus in both joints. Maximal incisal opening is 26 mm, but only 20 mm without severe pain. Excursion movement to the right is less than 2 mm and to the left is less than 3 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of mandibular right first molar, but it also appears that the mandibular left and maxillary left first molars are also absent with the second molars forward in the first molar position. She has root canals in the maxillary left second molar, right first molar, mandibular right second molar, left second bicuspid. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Joints appear arthritic.
Axial view shows that the sinuses appear clear, but she has enlarged turbinates that are probably causing some significant airway obstruction. Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear, but the inferior turbinates are quite large and appear to indicate some significant nasal airway obstruction. Left TMJ coronal tomograms show that she has significant arthritic changes at the lateral pole of the condyle with erosion occurring there. There appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact at the lateral aspect of the joint. More medially, the condyle appears to have a better morphology and better joint space. Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with significantly decreased joint space. There may be a little bit of sclerosis on the lateral aspect of the condyle. Left TMJ sagittal view shows significant erosive degenerative changes at the lateral pole of the condyle, whereas more medially, the condyle appears small in size, but appears to have a little better morphology and joint space. There is significant decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the condyle and anterior fossa area. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has erosion at the lateral aspect of the joint and sclerosis. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present. There appears to be decreased superior and anterior joint space. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some AP maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia. She has significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of only about 3 mm at the soft palate level and about 4 mm at the base of the tongue. The vertical height of the maxillary dental alveolus appears somewhat short. The inferior turbinates extend slightly beyond the hard palate.

Basic diagnoses for B350 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ sero-negative rheumatoid arthritis.
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Class I occlusion on the left, Class II end-on occlusion on the right.
Mandibular dental midline shifted 2 mm to the left of the maxillary and chin midlines.
Missing mandibular right first molar with the second molar partially forward into the first molar position.
Missing the left maxillary and mandibular second and third molars.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal dimension 11 mm).
Crowding of the lower anterior arch. High occlusal plane angle by about 15 degrees (normal 8 degrees).
Sleep apnea requiring CPAP machine.
Severe TMJ pain. Severe headaches. Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would include the following:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level mandibular arch. Try to shift the mandibular dental midline to the right 1 to 2 mm. Try to close up the space in the mandibular right side between the second bicuspid and second molar. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 3 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Hematology workup for preparation for surgery.
Surgery. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UVPP procedure).
Bilateral partial turbinectomies. Bilateral mandibular coronoidotomies. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B350  MRI 
AGE: DOB:
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. The articular disc is medially displaced. There is decreased superior joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The lateral rim curves inferiorly only about 1 or 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. There is decreased vertical joint space. The disc appears to be anteriorly and medially displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with severe degenerative changes particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. There appears to be some discal tissue over medially. There is decreased joint space between the articular eminence and the condyle at the lateral aspect of the joint. The medial aspect of the disc is anteriorly displaced. There is fluid in the anterior superior joint space. On opening, there is fairly good translation in the left joint. However, there appears to be bone-on-bone contact and there appears to be a perforation. There is sclerosis on the head of the condyle, and there may be some osteophytic development off the front of the condyle and also superiorly.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head and some sclerosis. There is some anterior beaking present. Discal tissue is anteriorly displaced and significantly degenerated and deformed. There is decreased superior joint space. The articular eminence is moderate in inclination. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is some restriction in translation and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. The disc is severely deformed and degenerated.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc anteriorly and significantly medially displaced with perforations and osteophytic formation. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated with significant deformation and nonreducing.



