B354 
B354 is 54 years old, referred by Dr. __.
B354 currently takes the following medications:
OxyContin 40 mg t.i.d.
Oxycodone 15 mg tablets 5 per day.
Alprazolam 0.5 mg t.i.d.
Paxil 40 mg 2 times per day.
Trazodone 1 to 3 at bedtime.
Flonase.
Advair.
Proventil.
Allegra.
Imitrex.

HISTORY OF PRESENT ILLNESS:
B354 has been diagnosed with having fibromyalgia, RSD, and chronic pain. B354's problems began in her early 20s. She says TMJ problems run in her family. The onset of her problems has an unknown etiology. She had a problem at first with significant migraine headaches. This time she lived up in __, and Dr. __ performed orthodontics on her over a 5-year period. She apparently had maxillary expansion done and she wore splints and mandibular posturing devices. She also had some extractions done as well. The treatment lasted overall approximately 5 years. This treatment did help her pain levels and she was not in as much pain as she originally was. Then about 15 years ago, she moved to Austin, TX. Workup was begun again about 15 years ago. She had a fall 11 years ago. She was in a store, tripped, fell and hit the side of her face on one of the display units in the store. She had significant problems pain-wise after that and 11 years ago had bilateral TMJ arthroscopy performed. The treatment was performed by Dr. __. She continued to have problems so the second surgery was performed 11 years ago where the discs were repositioned and repaired. She did well following this procedure until 7 years ago when she got hit in the face. B354 works with emotionally disturbed children and one of them apparently hit her and apparently got beat up pretty well. She injured her foot, back and her jaw structures in that altercation. 6 years ago, she had bilateral arthroscopies performed again. 6 years ago, she had bilateral cadaver cartilage placed. Following placement of the cadaver cartilage, she began having infections bilaterally. 5 years ago, an exploration of the area was performed and Dr. __ performed the debridement and apparently he felt that there was an anaerobic infection but was unable to culture it. The area was debrided and closed. She continued to have drainage from the preauricular areas for an additional 2 years on the left side but the right side has continued to drain since that time until this week when it had stopped or at least has gone into remission.

She has earaches, tinnitus, occasional vertigo and she feels that she has hearing loss although hearing test has shown that her hearing is within normal limits. Other joints that bother her include her back particularly around the L5 area. She also has problems with the left shoulder, elbows, left greater than right, fingers, left foot and left great toe.

B354 
She has allergies to codeine and Latex. She cannot wear pierced earrings. She does not like to wear other metal jewelry at all.

She has been diagnosed as having fibromyalgia, RSD and chronic pain. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night and clenching during the day. B354  gets migraine headaches about once a month for which she takes the Imitrex. She gets other headaches at least 2 to 3 times per week that occur throughout the head area at about a level of 6. She rates her TMJ pain at 6 and this is while on medications. On an average day she registers her pain level at 5. She rates her jaw function and diet at 7, disability at 6. PRIMARY CONCERNS AND PROBLEMS: Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Pain through the jaw muscles, neck shoulder and back.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Several times a day the lower jaw shifts off towards the right side which she mainly has to manipulate to get it back in place.
Earaches.
Ringing in the ears.
Lightheadedness and dizziness.
Clenching and grinding of the teeth.
Wakes up at night gasping for breath.
Significant daytime tiredness.
Difficulty breathing through the nose creating a predominant mouth-breathing situation.
Concerns about this continuing infectious process around the joint area.
Concerns about the fate of the cartilage graft.

CLINICAL EVALUATION: In frontal view, B354 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Chin midline appears to be shifted to the left side probably about 2 to 3 mm. Mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency probably about 3 to 4 mm. Chin may be AP retruded by about 10 mm. Chin-neckline is a little bit short and chin-neck angle is not well defined. Intraorally, she is missing mandibular right first molar, left first, second and third molars. She has mild crowding of the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she is missing first bicuspids bilaterally and the third molars but has the rest of her teeth. A little bit of spacing between the cuspids and second bicuspids. B354 states that the infection from her joints eventually infected the teeth in the lower jaw and this year, she had the mandibular right first molar and mandibular left first molar extracted. By history, these teeth appeared a little cracked by her injury 7 years ago and finally they got infected apparently by her TMJ infections. It appears she had the mandibular right lateral incisor removed.

B354 
She has a Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and about a 2 mm Class III cuspid relationship on the left side. She has about a 4 mm anterior deep bite relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues look fairly good. Uvula is relatively normal in size and shape. The soft palate is relatively normal in length. Faucial pillars fairly significantly constricted transversely. She has a fairly good gag reflex. Intranasally, turbinates appear relatively normal in size. The left is just slightly larger than the right one. The septum may be deviated a little bit off the left side but not significant. Nostrils and columella appears relatively normal. Her luminal valves may be somewhat constricted. She is aware of having snoring problems. She has some fairly significant daytime somnolence. She also does report some episodes of wakening at night unable to catch her breath and some sleep apnea symptoms. To palpation, she has moderate pain throughout the head and neck area for the most part. Maximal incisal opening is 35 mm but only about 22 mm without significant pain. Excursion movement to the right is about 2.5 mm and to the left about 3 mm. B354 does have some tissue asymmetry with the right upper lip being elevated probably a couple of mm compared to the left side. She does have a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1.5 mm higher than the right side. She has significant bilateral TMJ crepitus.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the absence of mandibular left first, second and third molars, mandibular right first molar and third molar, bilateral maxillary third molars and first bicuspids. She has a large carious lesion on the posterior aspect of the left mandibular second bicuspid. The sinuses look relatively clear as does the nasal airway. Condyles appear somewhat arthritic but difficult to evaluate on these views.

Right TMJ tomogram shows what appears to be some decreased joint space. There may be a little sclerosis along the top edge of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There could possibly be some calcifications within the joint space but difficult to tell.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears somewhat arthritic. There appears to be significant decreased vertical joint space. Articular eminence is fairly flat on this side and appears much flatter than the opposite side. It is possible that there may have been an eminectomy implant performed on this side. Styloid process appears fairly prominent on both sides on the various radiographs. It is a little more evident in the tomogram on the left side as compared to the tomogram on the right side. Opening view shows that there is restricted translation of the condyles. On the right side, there is very minimal joint space left between the condyle and the articular eminence. Left side is more difficult to evaluate the joint space.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. A little deviation of the nasal septum in the bony aspect. It appears that there is a huge septal spur coming off on the left side of the nose.

B354 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows maxillary and mandibular anterior teeth had been retruded. Class I skeletal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted with an airway dimension of about 5 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue at about 5 mm but lower down towards the hyoid area it may only be about 3 to 4 mm. Occlusal plane angle appears relatively normal. The tongue appears to fill the entire oral cavity.

B354 has been off work since earlier this year. She has to go on medical leave predominately because of the jaw pain and dysfunction.
BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class III end-on occlusion on the right side and slight Class III end-on occlusion on the left side.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. Earaches.
Tinnitus.
Vertigo.
Sleep apnea.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Large septal spur on left side of nose.
Missing maxillary first bicuspids, third molars and mandibular third molars, first molars and left second molar and mandibular right lateral incisor.
Periodontal problems around most of the teeth. Masticatory dysfunction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: Dental restorations so as to maintain all remaining teeth.
Periodontal evaluation and treatment of all four quadrants.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level the maxillary arch. Open up first bicuspid extraction sites by tipping the incisors forward approximately 4 to 5 mm at incisal tips and posteriorly move the second bicuspid approximately 2 mm if possible. I think we should open up the first bicuspid space to equal about 6 mm on each side. Tip the lower incisor teeth forward creating about 1 mm space around each incisor and mesial aspect of the cuspids.

Sleep study.
B354 
CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Fat grafts to bilateral TMJs (harvest from abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance.
Consider osseo-integrated implant placement in the maxillary first bicuspid areas, mandibular right first molar area and mandibular left first and second molar area.
Remove large nasal septal spur on the left side.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine and retain occlusion.

Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have undergone significant arthritic changes. There is an osteophyte sticking up in the mid portion of the condyle. There could be some degenerative changes in the fossa as well. Decreased joint space vertically particularly with the osteophytic formation has developed. Difficult to identify discal tissue.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has arthritic changes as well but not as severe as the opposite side. Decreased superior joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. Difficult to identify discal tissue.

The left and right sides are not labeled on the sagittal views so it is difficult to identify which side is which. Both sides show significant osteoarthritic changes on the condyles. It could be the angulation of the imaging that the articular images appear more shallow compared to the first imaging. There is anterior beaking present. Discal tissue is very difficult to identify. Discs appear significantly degenerated.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with significant difficulty identifying any discal tissue.


