B355 
B355 is 31 years old and referred by Dr. __.
Patient History
By history, B355 was involved in an MVA 14 yearsa go and sustained a severe whiplash injury. She was struck from behind when she was parked at a stop light, and the car that hit her was going approximately 40 miles an hour. It took her about a year to get over the whiplash injury. She became aware of TMJ symptoms about 11 years ago of unknown etiology. From about 8 to 11 years ago, she was placed in a night guard, and this seemed to help a little bit but obviously didn't fix the problem. She has had a significant flareup during the last two years after she had her second child. Since that time, she has had a splint since last year, and this has helped some. She has had physical therapy x 2, but this has provided relatively short-term improvement for her and essentially only helped her left shoulder and didn't do much for the jaws themselves. She has been on medications predominantly Norflex, Relafen, and occasionally a Tylenol with codeine to control the pain. She also takes Aleve for pain. She gets a significant flareup of her joints about every two weeks, and it is much worse on the left side as compared to the right side.

The medications that she takes include Norflex, Relafen, Tylenol with codeine occasionally, and birth control pills. She gets some left-sided earaches, she seldom gets tinnitus, and she does have some vertigo, although it was a lot worse previously as compared to now. No other joints seem to bother her. She has no known allergies and can wear any type of jewelry without any particular problems. Sometimes her hands go numb with increasing pain levels. She finds it difficult to find a comfortable place for her bite. She does clench and grind her teeth at night and may also do some clenching during the day. She rates her headaches that she gets predominantly on the left at a level of 6 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain at about a level of 6. On an average day, her pain level and discomfort is about a level of 4. She rates her TMJ function at 2, diet at 3, and disability at 5.

Patient Concerns
Headaches, predominantly on the left side
TMJ pain, predominantly on the left side
Earaches Teeth don't fit together properly
Clinical Examination

In frontal view, she has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. A little bit more fullness on the left side as compared to the right side. Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 5.5 mm. Maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin are fairly well aligned to each other, except the chin is a little bit deviated toward the right side probably a couple of millimeters. Nasal tip is deviated off to the right side 2 mm. She is missing the mandibular left central incisor and has only three incisors.

In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency at point A, although the upper lip is fairly even with the subnasale. Chin, however, is retruded approximately 10 to 12 mm.

Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular left central incisor but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Some crowding around the upper lateral incisors. She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. She has just a slight Class II skeletal relationship of about 2 mm on each side. She has a more significant overjet of probably about 3 to 4 mm, and this discrepancy is due to the loss of the lower left central incisor. She demonstrates almost a 1.5 to 2-mm vertical excess on the left side as compared to the right side. Oropharynx appears clear, and the tissues appear healthy at this time. Intranasally, she has a significant deviation of the nasal septum off toward the left side. Turbinates are relatively small in size, and there appears to be a good functional airway on both sides, and that was even with a significant deviation of the septum. Columella appears wide, and nostrils appear quite narrow. However, B355 does not complain of significant difficulties breathing through her nose and is not aware of doing mouth breathing when she sleeps. She has about a 1-mm overbite relationship.

To palpation, she has moderate pain over the left TMJ and milder pain over the left temporalis, bilateral shoulders, styloid areas, right TMJ, and milder tenderness over the right masseter.

On opening, the right joint seems to function relatively smoothly. On the left side, she has some crepitus noises particularly in excursive movements. Maximum incisal opening is about 40 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 6 mm and to the left 8 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. The rest of the teeth are all present. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Appears to have significant osteoarthritic changes particularly in the right condyle and to a lesser extent in the left condyle. Appears that there may be some pseudocysts in both condyles. She is absent one incisor tooth, and it appears to be the left central.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. She has a significantly deviated nasal septum with a large spur off to the left side. Right turbinate is extremely large. Probably has nasal airway obstruction. Sinuses all appear relatively clear.

Right TMJ tomogram reveals decreased superior and posteriorjoint spaces. Articular eminence is moderately steep.
Left TMJ reveals decreased vertical joint space. Anterior beaking present on the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Beaking of the condyle may be impinging on the articular eminence.

Open views show restricted translation of both joints.
Cephalometrically, she is Class II with a high occlusal plane angle. She has anterior vertical maxillary excess and probably some posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. Oropharyngeal airway, however, looks good. She has lip incontinence.

Tooth-size analysis reveals a Bolton's difference of about -5 to -6 mm, and this is due to the missing lower central incisor.
Basic Diagnoses
Fairly severe bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reductions and with significant deformation and degeneration of the articular discs
Anterior vertical maxillary excess
Slight posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Slight Class II end-on occlusion
Transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being about 2 mm vertically shorter than the left side
Chin deviated off to the left side approximately 2 mm
Missing mandibular left central incisor
Over-jet relationship of 3 to 4 mm
Headaches with the left side being much greater than the right side
TMJ pain with the left side being greater than the right side
Myofascial pain being slightly worse on the left side as compared to the right side
Left-sided earaches Occasional vertigo
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of -5 to -6 mm (secondary to missing lower central incisor)

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for inter-dental osteotomies in case they are necessary. There is already room on the left side, but on the right side the roots are in a little bit closer relationship. Consider stripping upper anterior teeth to remove a couple of millimeters of tooth structure to retract the incisors somewhat to help correct for the significant tooth size problem
Align and level mandibular arch. Tip lower incisors forward slightly opening about a 0.5-mm space around each of the lower incisors to help compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, meniscectomies, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior maxilla superiorly, the posterior inferiorly, and correct the transverse cant

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
Restorative dentistry to build up the lower anterior teeth
B355  MRI Evaluation 

Date of Acquisition: Date of Reading: 
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is very flattened across the top. Decreased lateral joint space and decreased vertical joint space, although greater at the lateral aspect. Appears to be discal tissue identified anteromedially. Cortical bone appears to be intact, but it appears that this condyle may have undergone condylar resorption.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is more narrow in the mediolateral dimension as compared to the opposite side. Decreased vertical joint space particularly at the lateral aspect. Fairly significant downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa on this side as compared to the opposite side. Appears to be some discal tissue anteromedially to the condyle. Fossa appears to be intact.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has fairly good architecture out laterally with some anterior beaking, but more medially there are more degenerative changes associated with the condylar head. Articular eminence is long of lateral steepness. Decreased vertical and posterior joint spaces. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and quite short anteroposteriorly.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows the condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa with decreased posterior and vertical joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and significantly deformed and short anteroposteriorly.

Left TMJ, dynamic views, demonstrate that there is some restricted translation of the condyle. Articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction and appears to have adhesions to the articular eminence. Condyle comes about two thirds of the way down the articular eminence.

Right TMJ, dynamic view, shows that the condyle comes about two thirds the way down the articular eminence. Articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Impression:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction and significant deformation of the discs

