B356 
Date of Birth: 
The patient is a 16-year-old female referred by Dr. __.
HISTORY OF PRESENT ILLNESS: B356 states that her jaw joint problems began about 1-1/2 years ago of unknown etiology. She became aware of some clicking and popping in her joints and also started to develop headache and pain problems. She has had no previous orthodontic treatment. She has had splint therapy. She takes ibuprofen as her only medication.

PATIENT CONCERNS/PROBLEMS
Jaw and mouth pain. Headaches.
Jaws pop creating increased pain. Jaw locking.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. She has no other joints that bother her. She has been diagnosed as having ADD. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime. She apparently has fairly continuous headaches and usually wakes up with headaches. She rates the headaches at a level of 8 on the left side throughout the head area and a level of 6 on the right side. She rates her TMJ pain about at level of 8 and it does get to a 10. Average daily facial pain and headaches are about an 8. She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 5 and disability at 7. To palpation, she has moderate tenderness over the masseters and TMJs. Incisal opening is about 40 mm according to some early information provided by Dr. __. Photographs were sent. She appears to have fairly good facial symmetry in the frontal view. In profile she also appears to have good facial symmetry. In occlusal view, midlines are off by about 1/2 to 1 mm. She appears to have about a 3 mm vertical overbite relationship anteriorly. She appears to have a crossbite tendency bilaterally in the posterior aspect. She has a Class II end-on occlusion of about 3 mm in right cuspid area and probably 1 mm perhaps on the left side, although she appears to have more of a Class II molar relationship on the left side. Phone evaluation was interesting because today B356  was at her home ill because of the flu and has been throwing up. I actually talked to her through her mother and aunt whom were both at the aunt's home but then had to call B356 at her and her mother's home and we had to relay the questions through a third party.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars. Sinuses appear clears. Rami are cut off so I could not evaluate the joints. It appears that she may have an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch and a reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch.

Some right TMJ films are present and it appears the condyle may be posteriorly displaced but hard to tell. Articular eminence appears moderately steep.

Left TMJ films show a condyle that appears to have perhaps some arthritic changes but the quality of the film is not real good so it is very difficult to tell. B356 

MRI showed that she has some bilateral TMJ arthritis with some erosions and the articular disc is dislocated without reduction and significantly deformed and degenerated. The left side appears worse than the right side. However, she claims that she has clicking and popping in her joint which means that perhaps with normal function that the joints still click and pop thus reducing whereas on the MRI because of the situation the disc did not reduce.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction.
Relative mandibular hyperplasia.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Masticatory dysfunction. Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x4.
Accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch and slightly reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Class II end-on occlusion.
Tendency towards posterior crossbites.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Try to expand the posterior arch particularly in the bicuspid area to eliminate the tendency towards posterior crossbite. Create about 1 mm of space around each of the upper lateral incisors as it appears that there is a tooth size discrepancy.
Align and level mandibular arch. Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain Class I occlusion.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B356  MRI Evaluation 
Date of Birth: 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have undergone some resorptive changes. In the mid part of the condyle there is decreased superior joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm. It could be even up to about 4 mm as we come more anteriorly. Decreased superior joint space. In one area there appears to be a little calcification or a little osteophyte towards the middle third of the condyle. It appears that there have been erosive changes at the lateral aspect of the condyle. Significantly decreased joint space at the lateral rim. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone even greater arthritic changes. It appears that there has been some significant erosion of the condyle at the lateral aspect and also across the medial aspect. There is some osteophytic formation extending superiorly in the mid part of the condyle. There is some lateral osteophytic development as well. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 4 to 5 mm. Decreased superior lateral joint spaces. It appears that there is disc tissue displaced anteriorly but somewhat more degenerated than the opposite side. The lateral pole of the condyle is significantly more inferiorly positioned than the medial pole.

Left TMJ sagittal shows a condyle that laterally has erosion of the condylar head and some flattening on the anterior aspect of the condylar head. More medially, the condyle appears a little bit better shaped but it appears somewhat narrow anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting down towards the inferior aspect of the eminence. It is more anteriorly displaced along the entire aspect of the condyle. Decreased superior and posterior joint spaces. The disc is significantly deformed and narrow anteroposteriorly as well as thickened. The posterior band is quite thick and the intermediate zone is extremely narrow. On opening, there is restricted translation and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. It is possible that this disc could be salvageable but there are significant degenerative changes preexisting.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some significant erosions at the lateral aspect of the joint. More medially, the condyle has a little bit better morphology. There is anterior beaking more towards the medial aspect of the joint. There is decreased superior and posterior joint spacing. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There may be some erosion at the lateral aspect of the articular eminence. The disc is significantly degenerated much more so than the opposite side. The disc is more evident at the lateral aspect of the joint than at the medial aspect. However, the definition of the disc is very poor. It appears there is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. It is difficult to differentiate between the articular eminence and the disc at the lateral aspect of the joint. On opening, there is significant limitation of translation somewhat similar to the opposite side and the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION
Bilateral TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reductions and significant deformation of the disc with the left side being worse than the right side. Right disc could possibly be salvageable but left disc appears nonsalvageable.
