

B358 
B358 is 14 years old and referred by Dr. __. 
Patient History
B358 was born with right-sided hemifacial microsomia. B358 has had the following previous treatments relative to her jaw situation. In the fourth grade, she had alignment of the four maxillary incisors, and she also had maxillary expansion performed. She wore headgear. 6 years ago, she had a distraction osteogenesis procedure attempted on the right mandibular ramus. With the expansion, B358 would get severe pain. Finally the device failed and had to be removed. B358 has had five distinct surgeries on the right ear for reconstruction. She had two surgeries for the distraction device, one to place it, and then another one to remove it. B358 also had a dog bite to the face in 8 years ago when she was in the second grade. She had to have some stitches placed, approximately 100 stitches.

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. She has almost complete hearing loss in the right ear as a result of the hemifacial microsomia. Other joints that bother her involve primarily just the right middle finger that was broken about a year ago. She has NO KNOWN ALLERGIES, and she is not aware of any problems with jewelry. She doesn't clench or brux her teeth. She gets headaches at about a level of 3 in the frontal and temporal area, and at times they occur weekly, but then they don't occur every week. She is not aware of any pain directly in the jaw joint itself. She rates her average daily pain and headache level at about a level of 4. She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 2, and disability at 2. Facial nerve works well. She is not aware of any numbness or loss of feeling in the facial area.

Patient Concerns
Noises in the left jaw joint area
Cannot move the lower jaw to the left
Pain in the left jaw area
Snoring
Holding her breath when sleeping
Difficulty sleeping
Gets sick a lot on a monthly basis
Residual facial scars from previous dog bite injury

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B358 has fairly good balance in the middle and upper third face. She does have asymmetry involving the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm. Nasal tip may be just about a millimeter to the left. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm to the right of the maxillary midline. Chin is probably about 6 mm off to the right side. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other taking into the consideration the cant in the occlusal plane. Mandible is retruded by about 20 mm. Chin-neckline is short, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. Lower lip is protrusive well beyond the chin by probably a good 10 to 12 mm. The right ear is probably about 6 to 10 mm lower than the left ear.

Intraorally, B358 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Lower anterior arch is sort of squared off right now. Very minimal crowding currently. She seems to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth except she does have a high attached labial frenulum, but it still appears that there is adequate gingiva above it. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a significantly increased curve of Wilson particularly on the right side. Increased curved of Spee with the incisors being elevated probably 3 mm or so above the posterior teeth. B358 has an anterior open bite of about 4 mm. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side by probably a good 5 to 6 mm, and on the left side she is actually just slightly Class III by about 2 mm. When she bites together, she appears to occlude on the left side from the maxillary first bicuspid and mandibular second bicuspid on posteriorly. On the right side, it appears that she can get her teeth together if she bites a little bit harder, and these include primarily the bicuspids and molars. She has a crossbite on the right side. She has an overjet of about 3 mm. Uvula is elongated somewhat. Soft palate may be a little bit elongated. Some asymmetries in the soft palate. She says when she phonates she has a little bit more movement on the left side of the soft palate as compared to the right side. Faucial pillars are a little bit constricted transversely. There is a transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being about 2 mm higher at the cuspid level on the right side as compared to the left side. There is a posterior yaw in the jaws with the maxilla and mandible both being shifted toward the left side back in the molar area by probably approximately 3 mm. Maximal incisal opening is 34 mm. Excursive movements in each direct are about 5 mm.

On opening, right joint functions relatively smoothly. In the left joint, she has an opening click at about 25 to 30 mm. She has a closing click at probably around 10 mm. She also has clicks in the left joint on excursive movements. To palpation, she has moderate pain in the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, and milder pain in the styloid areas.

Intranasally, there appears to be a little bit of a septal spur extending along a good part of the superior aspect of the septum off toward the left side. The turbinates are moderately enlarged anteriorly but could not see the posterior area as well. She does breathe mainly through her mouth. This could be related to the perhaps deviation of the nasal septum, septal spurs, and hypertrophied turbinates that may be enlarged further posteriorly. She is predominantly a mouth breather.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows that B358 has impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars where the crowns are formed, but the roots are yet to be formed. Sinuses look relatively clear. Difficult to evaluate the nose. Lower incisors are significantly overangulated. Left condyle appears as though it has perhaps undergone some bony changes. Right condyle appears small and difficult to identify on this particular radiograph.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Bony septum is deviated significantly off toward the left side, and there may be a component of it off to the right side as well. Inferior turbinates are relatively large where particularly the right side is quite large and appears to fill most of the functional airway. The facial asymmetry can be seen. The yaw in the upper and lower jaw off to the right side can be appreciated as well. Left condyle appears to have fairly good width, but may be a little bit short vertically. Right condyle appears much smaller in size and development.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be a little bit flattened on top. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space appears fairly good superiorly and posteriorly but a little bit decreased anteriorly between the anterior aspect of the condyle and the posterior aspect of the articular eminence.

Right joint is difficult to identify. Articular eminence is moderately shallow compared to the opposite side.
On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints with good restriction on the right side as compared to the left side.

Cephalometric radiograph shows that B358 has a high occlusal plane angle at two distinct occlusal plane levels. Inferior border of the mandible on the right side is significantly higher than the left side by probably 12 mm. Mandible is AP deficient, and she appears to have a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway is severely constricted with less than 2 mm airway at the soft palate level, and at the base of the tongue in one area it is only about 2 mm and fluctuates between 2 and 4 mm. The vertical asymmetry may be a little exaggerated particularly if the ear holes were used as the right ear is significantly lower than the left ear, and tilting to accommodate it would increase the vertical asymmetry both at the occlusal plane and the inferior border of the mandible. B358 has a tooth-size discrepancy of about 2.5 mm.

Basic Diagnoses
Right-sided hemifacial microsomia
Severe AP mandibular deficiency and asymmetry
Maxillary asymmetry and slight AP deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Yaw in maxilla and mandible with the jaw structures being rotated 2 to 3 mm off to the left
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction
Right TMJ hypoplastic condyle
Apertognathia
Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
Accentuated curve of Wilson, upper arch
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars
Class II cuspid relationship on the right side and slight Class III tendency on the left side
Mandibular dental midline shifted 3 to 4 mm to the right and chin midline shifted 5 to 6 mm to the right Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being approximately 2 mm higher than the left side
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5
Overangulation of lower incisors
Right ear deformity that has been reconstructed
Right ear 8 to 10 mm lower than the left ear
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal septal deviation and spurs
Nasal airway obstruction Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of 2 mm (normal 11 mm)
Severe snoring
Sleep apnea
Daytime somnolence

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch in three segments:
Segment 1: Left cuspid through first molar
Segment 2: Left lateral incisor through right lateral incisor
Segment 3: Right cuspid through right first molar
Place bands on second molars but do not incorporate the second molars into the arch wire. Use a solid arch wire but place a compensating step anteriorly between the cuspid and lateral incisor so that the four incisors are aligned at an elevated level above the cuspids. The incisors should be 2 to 3 mm higher. This will also help to extrude the cuspids down slightly to get them aligned with the posterior teeth. Do not incorporate the second molars as this will cause some undesirable movements of the adjacent teeth. Tip lateral incisor roots medially and the cuspid roots distally to make room for the interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing at least 2.5 mm to 3 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward and to help decrease their overangulation

Surgery
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction approximately 17 mm
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla slightly, downgraft it posteriorly approximately 5 mm, and move the anterior aspect superiorly approximately 2 mm
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4
Partial turbinectomies
Nasal septoplasty
HTR implant to anterior mandible

B358  MRI Scan Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition: Date of Reading: 
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with moderately good width of the condyle. Lateral rim of the fossa curves downward fairly significantly probably 3 to 4 mm. Appears to be some discal tissue anteriorly and medially to the condyle.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has some unusual shape to it. It is narrow transversely. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly a fairly significant amount and is somewhat more steep than the other side. Joint space, however, appears fairly well-balanced. Appears to be a hot spot in the superolateral aspect of the fossa of the joint. It is almost as though the bone has lost some of its continuity in that area.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has flattening on the superior aspect and has anterior beaking. Condyle is postured forward in the fossa, and she is not in a centric relationship position. Articular eminence is moderately steep and fairly long in length. Disc is anteriorly displaced with some fluid in the superior joint space. May be some kind of inflammatory process going on behind the condyle as that area is lit up quite significantly.

On open views, it is difficult to tell where the condyle is and whether there is translation or not.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows the condyle that appears flattened superiorly but has actually fairly good anteroposterior width of the condyles surprisingly so. Articular eminence is relatively shallow compared to the opposite side. Appears that there may be discal tissue present that is positioned above and a little bit posterior to the condylar head. There is an area in the condyle that does light up quite a bit toward the lateral aspect of the joint. The area is quite prominent and lights up extremely well. It is possible there could be a remnant of the disc anterior to the condyle.

On opening, it is difficult to tell where a condyle or disc is.
Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction clinically but not determinable on the MRI
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc appears to be slightly posteriorly positioned. A lesion is present up in the bony aspect
Reposition left TMJ articular disc with Mitek anchor
Continue to observe right joint


