B359 
B359 is 21 years old. Referred by Dr. __. B359's TMJ problems may have begun when she was about 10 years old. She fell while rollerblading and struck her chin and had lacerations. She developed clicking and popping in her joints after that and still continues to have some clicking and popping apparently.

B359 has had previous orthodontics from 12 to 10 years agoand then it was repeated again from 8 to 6 years ago. Orthodontics were performed by Dr. __ , and then the second orthodontics were performed by Dr. __. She try an over-the-counter splint from 10 to 8 years ago, but it was ineffective and she was unable to tolerate it and wear it. Apparently, B359 had difficulties opening mouth and when she went to see her orthodontist apparently the staff would get upset with her because she could not open her jaws very wide and they classified her as being uncooperative.

B359 gets headaches about three times a week at about a level of 9 in her frontal and temporal areas bilaterally. She rates her average TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 5, jaw function is at 6, diet at 0, and disability at 3. On medications, she has a NuvaRing and she takes Excedrin Migraine for her headaches. She has no problems with earaches or tinnitus, but does get vertigo. Other joints that bother her are her knees occasionally and she has some difficulties with her "toes coming out of joint" at times. She is allergic to Ceclor. She has been diagnosed as having asthma. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night and also during the day when she is under stress.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B359 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper lip tooth relationship is 5 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are pretty much on the facial midline. B359 has a head postured forward position. Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to the subnasale. She appears to have 4 to 5 mm of AP maxillary deficiency. The chin is at least 20 mm AP deficient. Chin neckline is extremely short and chin neck angle is not defined. She has at least 8 mm of lip incompetence. Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has significant crowding in the lower anterior arch with the left first bicuspid blocked partially out of the arch. She appears to have adequate attached gingiva, although a little bit thin around the incisors. The two central incisors are a little bit lingually inclined compared to the other teeth and elevated. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally with very close to a Class I molar relationship. She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm anteriorly. Oropharyngeal tissues are relatively normal. Tonsils are mildly enlarged. Intranasally, the turbinates are enlarged particularly on the left side. The septum may be deviated a little bit towards the right side. There is significant nasal airway obstruction. B359 has had her wisdom teeth removed. To palpation, she has some moderate pain over the TMJs, masseters, right retromandibular area, and milder pain over the temporalis muscles. On opening, joints seem to function reasonably smoothly. She can create an audible click or glitch in the right joint by certain manipulations. Maximal incisal opening is 36 mm, but to only about 33 mm without significant discomfort. Excursion movement to the right 6 mm, to the left 5 mm. There is a tooth size discrepancy in the anterior teeth of approximately 2 mm. In the lower bicuspid area, there is probably at least 0.5 mm tooth discrepancy with the lowers being larger than the uppers.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. The rest of the teeth are present. Sinuses look relatively clear. It is difficult to evaluate the TMJs. Waters view shows that the bony septum actually looks reasonably appears straight. Turbinates are quite large. Sinuses look relatively clear. Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit sclerotic on top. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The condyle appears postured forward in the fossa just slightly. Left TMJ tomogram is a little bit harder to evaluate. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The joint space may be decreased superiorly. On opening, there is some restricted translation abilities. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B359 has a retrusion of the maxilla and mandible. She has a very high occlusal plane angle. She has decreased oropharyngeal airway and an AP dimension of about 3.5 mm at the soft palate level and about 5 mm at the base of the tone.

Basic diagnoses for B359 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and with severe deformation and degeneration.
AP maxillary hypoplasia. AP vertical maxillary hyperplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia. AP mandibular hypoplasia. AP microgenia. Class II end-on occlusion. High occlusal plane angle of 24 degrees (normal 8 degrees).
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of 3 mm (normal AP dimension is 11 mm).
Significant crowding of the lower anterior arch. Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.
Severe TMJ pain. Severe headaches. Myofascial pain. Sleep apnea. Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure. Also slenderize the lower bicuspids as there is a 0.5 mm tooth size discrepancy with the lower bicuspids being larger than the uppers. Sleep study to evaluate the sleep apnea situation. CT scan of the jaw and jaws joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral coronoidotomies.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posterior to decrease occlusal plane angle. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Augmentation genioplasty. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B359  MRI 
AGE: 21/F
DOB:
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good width. The lateral pole of the condyle is significantly lower than the medial pole. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 4 to 5 mm. There is decreased superior joint space. The disc is anterior and medially displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have moderate mediolateral width. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly also about 4 to 5 mm. Lateral aspect of the condyle appears to be more flattened. It appears there could be a medial osteophyte sticking off of the condyle. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has arthritic changes. The anterior aspect is somewhat flattened and there is anterior beaking. The articular eminence is moderately inclined and elongated. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is severely deformed and degenerated. It appears there may be more discal tissue over medial, although it is quite thickened and deformed. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle, but articular disc remains anteriorly displaced, nonreduced, and significantly deformed.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has arthritic changes, but not quite as severe as the opposite side. There is some anterior beaking present. The articular eminence is moderately inclined and somewhat elongated. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is significantly deformed, but not quite as severely as the opposite side. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle, but the disc remains anteriorly displaced and nonreduced.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteromedially displaced without reduction. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated without reduction and with significant deformation and degeneration.
Questionable salvageability of the articular discs.


