B361 
B361 is 31 years old and is referred by Dr. __.
PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Difficulties breathing through the nose.
Primarily a mouth breather.
Teeth and jaws are out of alignment. Constant recurring earaches.
Headaches.
TMJ pain and discomfort.

MEDICATIONS:
Astelin.
Nasonex.
Benadryl p.r.n.
B361 does flush his sinuses nightly with saline. If he does not do this it wakes him up and he feels lousy the next day. B361 gets frequent earaches at least an earache per month. He has tenderness and vertigo. He has no other joint problems. He is aware of clenching and bruxing of his teeth at nighttime and also during the day. B361 believes that his earaches and headaches began in about the sixth grade. He has had no treatment until last year when he began orthodontic treatment. He also was given a bite plate at that time to help control his occlusion and to help protect his teeth and braces. He feels that his symptoms have gotten worse since he has begun the orthodontic and splint therapy.

He has had a sleep study and also he has had workup for sinusitis previously.
In frontal view, B361 has reasonably good left to right symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 7 mm. Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. The nasal tip is about 3 to 4 mm off towards the right side. Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off towards the left side as is the chin. In profile view, B361 has some significant AP maxillary deficiency probably at least 6 mm. Chin is retruded approximately 20 mm. Chin neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not defined. Intraorally, B361 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present except he is missing his mandibular left first molar. The second and third molars are in significantly lingual inclination. The lower left cuspid is about at least 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. He does appear to have good attached gingiva. In the upper arch he has all of his teeth back through the second molars present. Slightly reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch possibly an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch. He has fractured maxillary incisors edges. He has Class II end-on occlusion on the right side by probably 5 mm and the same on the left side. He has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy and normal in structure. Intranasally, the septum may be deviated a little bit off towards the right side. The right turbinate is extremely large and appears to obstruct most of the airway. The left side turbinate appears a little bit more normal in size at least anteriorly that may be a little bit enlarged posteriorly. He has a wide columella and very narrow nostrils. B361 

The luminal valves also appear significantly constricted. When the nasal aperture opens, it seems to improve his ability to get air in particularly on the left side and less so on the right side. To palpation he does not have any particularly tenderness around the head and neck area. On opening, he occasionally would have a glitch in the right joint but otherwise the joint seems to function reasonably smoothly. Transversely the occlusal plane is fairly level. B361's incisal opening is 54 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 7 mm, left 9 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the absence of the right maxillary and mandibular third molars. On the left side he has his third molars but is missing the mandibular left first molar. The second and third molars are in lingual inclination. The sinuses look reasonably clear but difficult to tell on this imaging.

Waters view shows that the right maxillary sinus appears very cloudy and opacified and the left side has some pneumonation. The bony septum appears reasonably straight. The left turbinate appears to block off a major portion of the nasal airway and the right side also tends to block off the airway. Ethmoid and frontal sinuses appear clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have fairly reasonable morphology. Articular eminence is relatively short in length and somewhat shallow. There is decreased vertical joint space.

Left TMJ tomogram is more difficult to read. The condyle appears to have reasonable morphology but decreased joint space. Articular eminence is relatively shallows.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B361 has anterior vertical excess and AP maxillary deficiency. He also has AP mandibular deficiency. Oropharyngeal airway is quite constricted of less then 3 mm at the soft palate level. The base of the tongue is about 3 mm. He has a skeletal occlusal Class II relationship.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: Bilateral TMJ arthritis and anteromedial dislocation of the articular disc.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess. AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II occlusion.
Missing mandibular left first molar.
High occlusal plane angle.
Left mandibular cuspid 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of 2 to 3 mm (normal 11 mm.) Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction. Right maxillary sinusitis. B361 

TMJ pain. Headaches. Earaches, tinnitus and vertigo. Sleep apnea symptoms. Lip incompetence. Maligned left-sided maxillary and mandibular third molars.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: Extract left-side maxillary and mandibular third molars.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing only about 1 mm or 2 of tooth structure to correct for a slight tooth size discrepancy and also for increased lingual labile width of the incisors. Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly, advance it, and expand it. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomy to advance it forward in a counterclockwise direction.
Partial inferior turbinectomies.
Debridement of right maxillary sinus.
Consider external rhinoplasty to remove dorsal hump as well as straighten the nose since it is deviated off toward the right side.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Placement of osteointegrated implant in mandibular left first molar area. Restorative dentistry to place the crown on dental implants in the mandibular left posterior quadrant.

B361  MRI EVALUATION 
AGE: 31/M
DOB: 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. Decreased superior joint space. The disc is seen to be medially displaced. The crown of the condyle is about 2/3 uncovered. The cortical bone appears to be intact.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. The superior joint space appears to be somewhat decreased. The disc appears to be medially displaced but appears to cover more of the top of the condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows articular eminence is moderately steep and the disc is not seen out laterally. More medially the disc appears displaced. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the articular disc and the disc appears to be in a reduced position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head and perhaps some slightly increased degenerative changes compared to the opposite side. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. Out laterally, the disc is not identifiable. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc appears to reduce.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteromedially displaced. Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly and medially displaced with reduction.

