B365 
B365 is 29 years old. She was referred by a doctor in Monterrey, Mexico, she saw down there, but B365 cannot remember the doctor's name. B365 has been diagnosed with fibromyalgia. She has had TMJ problems since she was about 18 years old that she feels was likely initiated from stress she was under at that time. She has it predominantly on the left side. Since the age of 22, she has had maybe 4 or 5 splints, some of those over-the-counter type. She has a lot of chiropractic treatment, massage therapy, acupuncture, and she has also been seeing a psychologist. She did have some intranasal surgery that may been a septoplasty done last year. This improved her airway some, but she still has some problems with congestion particularly during allergy-type seasons.

She rates her TMJ pain at about a level of 7, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 5, diet at 2, and disability at 4. She gets headaches predominantly on the left side and temporal area about a level of 6. She gets occasional left-sided earaches and occasional tinnitus. She does experience vertigo and nausea that she states occurs fairly frequently. Other joints that bother her include her left shoulder. Her knees are noisy and she can get some pain particularly if she wears heels or walks for a long time. She has been diagnosed with fibromyalgia. She is aware of clenching and sometimes grinding of her teeth at night time and also during the day.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B365 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 3.5 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin. The mandibular dental midline may be just slightly off to the right side 1 to 2 mm. She has some mild lip incompetence of probably about 5 mm. In profile view, she does demonstrate some mandibular retraction of probably about 6 to 8 mm. The maxilla appears to have good projection. Intraorally, B365 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, B365 has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She actually has a third molar in on the left side. She has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship and maybe just a slight Class II tendency on the right side. She has about a 2 mm anterior deep bite relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal. Tonsils are mild to moderate in size, but appear non-inflammatory. Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side. The turbinates are moderate in size. B365 does have some moderate snoring problems. She has moderate to severe daytime somnolence. She sometimes will wake up at night unable to catch her breath. She does not sleep well at night, and she feels that is due to either snoring, pain, or thinking about things. She usually needs a nap during the day. To palpation, B365 has moderate pain over the left TMJ, left temporalis area, left SCM, left posterior neck, and left shoulder. She has moderate tenderness over the masseter muscles, right TMJ, and retromandibular areas as well as the right SCM. On opening, she has an early click in the left joint at 5 to 10 mm of opening and a closing click of about 5 mm. The right side seems to function reasonably smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is about 49 mm, excursion movement to the right 5 mm, to the left 9 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows that she is missing the mandibular third molars and maxillary right third molar, but the left third molar is still present. Sinuses look clear. The septum appears to be deviated off towards the left side. Turbinates particularly on the right side are moderate in size. It is difficult to evaluate the condyles. Axial views show that she has moderately enlarged turbinates. Sinuses, however, appear clear. Frontal view shows the turbinates are moderately enlarged and sinuses are clear. Right TMJ tomograms show what appears to be relatively normal joint space. In the coronal views on the right side, the joint space looks reasonably good as well
In the left TMJ tomograms, there appears to be actually greater joint space vertically as compared to the opposite side. The condyle appears to have reasonably good morphology. Coronal views likewise show reasonably good joint space. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B365 has retrusion of the mandible. She has a significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of about 3 mm at the soft palate level and about 7 mm at the base of the tongue.

B365 's boyfriend has observed that she does stop breathing at night and this concerns him. Apparently, this is a common occurrence.
Basic diagnoses for B365 would be as follows:

Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction. AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Slight anterior maxillary hyperplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion on the right side, but basic Class I on the left.
High occlusal plane angle of 15 degrees (normal 8 degrees).
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 3 mm (normal 11 mm).
Hypertrophied soft palate.
TMJ pain.
Sleep apnea syndrome. Hypertrophied nasal turbinates causing nasal airway obstruction.
Crowding of the lower anterior arch. Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally in case any interdental osteotomies are necessary.
Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward.
Surgery.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and down graft it posteriorly. Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP). Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the genial muscles.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Extraction of maxillary left third molar.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B365 MRI 
AGE: 29/F
DOB: 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. There appears to be discal tissue in position on this side. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly 1 to 2 mm. In some other views, however, the disc could be anterior and medially displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows reasonably good condylar morphology. There is some discal tissue that appears to be displaced medially. Otherwise, joint space looks fairly good. The disc appears to be in position.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. There is slightly decrease posterior joint space in some views. Out laterally, the disc is not as obvious as is medial. More medially, the disc is anteriorly displaced, although there does appear to be some condensed tissue over the top of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. On opening, there is reduction of the disc relatively early and there is good translation of the condyle and disc. There is some slight sclerosis on the head of the condyle and some slight anterior beaking. There is some fluid in the superior joint space.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a little flattening of the condylar head at the lateral aspect of the joint. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. Articular disc appears to be in position. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated but with early reduction. Right TMJ relatively normal architecture.

