B366 
B366 is 30 years old. Referred by Mr. .
HISTORY: B366 was involved in a motor vehicle accident last year. She was driving in her car and was hit in the driver's side by another car striking her head on the window. She had immediate pain in her jaws after the accident. In addition, she had a significant cervical injury that did require subsequent surgery. Last year, she had surgery on C4, 5, and 6 where a plate was placed and apparently diskectomies done in those areas. B366 gets significant headache problems and daily reaches a level of 8 in the frontal, temporal, and top of the head areas bilaterally with the left side somewhat worse than the right side. The headaches can escalate to 10. Eating usually worsens the level of her headaches. She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 8 with the left side being worse than the right side. Her average daily pain usually reaches a maximum of 10. She rates her jaw function at 8, diet at 5, disability at 5. When she bites her teeth together, she occludes only on the right side and the left teeth apparently do not touch. She gets earaches, but no tinnitus nor vertigo. She may have some hearing loss as people have to repeat things to her and she has to have the TV louder than before. Fortunately, no other joints bother except her neck which is in the postsurgical healing phase. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B366 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is zero. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much on the facial midline. Maxillary dental midline is probably about 4 to 5 mm to the right. In profile view, she has good balance between the maxilla, cheeks, and nose. Chin appears to be about 12 mm AP deficient. Chin neckline and angle are not well defined. Intraorally, B366 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch, but appears to have good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. The upper cuspid on the right side is blocked and is somewhat out of the arch. She has some caries around the maxillary central incisors, particularly the right one. She has a basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side, but a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side, being right about 3 to 4 mm Class II. She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm. Maximum incisal opening is 32 mm, but only about 20 mm without severe pain. Excursion movement to the right side was 9 mm, but only about 3 mm to the left side without excruciating pain. If she tried to shift the left side, she had pain in both sides of the jaw, a little bit more so on the left side. To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, posterior neck, moderate pain over the styloid areas, SCMs, and left medial pterygoid area. On opening, she had a definite click at about 20 mm and a closing click at somewhere around 15 mm on left side. The right side seemed to be relatively smooth. The uvula is moderately elongated as is the soft palate. Fascial pillars may be moderately constricted, but visualization was difficult. The tonsils looks relatively normal. Intranasally, the turbinates appear relatively normal in size, although they did appear to have a little bit of inflammation associated with them. The septum looked relatively straight. There did not appear to be any obvious nasal airway obstruction clinically.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of impacted mandibular third molars in horizontal angulation. The maxillary third molar is impacted, but the right one is erupted and is, in fact, is hyper-erupted compared to the second molars. Sinuses look relatively clear. Condyles look reasonably normal. Waters view shows that the bony septum is reasonably straight. Left turbinate appears enlarged and appears to fill a good portion of the nasal airway. The right side appears more normal. The maxillary sinuses are difficult to evaluate. The other sinuses appear relatively clear. Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have lost a little bit of vertical volume. Joint space, however, looks good. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Left TMJ tomogram shows that the teeth are not together on this side. There is fairly good joint space, but again with the teeth not in occlusion, she could possibly be postured opened. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is moderately good translation of both condyles.
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a skeletal Class II relationship and AP macrogenia. She has a relatively high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway dimension measures about 6 mm at the soft palate level, but 10 mm at the base of the tongue. Basic diagnoses for B366 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency. AP macrogenia. Decreased oropharyngeal airway. Class II occlusal relationship on the left side.
Maxillary midline shifted 4 to 5 mm to the right.
Maxillary right cuspid blocked out of the arch.
Class II end-on cuspid and molar relationship on the left side.
TMJ pain.
Headaches. Myofascial pain.
Horizontally impacted mandibular third molars, impacted maxillary left third molar, and erupted malpositioned maxillary right third molar.
Dental caries.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Dental services to eliminate dental caries.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. Surgery. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the anterior mandible.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x3 and extraction of maxillary right third molar.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B366 MRI EVALUATION 
AGE: 30/F
DOB: 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal views shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There is significantly decreased lateral joint space. Articular disc is medially displaced and covering only about the medial third of the condyle. The disc also appears to be anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There also appears to be decreased lateral joint space, but not as significant as the opposite side. Disc appears to be medially displaced, but still covering about half the condylar head. There is a little bit of irregularity in the head of the condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some anterior beaking and flattening on the posterior head. Laterally, the disc is not seen. Towards the medial aspect, the disc is seen and appears to be in reasonably good anteroposterior position. On opening in the more lateral cut, the disc is not seen, but in the more medial cut the disc is seen to translate with the condyle and remain in position.

Right TMJ sagittal views shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the posterior head and some flattening on the anterior head with what appears to be some erosion towards the lateral aspect of the joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The disc appears to be in fairly good position, although not seen very well at the most lateral aspect of the joint. She has a little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. On opening, there is good translation, and the disc appears to be in a reduced position. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint, the disc is quite thin and likely supports a moderate medial displacement of the articular disc.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc medially displaced. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc medially displaced, but not as severely as the left side.

