B367
B367 is 32 years old and referred by Dr.  
Patient History

Previous surgeries that B367 has had include tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy, and he had a broken leg that was set. He did have problems with allergies and asthma when he was quite a bit younger but has pretty much outgrown the asthma problems but still has some problems with allergies. He takes Advil and Claritin.

B367's problems began with his joints when he was about 16 or 17 years old of unknown etiology. He did state that he recalls having some dental work where they put clamps on his teeth, and after that his jaws were quite sore. That was around the age of 11 or 12. He had orthodontics from the age of 14 to 16. That is when he began developing worsening joint problems. He wore a splint from about the age of 17 for about two years and had three different splints made. He went along reasonably well and until recently his joint problems have gotten a lot worse in the past four years.

B367 sleeps predominantly on his side, although he is a significant mouth breather and does have significant snoring problems, but he is not aware of any apneic episodes. He says when he goes to sleep he sleeps fairly well. Not particularly tired during the day. B367 does get earaches, occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss. He gets almost daily headaches at about a level of 6 in the temporal area bilaterally. TMJ pain is at 7, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 6, diet at 4, and disability at 3. He is aware that he has some allergies to cedar but has no other really known allergies and doesn't have too much problems with his allergies anymore. Is not aware of any food allergies.

Patient Concerns
Headaches TMJ pain
Joints pop and click a lot
In the mornings, it will lock up
Difficulties eating and chewing
Earaches Predominantly a mouth breather
Significant snoring

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B367 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.

In profile view, B367 has some AP maxillary deficiency for probably at least 4 to 6 mm. Mandible is deficient AP wise by probably 15 mm. No definition of the chin-neck angle, and chin-neckline is extremely short.

Intraorally, B367 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Also, he has all of his upper teeth back through the second molars. He has basically a Class I cuspid relationship. Has a vertical overbite of about 3 mm. Has a slight reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Has some diasthemas between the upper laterals and cuspids. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is a little bit enlarged. Appears to be some decreased dimension from the soft palate to the back of the throat. Tongue appears moderately enlarged. Intranasally, turbinates are of moderate size. Has some moderate spurring at the base of the septum bilaterally, but the nasal airway appears reasonably good. To palpation, he has some moderate pain over the temporalis and masseter muscles and milder pain over the TMJs and styloid areas as well as the SCMs.

On opening, he has definite audible clicks and pops in both TMJs that occur at about 10 to 15 mm of opening and about 5 to 10 mm of closing. Incisal opening is 53 mm. Excursive movements are pretty close to 9 mm in each direction. In excursive movements, he has audible clicking in both joints. B367's pain usually gets worse in the afternoons and evenings and usually feels better in the morning unless he sleeps wrong on his jaw, and then he can wake up being in pain in the morning as well.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Left condyle appears a little bit flat on top. Sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Appears to be good supported bone around the teeth.

Waters view shows that the sinuses all appear clear. Has quite large frontal sinuses. Maxillary sinuses do appear relatively clear. Nasal airway appears fairly good, although the septum appears somewhat wide in width.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. A little flat on the anterior and posterior aspects. Joint space appears to be decreased posteriorly and superiorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has flattening on the posterior head. Appears to have a little bit better morphology. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

On opening, there appears to be good translation of both joints. A little bit of peaking is observed on the left condyle in the forward position. Both condyles have some significant flattening on the posterior superior head. Styloid processes are moderately long.

Cephalometrically B367 appears to have AP maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia. Oropharyngeal airway is only about 5 mm between the soft palate and the posterior pharyngeal wall. The tongue fills the entire oral cavity. Has a double image of the posterior wall of the pharynx. Measured from the base of the tongue, the posterior pharyngeal wall is about 7 to 8 mm, I guess 8 mm. With the double image, one area is only about 2 mm of space. Has a relatively high occlusal plane angle. Has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Class I occlusion with an anterior deep bite
Decreased oropharyngeal airway space of 5 mm (normal 11 mm)
High occlusal plane angulation of approximately 15 mm
Headaches
TMJ pain
Masticatory dysfunction
Earaches Snoring
History of bleeding disorder
Sleep apnea symptoms

Recommended Treatment
Treatment Option 1
Hematological evaluation for diagnosis and management of clotting disorder
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction approximately 12 mm at point B and decreasing the occlusal plane
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it about 6 mm and downgraft it posteriorly

Treatment Option 2
Hematological evaluation for diagnosis and management of clotting disorder
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain current jaw and occlusal relationship

B367  MRI Scan Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition:	
Date of Reading: 
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Appears to be good vertical joint space. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. Disc appears to be laterally displaced with the medial aspect of the disc being almost over the center of the condyle.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. Good joint space vertically. Lateral rim of the fossa curves moderately inferiorly. I also get the impression that the disc may be laterally displaced with the medial aspect of the disc over the lateral two thirds of the condyle with the middle third uncovered by the discal tissue. However, it is difficult to determine the exact medial extent of the disc on this side.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has some significant flattening on the anterior head of the condyle particularly toward the lateral aspect of the joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Disc appears to be almost excessively thick but appears to be in a normal anteroposterior position. Disc has a little bit of a vertical orientation toward the more medial side of the joint, but the bilaminar tissues are quite thick. It gives the impression that perhaps the patient may be on long-term splint therapy because of the increased thickness of the bilaminar tissues toward the medial side of the joint. Some anterior beaking is present more toward the medial side, although there is a little bit at the lateral aspect as well. Fairly minimal fluid in the superior joint space. Medially the discal tissue is not readily seen.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and disc with the disc well-reduced on opening.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has some flattening of the anterior head. Some anterior beaking is present. Appears there is some small osteophytic projection superiorly off the condyle, the midportion of the condyle perhaps. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Disc appears to be in fairly good position, although there is again the increased thickness of bilaminar tissue posterior to the condyle. Toward the medial aspect, there appears to be loss of definition of the disc that could be supportive of a lateral displacement of the disc. There is some fluid in the superior joint space and a small amount in the inferior joint space.

On opening, there is good translation of the disc and condyle, and the disc is reduced in good position. Disc is seen in better position over medially on the open views.

Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis with perhaps lateral displacement of the articular disc and an increased thickness of the disc over normal. Could be anteriorly displaced toward the more medial aspect of the joint
Right TMJ arthritis and possibly lateral displacement of the articular disc.

