B370 
B370 is 31 years old and referred by Dr. _

Patient History
She had an appendectomy done 27 years ago. 4 years ago, she had a head injury and had one seizure but none after that. She had a biking accident and struck the posterior left side of her head and was knocked unconscious and had a grand mal seizure at that time.

Current Medications
B370 takes no medications of any kind at this time.
Patient Concerns
Primary concerns are as follows:
Open bite.
Severe headaches (migraines).
Moderate to severe TMJ pain.
Pain through the muscles of the head, jaw, and neck area.
Significant noises in the jaw joints.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Difficulties with her tongue as it is being displaced by the large mandibular tori.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway space of 5 mm (normal 11 mm).

B370 thinks that her TMJ problems may have begun back around the age of 10 or 11. She remembers one incident where someone hit her or bumped her in the jaw from the right side, and it did create pain on the left side. She did not develop clicking and popping right at that time but during about that same time frame she remembers having clicking in her jaw joints. She had orthodontics as a teenager. Prior to the orthodontics, she did have an open bite, and she recalls that was fairly closed up so that her front teeth actually did touch for a while but then the bite opened up. In the last six years, she feels that the bite has gotten worse. B370 feels that she pushes her tongue forward on her front teeth and feels that may be somewhat contributory to redeveloping her open bite. She does get frequent earaches and vertigo and gets occasional tinnitus. She does have a little bit of problem with her left shoulder, and her wrists do bother her, but she feels that is work-related.

Clinical Evaluation
In frontal view, B370 has fairly good facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is 0. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is probably 1 to 2 mm off to the left side. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much aligned with each other. Therefore, mandibular dental midline and chin midline may be just a little bit off toward the left side. Nasal tip is a little bit off to the right side probably a couple of millimeters. In profile view, B370 has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Chin appears retruded, and chin-neckline is a little bit short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined. Upper lip may be retruded 2 to 3 mm. Chin may be back 8 to 10 mm.

Intraorally, B370 has all of her lower teeth erupted in back through her third molars. There is adequate attached gingiva lower anterior arch. She has huge lingual tori that fill up all but about 8 mm transversely in the floor of the mouth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the third molars, except she is missing the right lateral incisor replaced by a pontic. She does have a crown on the left lateral incisor. She essentially occludes only on her second and third molars with all other teeth being out of occlusion. She has an anterior open bite of 7 mm. She has a slight Class II cuspid-molar relationship.

Intranasally, the airway looks good with just moderate-size turbinates and no particular inflammatory response seen. Oropharynx also appears clear. Tonsils are present but relatively small in size.

B370 rates her headaches at a level of 8 that oftentimes begin in the temple area but can cover the entire head and neck area. Usually these occur about two times per week, but there are times when they occur daily. She rates her average TMJ pain at about 4, overall pain at 6, jaw function at 7, diet at 3, disability at 4. Maximal incisal opening is 48 mm excluding the open bite. Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction.

On opening, she has a distinctive pop in the right joint at probably around 40 mm of opening and a closing click at about 35. On the left side, she can manipulate her jaw and make some popping noises on that side at well at probably about 45 mm of opening and reciprocal one at 40 mm of closing. To palpation, she has some mild to moderate discomfort over the masseter muscles, TMJs, and styloid areas.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the presence of all teeth except the maxillary right lateral incisor that has been replaced by a pontic that appears to be cantilevered off of the cuspid. Sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Left condyle appears a little bit more pointed with perhaps an osteophyte at the tip of it. Right joint appears a little bit flattened across the top. No other significant findings noted. Styloid processes are quite thickened and slightly elongated.

Left TMJ shows a condyle that is flattened on the posterior aspect and also on the anterior aspect. Some anterior beaking present. Vertical and posterior joint space actually looks pretty good. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There appear to be some significant degenerative changes associated with this condyle.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with what appears to be loss of vertical height. Has anterior beaking present. Superior and posterior joint space appears almost excessive. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Translation is very good in both joints with the condyles coming anterior to the articular eminences.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinate on the left side appears larger than the right side. Some mild asymmetry noted in the jaw structures.

Cephalometrically, she has a significant open bite and a reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch and perhaps slightly accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Oropharyngeal airway dimension is about 6 mm at the most at the soft palate level and close to 7at the base of the tongue.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe deformation and degeneration.
Mandibular hypoplasia.
Maxillary hyperplasia.
Severe headaches.
Severe TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Severely hyperplastic bilateral mandibular tori extending from cuspids all the way to the third molar area.
Anterior open bite of 7 mm.
Occludes only on second and third molars with all other teeth being out of occlusion.
Class II end-on cuspid-molar relationship.
Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch.
Reverse curve of occlusion, lower arch.
Moderate crowding, lower anterior arch.

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch in three segments: Segment 1: Left cuspid through second molar; Segment 2: Left lateral incisor through the right central incisor; Segment 3: Right cuspid through right second molar. Use a continuous arch wire, but place a step in the arch wire to align the four incisors at an elevated level and help slightly extrude the cuspid teeth. Tip cuspid roots distally and the left lateral incisor root mesially to make root for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. Try to elevate lower incisors to help eliminate the slight reverse curve of occlusion in that arch.

CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol)
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomy, meniscectomy, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand, level, and close the open bite.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest graft from abdomen).
Surgical removal of bilateral mandibular tori.
Extract maxillary and mandibular third molars.

Postsurgical orthodontics to finish and retain
Dentistry to rebuild the maxillary lateral incisors
B370  MRI Evaluation
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with a significant downward slope of the lateral pole of the condyle. A fairly significant downward turning of the lateral rim is also present. Vertical joint space actually looks fairly good. Disc is maybe anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width but appears to have been some bony changes associated with it. Significant downward rotation of the lateral pole of the condyle. Lateral rim of the fossa appears downward but not nearly to the extent as the opposite side. There appears to be some incongruency on the head of the condyle more so than the opposite side. Joint space looks quite good. Difficult to tell exactly where the disc is.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly and has a significant hockey stick shape to it. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Some anterior beaking present. Out laterally, it appears that there may be some loss of cortical bone on the anterosuperior head of the condyle. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and significantly deformed and quite short anteroposteriorly. Some significant amount of fluid in the superior joint space both above the condylar head and also in the anterior recess around the articular eminence.

On opening, there is reasonably good translation, and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that appears to have undergone significant arthritic changes. There appear to be osteophytic extensions to them off the superior head of the condyle. There is significant anterior beaking present. Some areas where the cortical bone may have some erosions. Articular eminence is moderately steep. It appears to be intact for the most part. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and quite thickened and quite short anteroposteriorly. There is fluid in the superior joint space and in the anterior recess by the articular eminence.

On opening, there is moderately good translation but not quite as good as the opposite side, and articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with significant deformation and nonreducing.
Right TMJ arthritis (worse than the left side) with articular disc dislocation with significant deformation and nonreducing.

