B372 
B372 is 40 years old and is referred by Dr. _.
Patient History
B372 has had a previous laparoscopy 12 years ago. B372 is in good health except for her jaw problems. She was on WELLBUTRIN when she filled out the form, but it caused her to be jittery, and she since has discontinued it. She has had an adverse reaction to PENICILLIN. She apparently got hives in the past when she has taken penicillin.

B372's problems began when she was about 14 or 15 years of age in reference to her TMJ problems. The etiology is unknown. She tolerated things fairly well, and in the past year-and-a-half she has really developed significant pain, headache, and dysfunction problems. She did finally get a splint this year, and the splint does help by reducing the pain. She chronically holds the lower jaw forward as it feels better in that position. If she goes back into a centric relation, she has severe pain. She has taken Vicodin occasionally but also has taken aspirin and Excedrin for migraines most of the time.

Patient Concerns
Headaches that progress into migraines
Severe pain in the TMJ joints
Difficulties opening her jaws
Difficulties eating and chewing
Teeth and jaws don't fit together properly
She has to posture her jaw forward to try to achieve relief
Lower jaw is becoming progressively more retruded
Earaches
Tinnitus
Frequent vertigo
Hearing loss
Frequently wakes up with headaches at least 50% of the time
Nighttime clenching and grinding of the teeth
Daytime clenching
Not sleeping well
Snoring
Even though she has been an aerobics instructor for years, lately she feels as though she gets out of breath just walking and can't catch her breath
Breathlessness problems
Difficulties breathing through her nose
Chronic fatigue

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B372 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline and chin are shifted to the right about 1 to 2 mm.

In profile view, B372 has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose. Chin is retruded, and chin-neckline is short. Chin-neck angle is poorly defined. Chin is probably about 15 mm AP deficient. She does have some mild crenations on the tongue. Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Some moderate crowding, lower anterior arch. Slight accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Some mild crowding, upper anterior arch. B372 has a Class II occlusion. She has an overjet of probably about 4 mm. In manipulating her jaw back into a centric relation, it is quite uncomfortable for her. She is about 5 mm Class II bilaterally. Difficult to visualize the soft palate and uvula but was able to see it, and tissues look healthy. Transverse width of the oropharynx appears as though it could be somewhat narrow. Turbinates are moderately enlarged intranasally. She does have some constricture of the luminal valves.

To palpation, she does have some mild tenderness over the TMJs and styloid areas. All other areas are free of pain or discomfort. Maximal incisal opening is 48 mm. Excursive movements are 10 mm in each direction. She can fairly easily open up, but if she tries to go through repeated openings, it becomes quite painful for her to do that.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows crowns on the mandibular first molars, maxillary right first molar, and the tooth also has a root canal on it. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Difficult to evaluate turbinates. Condyles appear arthritic with the right side being worse than the left side. The right side appears as though it has an erosion in the center of it.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with severe arthritis and significant anterior beaking present. Fossa has a moderate slope to it. The patient may not have been all the way back in centric relation with this radiograph, but nonetheless the condyle is quite arthritic in appearance.

Right TMJ tomogram appears to be taken in more of a centric relation as compared to the opposite side. Decreased posterior joint space, and appears that there is a little osteophyte perhaps extending posteriorly off the condylar head that appears to almost touch against the posterior wall of the fossa. Articular eminence is of moderate inclination. Significant anterior beaking is present. Appears to be an erosion in the center of the condylar head.

Opening views show fairly good translation of both condyles. The condyles are quite arthritic.
Waters view shows that the sinuses appear fairly clear with the left one being just a little bit more cloudy than the right side. Ethmoid and frontal sinuses look clear. Turbinates appear to fill a good part of the nasal cavity.

Cephalometrically, B372 has a Class II skeletal relationship. She has a high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway actually looks not as bad as one might expect. Airway at the soft palate level is about 7 mm and at the base of the tongue is about 8 mm. She has posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. On the lateral ceph, her head is tipped upwards which will increase the airway. B372 has an aunt and her dad who have severe arthritic problems in multiple joints. No significant tooth-size discrepancy is present.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ severe reactive arthritis
AP mandibular deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Class II occlusion
High occlusal plane angle
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Mild crowding, upper anterior arch
AP microgenia
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction
Decreased oropharyngeal airway dimension
Severe TMJ pain
Severe headaches
Earaches Tinnitus
Vertigo
Hearing loss

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch Align and level mandibular arch
CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to downgraft the posterior aspect and upright the incisors
HTR implant to anterior mandible

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
Other Systems
B372 does have problems with her hips and knees. She has never had any urinary tract infections, but she does have polyuria; however, she drinks a lot of water. When she has her period, she has excessive pain. She has had two children, ages 14 and 16, and no miscarriages. She was diagnosed as having endometriosis when she was younger and was told she wouldn't be able to have children. She has had lots of problems with ovarian cysts. She had pelvic inflammatory disease x 1. She had an abnormal Pap smear once, and she had cryosurgery, and this was at the age of 37. She used to have problems with vaginal yeast infections with the use of panty hose, but she doesn't wear those anymore and no longer has a problem. She had gingivitis x 1. She does have earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, and has loss of hearing. No known STDs. She is tired a lot. She gets palpitations of her heart during her periods. For about a year-and-a-half recently, they had three parakeets. One of them died. Her sister has two love birds and a parrot that she spends a fair amount of time with. She has had a cat for about a year. They have had guinea pigs in the past. She has had several outside dogs.

B372 MRI Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition:	
Date of Reading: 
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears to have undergone some significant condylar resorption. Cortical bone may not be intact all the way across. The superior cortex looks a little raggedy. Fossa appears a little bit rough but could be just the quality of the MRI. Significantly decreased joint space vertically. Mild downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. Discal tissue not identifiable.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears to have significant arthritis associated with it. Condyle looks quite sclerotic and appears as though there has been significant resorption. Condyle very narrow mediolaterally. This joint may have had previous surgery. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly quite significantly, and it appears as though there is reactive bone extending down from the lateral rim of the fossa. Bone in the fossa looks fairly thin.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is narrow anteroposteriorly. Appears to have lost a lot of vertical height and volume of the condyle. Significant anterior beaking is present. May be some discal tissue anteriorly but appears to be fairly degenerated. Decreased vertical joint space. Could possibly be some erosions even in the fossa articular eminence area but difficult to verify. Discal tissue definitely is anteriorly displaced.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle, and it appears that the remnant of the discal tissue remains anteriorly displaced.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has undergone severe condylar resorption with loss of vertical height and anteroposterior dimension. Significant anterior beaking or osteophytic formation in the front. Some cratering out of the condylar head toward the medial side. Appears to be some remnant of discal tissue sitting beneath the articular eminence. May be erosions in the fossa area.

On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyle as it comes down beneath the articular eminence, but the remnant of the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Impression:
Left TMJ severe arthritis with articular disc dislocation with severe deformation and nonreducing
Right TMJ severe arthritis with articular disc dislocation with severe deformation and nonreducing

