B373 
B373 is 15 years old, refereed by Dr.   .
PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Gummy smile.
Mouth breathing, particularly at night.

She takes no medications. She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo. She does clench and grind her teeth at night. She has no TMJ pain or headaches. She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 0. Incisal opening is 58 mm. Excursive movements are about 5 mm in each direction. She is unaware of when her joint problems began nor is there any known etiology.

To palpation she has no tenderness around the head and neck area. However, on opening she has significant joint noises with an opening click on the left side about 15 mm, closing click at 10 on the right side opening pop at about 25 mm and closing click at about 15 mm. There are also crepitus sounds that seem to come from those joints. She has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. She takes no medications.

In frontal view B373 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 8 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin. Mandibular midline is about 1 to 2 mm off to the left. At Thanksgiving of this year she had a frenectomy performed on the upper lip to see if that would help the lip come down further. Maxilla is slightly retruded by about 4 to 5 mm. Chin is retruded by probably about 8 mm. Chin-neckline is a little bit short although chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined. She does have hyperfunction of the mentalis muscle. Intraorally, B373 has all of the teeth back through the second molars except she is missing mandibular left second bicuspid which is impacted. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Upper lateral incisors particularly on the left side appears a little bit small. She has hyperplasia of the maxillary gingiva and mandibular gingiva generalized throughout the oral cavity. She has 0 overbite relationship. She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the left side by probably 2 mm on the right side about 2 mm. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is moderately enlarged but not too significant. The soft palate is normal in length. The faucial pillars are slightly constricted but not too significantly. The septum appears reasonably straight. The turbinates are moderately enlarged but it appears that there may be adequate airway. She does not appear to have any real significant obstruction but perhaps some mild obstruction. The columella is wide. The luminal valves are slightly constricted but holding them open did not seem to make a difference for her relative to ease of breathing. She says that some of her girlfriends have told her that she does snore sometimes. She has no daytime somnolence nor any sleep apnea symptoms. The right turbinate appeared larger than the left turbinate today.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars that are impacted and unerupted. She has an impacted interrupted mandibular left second bicuspid. There is a radiolucency around the crown. The tooth is tipped posteriorly into the mesial root of the first molar. B373

The first and second molars on that side appear anteriorly positioned compared to the opposite side. The sinuses appear relatively clear. The condyles appear relatively normal.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is slightly posteriorly positioned in the fossa. There is some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Slight increased anterior joint space.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There may be some slight flattening on the anterior head but there are no decreased superior and posterior joint spaces. On opening, there is good translation of both condyles with good joint space.

Waters view shows that the septum is deviated some. There is a septal spur off the bony part of the septum off towards the left side of the nose. Right turbinate appears enlarged compared to the left one. The sinuses appear relatively clear. On the dental model analysis there is about a 3 to 4 mm tooth size discrepancy likely due to the small upper lateral incisors. There is some lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. The space is only about 4 mm in the left second bicuspid area which leaves about a 3 to 4 mm deficiency. The left molars are slightly more anterior than the right side.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations with reduction. Vertical maxillary excess. AP mandibular deficiency. Severe lip incompetence.
Class II end-on occlusion. Impacted mandibular left second bicuspid.
Impacted 4 third molars. Deficient space in mandibular left second bicuspid area. Mandibular dental midline shifted 1 to 2 mm to the left of the facial midline. Mandibular arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1 to 2 mm lower than the right side.
High occlusal plane angle.
History of clenching and bruxism. Tooth size discrepancy with a 's difference of 2 to 3 mm. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction. Wide columella.
Generalized gingival hyperplasia secondary to the orthodontic appliances and perhaps in the upper arch due to excessive air exposure.

B373
RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: Surgical removal of mandibular left third molar and surgical exposure of mandibular left second bicuspid.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Open up at least 1 mm of space around each upper lateral incisor. Keep the lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally in case interdental osteotomies are necessary.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Continue to open up space in the left second bicuspid area by pushing the anterior teeth forward approximately 2 mm (this will help improve the arch symmetry) and distalize the molars 2 mm. Try to reposition in the mandibular left second bicuspid into the arch. Be careful as this tooth could be ankylosed or simply could just be trapped beneath the mesial root of the first molar.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly approximately 6 mm and advance it 4 to 5 mm. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Surgical removal of maxillary third molars x2 and mandibular right third molar.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion and retain with rigid retainers.
Consider post-treatment gingivoplasty if necessary to maximize the esthetic appearance of the gingiva and teeth.

B373 MRI Evaluation
Age: 15/F
Date of Birth: 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears fairly broad in width. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa. The lateral pole of the condyle is significantly lower than the medial pole by probably 7 mm or so. There appears to be decreased lateral joint space. There may be some discal tissue medially displaced. The cortical bone is intact though there is a slight depression in the bony cortex overlying the lateral rim of the fossa. The lateral pole of the condyle extends just slightly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that also is quite broad in width. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly a moderate amount. It probably comes down 3 to 4 mm. The lateral pole of the condyle is lower than the medial pole but only by about 2 or 3 mm. Significantly decreased lateral joint space. There appears to be discal tissue covering the medial half of the condyle. Lateral pole of the condyle extends just slightly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Cortical bone appears to be intact.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is actually quite narrow anteroposteriorly. There is a significant hockey stick shape to the head and neck of the condyle. The condyle is broader at the lateral aspect of the joint in an anteroposterior direction as compared to the mid aspect which is more narrow than the medial aspect. Out laterally, there appears that there may be some disruption of the cortical bone on the head of the condyle. There is a decreased superior and posterior joint space out laterally more so as compared to the mid or medial aspect of the joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep but gets significantly steeper towards the medial side where it is almost perpendicular to the horizontal plane. The articular eminence is quite long in length. Out laterally, the articular disc is clearly anteriorly displaced but as we progress more medially it assumes a more vertical position within the fossa although still anterior. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening there is almost excessive translation of the condyle and the disc is reduced and translates very well also. There appears to be some flattening on the posterior head of the condyle particularly in the mid portion of the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on anterior head and a little bit of anterior beaking present. A little bit of a hockey stick shape structure to the condylar head and neck. Decreased superior and posterior joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. Articular eminence is significantly steep but not quite as steep as the opposite side. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. It is more displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint as compared to the medial where it again shows a more vertical position between the condyle and the articular eminence. Although, it does appear to be a little bit more anteriorly displaced on this side as compared to the opposite side. There is some fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is translation of the condyle with reduction of the articular disc and good translation of the disc as well.

IMPRESSION: Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. Both discs appear salvageable. May possibly need to consider arthroplasty of the lateral pole of the condyle to keep it within the confines of the fossa.

