B374
B374 is 38 years old, referred by Dr.  . B374's problems began 16 years ago at the age of 23 of unknown etiology. He believes it may have been related to bruxism. He began to have some symptoms that then got worse. Prior to that time, he had had orthodontics at the age of 15. He went back into orthodontic appliances from 14 to 16 years ago by Dr.  . Following his accident, he had seen several ENT specialists and neurologists relative to his pain and headaches. Finally, he was referred to Dr.  . 15 years ago, he underwent double jaw orthognathic surgery by Dr.   in . Since that time, he has continued to have significant pain problems. He has had approximately 4 splints including one through neuromuscular programming. He has had physical therapy and chiropractic treatment well. 2 years ago, he was involved in a motor vehicle accident that significantly exacerbated his symptoms. B374 rates his headaches at a level of 7, occurring in the temporal and posterior head area. He rates his TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 10, jaw function and diet at 3, and disability at 9. The only medication he currently takes is Amrix (cyclobenzaprine) 15 mg q.h.s. He gets daily earaches, occasional tinnitus, and significant vertigo problems. No other joints bother him. Interestingly, when he eats or chews, he will get muscle spasms and pain through his shoulders, particularly on the shoulder blades, as well as in the abdomen area and in his legs. He believes he does perform some clenching at night time.

Primary concerns that B374 has at this time includes the following:
Increased crepitus in the joints.
Muscle imbalance in the TMJ area and neck after the car accident 2 years ago.
Vertigo.
TMJ pain. Headaches.
Teeth do not fit together.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B374 has fairly good facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 3 mm. The maxillary midline is probably 1 mm off to the right side. The mandibular dental midline is a little bit more centered. The chin may be just slightly off to the right side a couple of millimeters. In profile view, B374 has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably a good 4 mm. The chin is retruded probably 10 mm. Intraorally, B374 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. The teeth appear to be reasonably aligned. He has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, he seems to have all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has a Class III end-on occlusal relationship on the right side by probably 3 to 4 mm as well as on the left side. He appears to occlude only on the maxillary first molar, mandibular second molar and hits about the same on the right side. He has an anterior open bite of about 2 to 3 mm anteriorly, but it is greater on the left side in the cuspid area and less on the right side in the cuspid area. Transversely, the maxillary arch appears fairly level, and it appears there is a little bit of asymmetry in the lower arch with it being down about 2 mm in the cuspid area on the left side. He has some transverse maxillary deficiency with a tendency towards crossbite. He has a tendency towards a crossbite anteriorly and posteriorly. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal. Intranasally, the septum anteriorly is deviated off towards the left side. The left turbinate at least anteriorly appears relatively moderate in size and the right side appears somewhat enlarged. Maximal incisal opening is about 43 mm and he can get to about 40 mm without significant discomfort. Excursion movements are about 11 mm in each direction. In excursion, he is able to generate significant crepitation, actually being greater on the left side than the right side. Crepitation on the left side is worse if he protrudes the mandible some and then does the excursion movements.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. All the rest of the teeth are all present. The sinuses look relatively clear. He has bone plates in the anterior maxilla and 2 bone screws on each side of the ramus. Right condyle quite small compared to the left side and appears more arthritic. The bony septum looks reasonably straight. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good. He appears to occlude only on the maxillary first molars and the mandibular second molars. He has an open bite involving the rest of the teeth. He appears to have some retrusion of the maxilla and mandible. Axial views shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged. The septum seems to shift off towards the left side anteriorly. Otherwise, it seems fairly straight. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. TMJ sagittal views shows a left condyle that has fairly reasonable morphology. There is some flattening on the head of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space looks reasonably good. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic with perhaps some slight osteophytic development on the top of the condyle. The condyle is narrow anteroposteriorly. There appears to be reasonable joint space. Joint spaces may be affected by the use of the splint that he wears at night. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There appears to be some anterior beaking present. Left TMJ coronal view shows he has a little extension on the lateral pole of the condyle out laterally, showing that he may likely have bone-on-bone contact at that area, particularly if he protrudes the mandible slightly. Joint space is quite narrow towards the lateral aspect of the joint. Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is more arthritic. There appears to be an extension off the lateral pole of the condyle. Joint space otherwise looks reasonably good, except that it is somewhat decreased at the lateral aspect of the joint. The condyle appears more arthritic on the right side as compared to the left side. Dental model analysis is based on the models taken on . On these models, he has an anterior open bite of about 4 mm. He has bilateral posterior cross bites and a tendency towards an anterior cross bite. He has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship. His occlusion actually fits together a little better now than it did in February, at least relative to the transverse dimension of the maxilla and mandible. There does not appear to be any significant tooth size discrepancy. Basic diagnoses for B374 would be as follows:

Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc medially displaced. Right TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc dislocated without reduction with severe deformation and degeneration. AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia. Class III end-on occlusion. Anterior open bite of 3 mm.
Transverse cant of the mandibular arch with the left side being 2 mm lower than the right side. Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches. Myofascial pain. Vertigo.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
b. Align and level mandibular arch.
2. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3. Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and expand it transversely. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral coronoidotomies. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Nasal septoplasty.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B374 MRI AGE: 38/M
DOB:
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. The condyle appears to have good morphology. The disc appears to be medially displaced. There appears to be decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears much smaller in size and more narrow mediolaterally. The condyle appears arthritic with some sclerosis on the head of the condyle. There seems to be reasonable joint space, but the disc appears to be a little anteriorly and medially displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. A little bit of flattening on the posterior head. Articular eminence is moderate in inclination. The articular disc for the most part appears to be in reasonably good position. A little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint space around the posterior aspect of the joint. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and articular disc. At the lateral aspect of the joint in the closed views, the disc is not very evident, indicative of a medial displacement.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears more arthritic. The condyle is smaller in size than the opposite side. There is actually fairly good joint space present, but the articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is significantly deformed and short anteroposteriorly with significant loss of the intermediate zone. There appears to be an inflammatory process perhaps in the bilaminar tissue. On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyle, but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ partial medial displacement of the articular disc. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated anteriorly with significant deformation and non-reducing.

