B377
Date of Birth:
B377is 17 years old. She has had some problems in the past with allergies, stomach flu and colds. The only surgery she has had are tubes in and out of her ears. She does have some problems with allergies. When she does sleep she tends to breathe more through her mouth. The only medication she takes is Zyrtec-D one per day and Tylenol or Advil for headaches. She had a reaction to Biaxin in the past. The medication made her quite sick. She is also allergic to bees and has some environmental allergies but she has never been tested. She is allergic to nickel and cannot wear cheap earrings. She has some mild scoliosis. She has no joint problems except her left ankle bothers her periodically when the weather changes and this is from previous trauma to that ankle. B377 problems began about 4 to 5 years ago of unknown etiology. She has been in orthodontic treatment for quite some time. From 8 to 10 years ago starting when she was in the first grade, she had maxillary expansion performed. Later on, that maxillary expansion was repeated once again as well as some expansion of the lower arch. Last year, she started her recent orthodontic management. B377 is aware of clenching and grinding her teeth at night when she sleeps and she does that sometimes during the day as well.

She gets headaches about 1 time per week in the temple areas about a level of 5. Her average daily pain in the jaw joint is at 7, average daily pain is about 4, jaw function is 4, diet is 6, disability is at 4.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Headaches. TMJ and jaw pain. Difficulties eating and chewing.
Difficulties breathing through the nose.
Predominately a mouth breather.
Teeth and jaws do not fit together.

In frontal view, B377 has good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1.5 mm. Maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to the left side. Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the left side and chin is probably 3 to 4 mm off to the left side. B377 has some increased fullness in the right side of the face. Inferior border of the mandible in the right side is lower than the left side by probably 3 mm or so. In comparing some of her previous photographs, it appears that B377 may be developing some asymmetry with the mandible being shifted off towards the left side and also her open bite on the right side appears to have increased some at least in the photographs. B377 demonstrates a tooth size discrepancy fairly close to 2.5 mm. She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the maxillary right maxilla being about 1/2 to 2 mm lower than the left side and the right mandibular arch is probably 3 mm lower than the left side. The lower arch looks fairly reasonable. In profile view, she has some problems in the nasal dorsum. She may have some slight AP maxillary deficiency in subnasale area. The chin is just slightly retruded but not too significant. Lower lip is everted slightly. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  

She has full appliances on back through the second molars. Some slight lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being probably 1 mm or 2 posterior to the right cuspid. She has adequately attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has an accentuated curve of occlusion and the curve of significantly increased in the upper arch. She has an anterior open bite of about 4 to 5 mm. She has a slight Class III end-on occlusion on the left side and likewise on the right side. When she occludes, she occludes only on the left second bicuspid, first second molars and all other teeth are completely out of occlusion. She has an anterior open bite in the incisor area 4 to 5 mm and in the right cuspid area about 3 mm and posteriorly probably 1 to 2 mm in the molar area. The tissues in the oropharynx appear healthy and normal. The uvula is moderately enlarged and a little bit wide. Soft palate is just mildly elongated but not too significant. Faucial pillars are moderately constricted. Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side. The right turbinate is moderately enlarged and it appears to block some of that airway. On the left side, the airway looks quite wide open due to the fact that the turbinate is small and the septum is deviated significantly off towards the right side. To palpation, B377 has moderate to high moderate pain over the masseters, medial pterygoids, TMJs and styloid areas. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly although she could feel a little bit of popping on the right side which possibly could be the condyle coming out over the articular eminence. The left side does seem to function relatively smoothly. B377 does have moderate snoring problems but has no daytime somnolence and apparently no sleep apnea symptoms.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of 4 impacted third molars. The sinuses look relatively clear. The turbinates appear moderate in size and difficult to evaluate the septum. Difficult to evaluate the condyles but it appears that the right one is significantly larger than the left one.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. She has fairly large frontal sinuses particularly on the left side. The nasal septum in the bony area looks reasonably straight though some slight deviation towards the right side. The turbinate posteriorly on the left side appears quite large and may be blocking the airway back there. On the right side, it is moderately enlarged but not as big as the left side appears to be. There is mandibular asymmetry with the right side being lower than the left side. In occlusion she has her mandible postured just slightly off towards the right side and is not in centric relation.

On tomographic evaluation, only one of the tomograms turned out on the left side. The condyle appears small in size anteroposteriorly and appears somewhat arthritic. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is fairly flat in this view. It appears there could be some calcifications in the joint but did not see these on the MRI. Impacted third molars can be seen.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is significantly larger than the opposite side. The joint space looks fairly good. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Impacted third molars can be seen. On opening, there is restricted translation on the left side and the right side translates fairly well.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a high occlusal plane angle affecting the mandible. The inferior border of the mandible on the right side is significantly lower than the left side and this also is true at the occlusal surface. The lower teeth appear somewhat overangulated in relative to the rest of the mandible. She has a Class III occlusal relationship but appears to be closer to a Class I skeletal relationship. She has an anterior open bite of at least 4 to 5 mm. Oropharyngeal airway space is somewhat decreased with the distance from the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall is approximately 5 mm and the base of the tongue closer to 3 to 3.5 mm. She does have some adenoid tissue up in the nasal pharynx that is in very close approximation to the turbinate with the distance of about 3.5 to 4 mm. Turbinates do extend posterior to the posterior aspect of the palate. The lower incisors do appear overangulated.

BASIC DIAGNOSES Right mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction. AP maxillary deficiency.
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Apertognathia.
Occludes only on the left second bicuspid, first second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion in an open bite position. Impacted maxillary mandibular third molars x4.
Significant accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.
Increased curve of in the upper arch. Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. Difficulties eating and chewing.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Deviated nasal septum.
Hypertrophied adenoid tissue.
Tooth size discrepancy with a 's difference of 2.5 mm.
Overangulation of lower incisors.
Significant overangulation of maxillary incisors.
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Snoring.
 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level the maxillary arch but place a vertical step in the archwire between the cuspids and lateral incisors to essentially extrude the cuspids at least 1 to 2 mm and align the 4 incisors at an elevated plane level. Keep the lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally. Disengage second molars from the archwire.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 to 2.5 mm of tooth structure to compensate for the tooth size discrepancy. Surgery.
Right mandibular high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchor.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the occlusion, upright the anterior segment, and advance it forward slightly. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to align the mandible along the facial midline transversely as well as establish a good relationship with the maxilla. Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Nasal septoplasty. Turbinectomies. Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B377  MRI Evaluation 
Age: 15 y/o female Date of Birth:  
Date of Acquisition:  
Date of Interpretation: 

Left TMJ coronal view shows the left condyle appears a little bit narrow mediolaterally compared to the opposite side. The condyle must be fairly narrow anteroposteriorly. It appears that the disc may be anteriorly displaced. Superior joint space is not particularly thin. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly a fair amount and probably 4 mm. Cortical bone appears to be intact.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears wider and healthier as compared to the left side. There may be some decreased joint space vertically but particularly at the lateral rim of the fossa. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm and slightly less than the opposite side. Cortical bone appears to be intact. The disc appears that it may be anteriorly displaced. There appears to be some decreased medial joint space as well.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is very narrow anteroposteriorly. Either there is some developmental deformity or significant resorption that may have occurred in this joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep and fairly long in length. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting down towards the inferior aspect of the articular eminence. Posterior band is extremely thick at the lateral aspect of the joint. The disc is shortened anteroposteriorly. Cortical bone is intact in the fossa and along the articular eminence. There is a significantly decreased posterior joint space and vertical joint space but not too severe. There is fluid in the superior joint space. Not too much inflammatory process however around the joint. On opening, there is some restriction of translation and the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. There is some mild anterior beaking present. There is an extremely thin condyle anteroposteriorly particularly in comparison to the opposite side. On opening, the disc does not translate very well which could be indicative of adhesions between the disc and the fossa.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is much larger than the opposite side and has hockey-stick shape to it. Some flattening on the anterior head. In the right joint the disc does appear to be in position. Articular eminence is long and a little bit more shallow than the opposite side. No particular inflammatory response seen around the joint. On opening, the disc appears to remain in position and there is good translation about the condyle and the disc. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint the disc is more difficult to identify.

IMPRESSION
Left TMJ significant arthritic changes and articular disc dislocation without reduction with possible adhesions of the discs to the articular eminence. Right TMJ with mild arthritic changes but articular disc appears to be in normal position.



