B380
B380 is 45 years old and referred by Dr.  n. The only previous surgeries are C-sections and the ' have 3 children. She also has some mild arthritic problems. Otherwise, she is in fairly good health. She takes Ativan 1 mg at bedtime. She has had an adverse reaction to tetanus and penicillin. At the age of 5 years old she believes that she had encephalitis that created the profound hearing loss on the left side and a moderate hearing loss on the right side. She gets left earaches, occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her neck, back, left shoulder, elbows, fingers and right big toe. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night and does it during the day also. She does have multiple joint problems but what has been done so far has not identified any specific factors.

B380's problems began about 3 years ago perhaps but in the last 8 to 9 months, her situation has gotten significantly worse. It began when she was having a new crown made in the lower right posterior quadrant. The crown apparently did not fit well and she had some problems. Dr.  redid the crown and has tried to do some equilibrations but this has not resolved the problem. Etiology of her current situation is unknown. She did have orthodontics from the age of 14 to 15 and did wear retainers for quite a few years. She gets headaches about a level of 4 in the temple and on the top of her head about once a week. She rates her average daily TMJ pain at about 8 and it is exacerbated with eating. The right side is worse than the left side. Average daily pain is a level of 6, jaw function and diet 8, disability at 3.

PRIMARY CONCERN
Teeth do not fit together.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Bilateral TMJ pain with the left side being significantly worse than the right side. Cannot bite the teeth together.
Headaches.
Jaw joint pain.

B380 is not aware of any difficulties with snoring. Occasionally, B380 will have an episode where her neck jerks rotating her head quickly off to the right side and then it dissipates fairly quickly as well.

In frontal view, B380 has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline may be about 1 mm off to the left side. The chin is fairly well midline. The nasal tip is just slightly off to the right side. In profile view, she has some decreased vertical dimension. For the most part balance is fairly good anteroposteriorly and vertically. Chin-neckline and chin-neck angle are reasonably well defined. She has a prominent labiomental angle. Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids that were taken out probably during her initial orthodontic treatment. She has crowns on the left first and second molars and on the right first and second molars. She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth though a little bit thin around the central incisors. In the upper arch she is also is missing first bicuspids.

 
She said she has crowns on almost all of her upper teeth. She is probably a Class II end-on cuspid but with size of the crowns that have made she is a Class I in the molar area. She has an anterior deep bite of about probably 6 to 7 mm. She has an overjet of probably 3 to 4 mm. Oropharynx appears clear. Intranasally, the right turbinates are quite large and may be causing some nasal obstruction. On the left side anteriorly the turbinates are not quite as large as on the right side but posteriorly they possibly could be enlarged. The septum is reasonably straight. No sleep apnea symptoms. Maximal incisal opening is 56 mm but she can open about 46 mm without too much discomfort. Excursive movement is about 10 mm in each direction. Right joint seems to function reasonably smoothly. In the left joint, there would be an occasional click on excursive movements.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of 4 first bicuspids and all 4 third molars. It is difficult to evaluate the sinuses and condyles.
Waters view shows that there is a little bit of thickening of the mucosal lining in the left sinus. The frontal sinuses are quite large and the frontal and ethmoids appear clear. Some deviation in the nasal septum. Turbinates appear quite large particularly on the right side.

Left TMJ tomographic radiograph shows there appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. A little bit of flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit more arthritic. There is some increased flattening on the anterior head and there is a little bit of anterior beaking present. The condyle has a little bit more of a hockey stick shape to it as compared to the opposite side. The superior and posterior joint spaces appear that they may be decreased. Articular eminence is extremely long vertically and quite steep in angulation. On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. The significant difference in the condyle is relative to shape and shows that the left one has more of a hockey stick shape to it as compared to the right side. Also, the articular eminence is significantly steeper on the left side as compared to the right side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some slight over-angulation of the maxillary incisors. The maxilla and mandible are AP retruded, most likely related to the previous orthodontics with the 4 bicuspid extraction and retraction of the teeth. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is less than 6 mm and at the base of the tongue is about 9 mm. B380 has a brachiocephalic facial morphology. She has decreased anterior vertical height of the maxilla and mandible but also has a slightly short upper lip length. Dental model analysis shows that she has basically a Class II cuspid relationship but the cuspids have been overly built up in mesiodistal dimension. She is fairly close to being Class II molar posteriorly though she does have a slight Class II tendency there as well. Posturing B380 forward to a normal overbite overjet relationship places her into a Class I cuspid relationship for the most part but closer to a Class II molar relationship.  

Also, she tends to go a little bit into crossbite in that particular position. Also the mid buccal teeth including the first bicuspids and mandibular first molar are completely out of occlusion.

B380's pain is generally worse in the morning since she has to really work her jaws to get them working and functioning and loosened up in the morning.

OTHER SYSTEMS: B380 has joint problems affecting the neck, back, left shoulder elbows, fingers and right big toe. She gives no history of urinary tract or bladder infections. She was diagnosed with having endometriosis before her first pregnancy so does not know if she still has that particular situation. She recently has been told that she has fibroid tumors of the uterus. She also feels she probably has fibrocystic breast problems. She has not had an abnormal Pap smear. No problems with oral or vaginal yeast infections. She does have some dry problems but she does wear contacts. She gets occasional sinus problems. She gets earaches, tinnitus, vertigo and she does have loss of hearing due to her encephalitis at the age of 5. She has been diagnosed in the past of having allergy-induced asthma. She also gets allergy-related cough. She gets occasional chest pain. She has had bronchitis x2 and she had pneumonia x1 at the age of 14. She gets occasional problems with nausea and occasional abdominal pain and cramping. She apparently has fairly chronic problems with constipation. She recently had her thyroid evaluated and it was okay. She has been around birds and they had a canary about 15 years ago for about 3 years and then it died. There are lots of birds around her present home but they have only lived in this home for less than a year. She has not been around cats but she has been around dogs all of her life and most of those dogs did catch birds and eat birds since most of them are Dachshunds. She has never been around hoofed animals until just this past year as they moved into a new house and there are horses directly behind them. She has no implants. B280's mother did have scleroderma.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with probable reactive pannus surrounding discs.
Rule out connective autoimmune disease and/or reactive arthritis. AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior deep bite of 6 mm.
Anterior overbite of 3 to 4 mm. Missing all 4 first bicuspids and all 4 third molars. TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. Headaches.
Masticatory dysfunction.
Accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Lab tests. HLA typing.
C-reactive protein.
Chlamydia antibody group titer.
Mycoplasma antibody group.
Rheumatological workup.
Medications.
Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s.
Celebrex 200 mg tablets 1 tablet q.d. but may increase to 2 tablets q.d.
Consider non-narcotic pain medication such as Ultram or Talwin.

Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery. TMJ reconstruction by one of the following methods.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair (this will only work if no connective autoimmune disease or inflammatory process present.)
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies if discs are repositioned.
6. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B380 MRI Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows condyle with fairly good width. The lateral rim of the fossa has a minimal downward curvature. There is an unusual indentation up in the fossa area about one-third of the way across the fossa. Decreased lateral joint space. The disc appears to be medially displaced. Cortical bone on the condyle appears to be intact although there may have been some vertical loss of bone but difficult to tell.

Right TMJ coronal view shows the condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. Some medial beaking is present and this was also present on the opposite side. Decreased lateral joint. It appears that the disc may be anteriorly displaced as well as medially. Cortical bone appears to be intact though there is possibility of there being an osteophyte sticking out laterally through the condyle but difficult to confirm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head and towards the medial side it has some anterior beaking. Towards the medial side of the condyle it has more of hockey-stick shape orientation as compared to the more lateral aspect. Articular eminence is quite steep and quite long in vertical length. Out laterally, the disc is not very obvious but if moved medially the disc becomes more apparent. The disc is in a vertical orientation with the joint area. There appears to be decreased posterior joint space in some areas. There appears to be a little downward development of bone in the fossa at the superoposterior aspect of the fossa. Towards the medial side of the joint, the disc has less definition as it does in the mid part of the joint. Cortical bone appears to be intact in the fossa and on the condyle. There is good translation of the condyle and the disc. Interestingly, the disc seems to articulate in the posterior aspect of the condyle particularly towards the medial side of the joint. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. It appears that there may be a soft tissue pannus surrounding part of the disc.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good morphology out laterally but over-medially it again a significant hockey stick shape to the condyle and some anterior beaking present not quite as a extensive as the opposite side. Articular eminence is fairly steep but not quite as long as the opposite side. The articular disc is oriented in a vertical position and towards the medial side the disc is not as clearly defined relative to shape and morphology. There is decreased superposterior joint space. A little buildup of bone in the fossa area along the superoposterior aspect of the fossa. There is some fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc does reduce. Translation is not quite as good as the opposite side. The disc appears to have good morphology in the open view. It appears that there may be a pannus of tissue in some areas surrounding the disc. Even in the T1 films there is some tissue that lights up surrounding the disc superiorly and posteriorly. In the T2 films there is some soft tissue that lights up surrounding the disc.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ arthritis and articular dislocation anteromedially with reduction on opening.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteromedially displaced with reduction on opening. Both discs are salvageable. 4. Rule out connective tissue/autoimmune disease


