B381 
B381 is 20 years old and was referred by Dr.  . B381 has Hashimoto's disease (hypothyroidism). She has previously had an ulceration of the esophagus. She has had her wisdom teeth removed. B381 has had previous orthodontics x2 with the first time being from about the age 12 to 14 and the second time from approximately the age of 15 to 16. She noticed her TMJ problems in approximately 5 years ago when she was 15 years old and shortly after she had her orthodontic appliances removed. The etiology of her joint problems is unknown. She currently takes the following medications:

Femcon.
Lexapro 10 mg q.d.
Levothyroxine 0.75 mg q.d.
Singulair 10.
Zyrtec.
Minocycline.
Primary concerns that B381 has at this time include the following:

Headaches. TMJ pain. Difficulties eating and chewing. Difficulties opening the mouth very wide.
At times the mouth gets stuck open or closed. Noises in the jaw joints. Bite is changing and shifting.

B381 gets headaches about every other day predominantly in the temporal area at a level of 6. She rates her average TMJ daily pain at 8, average daily pain around the head and neck area at 8, jaw function 8, diet 7, disability 7. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night, and she is aware of clenching her jaws during the day.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B381 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 5 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm off the left, and chin is probably about 4 mm off to the left. In profile, there is a deficiency in upper lip projection of about 3 to 4 mm. The chin appears retruded about 8 to 10 mm. Chin neckline is somewhat short and chin neck angle is not well defined. Intraorally, B381 has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars present. She has some real thin attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth, particularly the central incisors. The teeth are fairly well aligned. In the upper arch, B381 has all of her upper teeth back to the second molars. B381 has an end-on Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by about 3 mm and the left side closer to 4 mm. She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm. In centric relation, B381 occludes only on the right second molars. Maximal incisal opening is 42 mm, but she can get to 34 without significant pain problems. Excursion movements to the right 5 mm, to the left 8 mm. B381 has some slight orbital dystopia with the right side being about 2 mm higher than the left side. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy with a normal uvula, soft palate, and fascial pillars. Tonsils are moderately enlarged, but they are asymptomatic for her. Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged, but the septum is reasonably straight. She has no breathing problems. There is no history of sleep apnea. She does have some mild daytime somnolence.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. The sinuses look relatively clear. The septum looks relatively straight. The left condyle appears a little bit smaller than the right side. It appears to have some significant anterior beaking present. Mandibular dental midline appears to be shifted to the left of the maxillary midline. Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. The bony septum is relatively straight. Turbinates are moderate in size. Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears less arthritic. There is some significant anterior beaking present. Joint space may be mildly decreased vertically. The articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is restricted translation of the left joint. Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle has a hockey stick shape to it. It appears a little bit healthier than the opposite side. There appears to be decreased joint space. On opening, there is some restriction in translation of the right condyle. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B381 has a slight occlusal Class II relationship, but a slightly greater scale Class II jaw relationship. Oropharyngeal airway looks fairly good. Tooth size analysis shows a Bolton's difference of only about 0.5 mm. Basic diagnoses for B381 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated without reduction and severe deformation (probable AICR). AP mandibular deficiency.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. Slight transverse maxillary deficiency. Class II end-on occlusion. Slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being about 2 mm lower than the left side.
TMJ pain. Headaches.

Recommended treatment would include the following:
Medications. Klonopin 1-mg tablet q.h.s. to control clenching and bruxism at night. Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary.
Align and level mandibular arch. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts Protocol)
Surgery. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect superiorly, push the anterior aspect downward, and expand as necessary. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Possible bilateral coronoidotomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B381 MRI 
AGE: DOB:
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. The lateral pole of the condyle is significantly lower than the medial pole by probably 5-6 mm. Joint space looks reasonably good. The articular eminence is fairly flat. Difficult to identify discal tissue within the joint, but it may be anteriorly positioned.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. The lateral pole of the condyle is positioned lower than the right side. It appears that there may be discal tissue displacing medially. The joint space appears narrow vertically. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a hockey stick shape to it. There is some sclerosis on the anterior head of the condyle. Decreased superior joint space. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced and sitting almost beneath the articular eminence. The disc is foreshortened anteroposteriorly. The disc is somewhat degenerated. She does have some fluid in the inferior joint space. On opening, there is restricted translation of the mandible and the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some significant anterior beaking and sclerosis on the anterior half of the condyle. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and significantly degenerated as well as malformed. The salvageability of this disc could be in question. She has fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is significant restriction of translation and the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis being worse on the left side with articular disc anteriorly displaced and non-reducing and significantly degenerated.


