B384 
B384 is 17-1/2 years old, referred by Dr.  , . Primary concerns that B384 has includes the following:
Tooth sensitivity to hot and cold air. Root resorption.
Concerns about possibly losing her front teeth.
Airway problems related to deviated septum and possibly turbinates. Receded lower face.
Small chin that is imbalanced with the rest of the face.

B384 had orthodontic treatment for 5-1/2 years. She apparently was initially treated with some Class I mechanics, but then ended up with subsequent orthodontics being treated with Class II mechanics that apparently has flattened and retruded her jaw position. She has had no extractions fortunately.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B384 has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about zero. The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty on the facial midline. Nasal tip is just slightly off to the right side 1 to 2 mm. In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is about 3 mm posterior to subnasale. Upper lip appears to be retruded by about 4 to 5 mm. Chin is retruded about 10 t 12 mm. Chin neckline however has fairly good length and chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. She does have just a slight head postured forward neck position. Intraorally, B384 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. They are nicely aligned and leveled. In the upper arch, she has all her teeth back through the second molars. Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy. B384 has a slight open bite. B384 has just a slight Class II cuspid tendency by about 1 mm on the left and maybe 2 mm on the right She has about a 0.5 mm overbite. She occludes predominantly on her molar teeth and maybe the second bicuspids, but the anterior teeth for the most part appear to be out of occlusion. She has moderately enlarged left turbinate. Septum appears reasonably straight. She has moderate snoring, moderate daytime somnolence, and she has been aware of having some sleep apnea episodes. She has a moderate sleep disorder and does not sleep well at night. She has restless leg syndrome as well. She believes at time she does breathe through her mouth. She wakes up with a dry mouth. She has a slight head postured forward neck position. B384 has had orthodontic treatment from the age of 12 to 17 for about 5-1/2 years. She has no TMJ pain, no myofascial pain or headaches. She has no earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 6, disability at 5. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. To palpation, B384 has some mild tenderness over the masseter muscles, but no other tenderness around the head and neck area. Incisal opening is 55 mm. Excursion movement to the right is 9 mm, to the left 8 mm.

I-CAT. Panorex shows the sinuses look reasonably clear. Septum appears reasonably straight. Turbinates appear moderate in size. All the teeth are present except for the mandibular third molars and the maxillary third molars are developing and unerupted. The rest of the teeth are all present. Roots are somewhat foreshortened on the maxillary incisors, first bicuspids, and mandibular incisors and bicuspids, particularly on the right side. Condyles did appear a little bit arthritic and appear to have some anterior beaking. Roots on the lower four incisors appear short in length. Coronal view shows that the turbinates are enlarged, but the septum looks reasonably straight and the sinuses are clear. In the axial view, the turbinates appear fairly large, particularly the left one, but the sinuses are clear. Left TMJ sagittal view shows condyle that appears a little bit small in size. There is some anterior beaking present, although the joint space looks reasonably good. Articular eminence is moderately steep. It possible there could have been a little bit of bone resorption in this joint. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have some anterior beaking present. The condyle appears a little bit small in size and has a little hook shape to it as does the other side. The joint space looks almost excessive superiorly and posteriorly. Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has moderately good mediolateral width. It sits well inside the lateral rim of the fossa. The Lateral rim curves inferiorly only about 2 to 3 mm. Vertical joint space looks reasonable.
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. The joint space looks good. The condyle might appear a little bit flattened on top. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible appear to be retruded. There is a skeletal and occlusal Class II tendency. The occlusal plane is slightly increased. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 3 mm at the soft palate level and about 4 mm at the base of the tongue (normal dimension is 11 mm).

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis with possible articular disc dislocation (need MRI to confirm diagnosis). Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion, being worse on the right side as compared to the left side. Moderately high occlusal plane angle. Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction. Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3.5 mm (normal dimension 11 mm).
Sleep apnea syndrome including snoring, daytime somnolence, sleep apneic episodes, and restless leg syndrome. Impacted maxillary third molars x2.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
MRI of the left and right TMJs. Sleep study. Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level mandibular arch. Surgery. Bilateral TMJ surgery, if indicated (will depend on MRI findings).
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. Surgical removal of impacted maxillary third molars x2.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B384  MRI AGE: 17/F
DOB:
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with reasonably good morphology. There is an increased superior joint space. The articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. There is some anterior beaking particularly towards the medial side of the joint. Articular eminence is fairly steep. T2 films show some anterior beaking and sclerosis on the head of the condyle. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. A little fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. On opening, there appears to be reduction of the condyle and disc and there is fairly good translation of the condyle-disc complex.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some anterior beaking. There is significantly increased vertical joint space. I believe the disc is anteriorly positioned and sitting beneath the articular eminence. Articular eminence is fairly steep. There is sclerosis on the head of the condyle and beaking present. There is some fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. On the right side, there appears to be good translation of the condyle with reduction in the disc and good translation of the condyle and disc.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. The disc appears to be anteriorly and maybe laterally displaced. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm. Joint space appears somewhat excessive.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a joint space that appears vertically elongated. Disc may be displaced laterally. Condylar width appears fairly good. disc.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs anteriorly dislocated with reduction.

