B389 
B389 is 17 years old, referred by Dr.  . The only surgery that she has had previously has been her wisdom teeth removed last year. She otherwise is in good health.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Yasmin.
Tylenol for headaches.
Hydrocodone occasionally for severe headaches.
B389 has had problems with her jaw joints since about the age of 5 to 6. Etiology is unknown. She had the first stage of orthodontics done when she was in the 9th grade at about the age of 13. She had orthodontics done again at the age of 15 for some touchup work. She is a dancer but has lots of joint problems. She has back problems and her shoulders bother her some. She has some hip problems and knee problems as well. In her knees she gets a lot of swelling and has "water on the knees." She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. Interestingly, her granddad and aunt have TMJ problems as well. B389's sister may also have some TMJ problems.

B389 gets daily headaches at about a level of 7 that occur in the temple areas and on the top of the head in the middle. These occur daily and can escalate to 9 which occur about every 1 to 2 weeks. She rates her TMJ pain at 3, overall average daily pain at 4, jaw function and diet at 3, disability at 6. B389 reports that she does not snore. She has moderate daytime somnolence. She is not aware of sleep apnea problems. She takes a nap after school practically everyday. She does not sleep well at night but she says sometimes she will go to bed at midnight and set the alarm for 3 o'clock in the morning to get up to do homework. Her daytime tiredness perhaps could be related to not getting enough sleep but this does not explain difficulties with sleep at night.

In profile view, she has a little bit of increased fullness on the right side of the face as compared to the left side by probably about 3 to 4 mm. Upper lip length is about 5 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 5 mm. Maxillary dental midline, mandibular dental midline and chin are all pretty much aligned with each other. In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm. Chin may be retruded by about 12 mm or so. Chin-neckline is a little bit short and chin-neck angle is moderately well-defined. Intraorally, B389 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She likewise has a 3 x 3 retainer in the upper arch. She has a slight Class II occlusal relationship on the right side by probably 2 to 3 mm and likewise on the left side by probably 3 mm. She a little bit of an overjet of about 1 to 2 mm. She has a 0 overbite relationship and a slight open bite tendency on the left side. She has just a slight cant in the lower occlusal plane with the left side being 1/2 mm to 1 mm lower than the right side. The upper arch is fairly level. In the lower arch there is a little bit of asymmetry with the lower right cuspid being 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. There may be a slight tooth size discrepancy with the lower teeth being a little bit larger than they should be to fit properly with the upper teeth. The uvula is a little bit elongated but no too significant. The soft palate might be a little bit elongated.  

Faucial pillars might be slightly constricted. Tonsils are present but appear relatively normal although there are some small cryptic areas. B389 believes she does breathe through her mouth at night when she is sleeping. The nasal septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side. The turbinates are moderately enlarged. The luminal valves are a little bit constricted. To palpation, she has moderate tenderness over the masseters, styloid areas and milder tenderness over the temporalis, SCMs and shoulder muscles. On opening, she has a consistent click in the left TMJ at about 5 to 10 mm of opening, closing click of probably 5 mm. The right joint functions reasonably smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is about 57 mm but opening comfortably of only about 19. Excursive movement to the right 8 mm, to the left 9 mm. As she goes into excursive movements, she has almost audible popping in both jaw joints.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
: Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. She has 3 x 3 retainers in both arches. Sinuses look clear. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. Condyles are difficult to evaluate in this view but do not seem to be too abnormal.

Waters view shows that the nasal bony septum is reasonably straight with a little tilt off to the left side at the superior aspect of the septum. The turbinates are fairly large and seem to obliterate most of the nasal airway. The sinuses look relatively clear. Frontal sinuses are quite large.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little sclerosis on the head of it. There is a little flattening on the posterior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep but quite long in length. The condyle appears to have a little bit of peaking perhaps at the superior aspect. Decreased joint space superiorly and posteriorly. This could be indicative of an anteriorly displaced disc.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have some anterior beaking. There is decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep and a little bit elongated but not quite as long as the opposite side. Slight increase in anterior joint space. This could be indicative of anteriorly displaced disc. On opening, there is good translation of both condyles with the condyles coming well anterior to the articular eminences. In this view, there seems to be similarity in the shape of the fossa and articular eminences as well as the length of the articular eminences.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B389 has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship. She has a high occlusal plane angle, slight Class II occlusal relationship and a tendency towards anterior open bite. Oropharyngeal airway looks within normal limits.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
AP mandibular deficiency. AP maxillary deficiency. Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
 

Class II end-on occlusion. Anterior open bite.
High occlusal plane angle.
Over-angulation of lower incisors.
Probably tooth size discrepancy (no models available at the time of the appointment.)
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Bilateral nasal turbinate hyperplasia.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to bring the anterior maxilla superior, posterior aspect downward and correct any transverse problems.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Bilateral partial turbinectomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

