B391 
B391 is 39 years old and referred by Dr.  .
Patient History
She has been under Dr.'s care since 13 years ago. B391 has had previous C-sections x 2 and has had a hysterectomy as well as a gallbladder procedure. She has had nine TMJ surgeries in each joint. She also has had some foot surgery and some abdominal adhesion surgery.

B391's TMJ problems began about 16 years ago when she was involved in a motor vehicle accident and sustained a whiplash injury. She developed TMJ-associated problems immediately after that, but it was not identified immediately, and it took probably a couple of years before it was identified to be TMJ-related. She was placed on splint therapy for a while without any positive result. 14 years ago, an ear, nose, and throat specialist did bilateral TMJ condylar shaves for her. This did not relieve the problems, and she went back into splint therapy again. She then was referred to Dr., and 13 years ago he performed bilateral arthroplasties, dermal grafts, and sagittal split osteotomies. 12 years ago, Dr.  did bilateral TMJ biopsies. 12 years ago, he removed hardware and released adhesions and scar tissue. 11 years ago, he did bilateral TMJ rib grafts. 9 years ago, he performed bilateral Christensen prostheses. In addition, she has had three other maintenance surgeries for removal of bone growth, hardware, etc., from the joints bilaterally. She has had a total of 9 TMJ surgeries bilaterally.

B391 gets frequent earaches with no tinnitus. She gets frequent vertigo. 7 years ago, she apparently developed an ear infection on the right side. Since then she has had permanent problems with balance and dizziness. She says if the lights are turned off she loses her orientation. Other joints that bother her include her right hip and her right ankle. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. Frontal branch of the facial nerve has permanent paralysis. She gets occasional numbness on the right side affecting her lips, chin, and tongue area. However, these episodes only occur occasionally. She feels worse in the mornings with increased pain but then subsides some during the day if she takes her pain medication. She rates her headaches which are constant at a level of 7 in the frontal and temporal area predominantly, but they go from side to side as far as severity. The headaches can escalate to 10, and when they do, these headaches can last 2 to 3 days. The frequency of these headaches is getting much more common. On an average day, she rates her TMJ pain at 6, overall pain on the average at 7, jaw function at 6, diet at 4, and disability at 6. B391 is not aware of any significant changes in her profile throughout her TMJ aspects.

Current Medications
Norvasc 5 mg q.d. (BP)
Premarin 1.25 mg q.d. Lorcet 10/650, average of 2 tablets per day
Patient Concerns
TMJ pain
Headaches
Pains through the jaw and neck areas
Changes in the bite
With pressure on the left side, it creates fairly severe pain through the jaw area radiating out to the chin
Difficulties eating and chewing
Some difficulties sleeping related predominantly to pain
Snoring.

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B391 has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face with a little bit of asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm. Maxillary midline and mandibular dental midline are both fairly well on the facial midline. Chin is shifted off to the right side about 3 to 4 mm. The left side of the face is probably about 4 or 5 mm longer than the right side.

In profile view, B391 has some AP deficiency of the maxilla of probably about 3 to 4 mm. The lower jaw is retruded by probably about 10 to 12 mm. Chin-neckline is short. There is some increased fullness in the submental area. Chin-neckline is reasonably well-defined.

Intraorally, B391 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Has some spacing between the lower left cuspid and first bicuspid that is probably at least 1 mm to 1.5 mm on the left side and on the right side about 0.5 mm. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship although the left cuspid is out of occlusion, and she has just a slight Class III tendency posteriorly in the molar and bicuspid area on that left side. On the right side, she is just slight Class III cuspid-molar relationship. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about a millimeter off to the left, although the chin is probably about 3 mm off to the right. She has a vertical overbite of about 1 mm. There is a transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being 1.5 mm lower than the right side. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula may be moderately hyperplastic. The soft palate may be a little bit elongated but not too significantly. Faucial pillars appear somewhat constricted transversely.

Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged. Septum has some little bends in it but relatively normal. She probably has some mild nasal airway obstruction but not too significant. Columella is slightly wide but not tremendously so. Nostrils look relatively normal. Luminal valves look relatively normal.

Maximal incisal opening is 28 mm but opening without significant pain 17 mm. Excursive movements are 1 mm in each direction. To palpation, she has severe pain over the masseter muscles, left medial pterygoid, low severe pain over the right medial pterygoid, extremely high moderate pain over the TMJs, left styloid area, and moderate pain over the temporalis, right styloid, SCMs, posterior neck, and shoulder areas.

As B391 closes her eyes, she gets a twitch at the right commissure area and upper lip area where the muscles contract some.
Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the presence of bilateral Christensen prostheses with metal on metal articulation. In the left ramus, there is evidence of three bone screws from previous sagittal split osteotomies. Each prosthesis is held in place with about six to seven screws for the mandibular component.

Left TMJ tomogram shows probably about six to seven screws holding the mandibular component in place. There are three screws in the ramus from a previous sagittal split. There is metal on metal articulation. Seems that there may be some separation between the fossa and the metal component but difficult to say. It is possible there may be heterotopic bone around this prosthesis, and it may be one of the reasons why the image is far less clear than the opposite side or else it is possible that the fossa component could be loose.

Right TMJ prosthesis is a much clearer image. Again, there are approximately six screws holding the prosthesis in place. There is metal on metal articulation. Difficult to tell if there are any fractures of the fossa component. This fossa appears to be better adapted to the underlying basal bone.

Waters view shows the metal on metal prostheses. I cannot see any fractures through the prostheses. The left fossa component angles inferiorly quite significantly, thus, perhaps the reason it is not as clearly identified. Screws appear to be in place, and there are at least three screws holding the left prosthesis in place. On the right side there are at least three screws holding that prosthesis. A couple of the screws appear to have backed out on the right side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows she has perhaps some slight AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency. Appears to have just a slight Class III occlusal tendency but a Class I skeletal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway may be somewhat constricted at the soft palate level but difficult to tell because of the overlying metal prostheses. Oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue measures about mm. Occlusal plane may be slightly steep but not too significant. There is a fair amount of bone removed from the rami with relatively very low condylectomies being preformed.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral failed Christensen TMJ total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ metallosis
AP maxillary deficiency and asymmetry
AP mandibular deficiency and asymmetry
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Snoring
Daytime somnolence
Slight Class III malocclusion
Diasthema between the lower cuspids and first bicuspids being greater on the left side than the right side
Bilateral severe TMJ pain
Bilateral severe myofascial pain
Bilateral severe headaches
Masticatory dysfunction
Transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being 1 to 2 mm higher than the left side
Paralysis to the frontal branch of the right facial nerve

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch Align and level mandibular arch closing the diasthemas in the lower cuspid/first bicuspid areas

Surgery
Removal of bilateral failed Christensen TMJ total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Maxillary osteotomies to advance and transversely level the occlusal plane
Fat grafts to bilateral TMJ (harvested from abdomen or buttock)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B391  MRI Scan Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of :
Standard films
Left TMJ, coronal and sagittal views, show the presence of a Christensen metal-on metal prosthesis. There are three screws holding on the fossa compartment and appear to be six screws holding on the mandibular component. It appears that the fossa component is intact and cannot detect any fractures, although the condylar head hides the majority of the fossa aspect. Appears that the fossa component as best as can be seen is intact but cannot evaluate directly underneath the head of the condyle.

Right TMJ, coronal and sagittal views, show a fossa component stabilized with three screws. It is possible that the screws could be a little bit loose on this side but difficult to tell. The mandibular component appears to be held in with seven screws with six at the lower end of the prosthesis and one at the very superior aspect. Again difficult to identify the presence of a fracture through the prosthesis, although the area of articulation in the fossa is obliterated by the metal condyle head.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows
Impression:
Presence of bilateral Christensen total joint prostheses with metal-on-metal articulation

