B394 
B394 is 14 years old, referred by Dr. _. She had some oral surgery last year where she had some primary teeth removed and primary teeth exposed to help get them into place. B394 is not sure when her jaw problems began. She began developing headaches when she was about 10 years old so this will be about 4 years ago. Primary concerns that B394 has include the following:

Difficulties eating and chewing because the jaws and teeth are so out of alignment.
Predominantly a mouth breather. Shortness of breath. Headaches.
B394 gets some TMJ pain at abut a level of 1 and has an average daily pain at 1. She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 1, disability at 3. She gets headaches about 3 times a week at about of level of 3 in the frontal and temporal area. She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, and gets occasional vertigo. Other joints that bother her are her knees occasionally and her back, but the back may be due more to muscle problems. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. She takes Advil and Tylenol when necessary for pain or discomfort.

She believes her joint problems began she was about the age of 10, or at least that is when the headaches started. The etiology is unknown. She began orthodontics 5 years ago which included expanders, braces, and head gear. She does have mild snoring, but she is not aware of any daytime somnolence or sleep apnea problems. She is a predominant mouth breather at night time and also during the day. She does appear to have a head postured forward neck position.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B394 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm. The maxillary midline may be just slightly to the left. The mandibular dental midline may be about 2 mm to the left and the chin may be just slightly to the left 1 or 2 mm. In profile view, the maxilla is retruded about 3 to 4 mm. She has a slight C-shaped curve to the upper lip. The chin is retruded about 20+ mm. The chin neckline is extremely short and chin neck angle is not well defined. She has a high mandibular plane angle facial morphology. Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars with the second bicuspids starting their eruption through. The lower anterior teeth look fairly well aligned and level. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has multiple spaces between the upper anterior teeth, but the upper lateral incisors appear small in size. She occludes only I believe on her second molars. All other teeth are out of occlusion. She has a full Class II malocclusion. She has an overjet relationship of about almost 14 mm. She has probably about 4 to 5 mm anterior open bite. In a Class I position, she would have bilateral posterior cross bites. On the lingual side of the maxillary teeth, she has severe hyperplasia that could be related perhaps to intrusion of the maxillary anterior teeth. Uvula and soft palate length appear fairly normal, but the fascial pillars appear fairly significantly constricted. The tonsils appear moderate in size. Intranasally, the turbinates appear large. They appear to create some nasal airway obstruction. B394 has 15 mm of lip incompetence. To palpation, B394 has some mild tenderness over the masseter muscles and milder tenderness over the TMJs, temporalis, retromandibular areas. She had a little glitch in the right TMJ about 35 mm, but it was inconsistent. Right joint seemed to function reasonably smoothly. Incisal opening is about 40 mm. Excursion movements are about 7 mm in each direction.

Basic diagnoses for B394 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR).
Severe AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia. Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
Class II occlusion.
Anterior open bite of 5 mm and overjet of 12 mm.
Overangulation of the maxillary incisors.
Multiple diastemas between the upper anterior teeth.
Hyperplasia of the palatal gingival tissues.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Hypertrophied adenoid tissue.
Severely decrease oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm at the soft palate level (normal dimension 11 mm).
Left maxillary and ethmoid sinusitis.
Accentuated curve of Spee upper arch.
Tooth size discrepancy with a 's difference of about 3 mm. ?????????

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Periodontal evaluation of hyperplastic palatal tissue and possible thinning of the tissue around the anterior teeth. Presurgical orthodontics. Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Be sure cuspids are closed tight against the first bicuspids. Close the diastema between the central incisors and try to retract the anterior 4 teeth, but leave about 1.5 mm of space between the upper lateral incisors and cuspids. Keep the lateral increase roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Continue to align and level the lower arch. Try to get the second bicuspids into occlusal alignment. Surgery. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible approximately 20-25 mm in a counterclockwise direction. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect superiorly, posterior aspect inferiorly, and expand the upper arch.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Adenoidectomy. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B394 I-CAT
Axial view shows that she has significant left maxillary and ethmoid sinusitis. There is a little bit of material in the right side, but not nearly as significant as the left side. Inferior turbinates appear quite large and create significant obstruction of the airway. The septum is reasonably straight.

Coronal view shows large turbinates present that appear to be blocking part of the airway. Significant sinusitis problem in the left sinus and to a lesser extent in the right side with perhaps a small mucocele on the right side or a focal area of sinusitis. Left ethmoid sinuses are full of fluid and thickening of the sinus membrane. Left and right condyles appears small in size and appear to have lost vertical and mediolateral volume.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost vertical volume. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep, but elongated. There is some significant thickening and fluid in the left maxillary sinus. Oropharyngeal airway is constricted, and she has an adenoid mass present. The soft palate appears moderately elongated. Inferior turbinates extend beyond the hard palate. The right sinus appears much clearer than the left, although there is what appears to be a mucocele in the inferior lateral aspect of the sinus.

Right TMJ sagittal view appears to have loss of volume in the right condyle as well. In the sagittal view, she also demonstrates a significant Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship and high occlusal plane angle.

B394 MRI AGE: 14/F
DOB:
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have undergone some resorption. There appears to be increased joint space vertically. Condyle appears narrow mediolaterally and vertically. There appears to be discal tissue anterior to the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears small in size vertically and mediolaterally with loss of condylar volume. Joint space appears increased. It appears there is discal tissue anterior and medial to the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone resorption vertically and anteroposteriorly. There is some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep and elongated. The articular disc is sitting beneath the articular eminence and is short anteroposteriorly. On opening, the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. There is increased vertical and anterior joint space in the closed position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone loss of vertical volume of the condyle. There is increased superior and anterior joint space. Articular eminence is fairly long and moderately steep. The articular disc is sitting forward beneath the articular eminence and is significantly deformed. There is a small amount of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, it appears the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ condylar resorption and articular eminence anteriorly displaced without reduction, but significant deformation, with increased superior joint space and anterior joint space. Findings are compatible with AICR.



