B397 
B397 is 21 years old. She is currently a junior at  in  . She has had difficulties with sinus infections and chest colds. She has a lot of allergy problems and a lot of difficulties breathing through her nose. She also has major headache problems. She started having problems when she was about 10 or 12 years old. Etiology is unknown. It was noted that she could not chew correctly and had to compensate as her jawbone made grinding noises as she functioned.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Zyrtec.
Singulair.
Flonase.
Patanol. Portia (BCP)
She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo. She has no other joint problems. She is not aware of clenching or bruxing at night. B397 does have significant problems with snoring and also daytime somnolence. However, she is unaware of having sleep apnea.

B397 rates her headaches at a level of 9 and they occur in the frontal and temple area about 3 times a week. She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 7, diet at 6, disability at 7. B397 has not noticed any change in her jaw or bite relationship.

In frontal view, B397 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left but the chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline. In profile view, B397 has some AP deficiency of the maxilla probably about 4 or 5 mm. The chin appears to be about 8 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is perhaps moderately defined. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. It has adequate attached gingiva though it is quite thin around the anterior incisors and cuspids. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. B397 has an end-on Class III occlusion being probably at least 5 or 6 mm Class III on the right side but closer to Class I on the left side. B397 has an anterior bite along the posterior crossbites. She has an anterior open bite of about 1 to 2 mm. Mandibular right cuspid is 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid. The maxillary right cuspid is about 3 mm posterior to the left cuspid. There is a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left cuspid being 1 to 1-1/2 mm lower than the right cuspid. Intraorally, oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy. The uvula is moderately enlarged. The soft palate appears of normal length. The faucial pillars appear significantly constricted primarily due to some large tonsils. Intranasal examination shows that that the left turbinate appears fairly hyperplastic. The right side does not appear too enlarged at least at the time of the evaluation but I could only see the anterior aspect of the turbinate. The septum appears that it may be deviated somewhat off to the left side. The columella, nostrils and luminal valves appear within normal limits. To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the TMJs, moderate pain over the left medial pterygoid, right styloid area and mild amount of pain over the masseter muscles. 

On opening, she has crackling and popping noises that she hears in her joints that may be described more as a crepitus. Maximal incisal opening is about 50 mm and 40 mm without much pain or discomfort. Excursive movements are about 4 mm in each direction. When B397 bites she feels that only her very back teeth on both sides actually touch. Clinically, it is difficult to tell which teeth are actually in occlusion. Dental model analysis demonstrates the presence of a tooth size discrepancy of about 4 mm. There is transverse maxillary deficiency of probably a good 8 to 10 mm. Slight reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch. There is also accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch with the incisor teeth being probably a good 3 to maybe 4 mm off the flat plane.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except for the maxillary right third molar. The left third molar and both mandibular third molars are in place. All the other teeth are present. Sinuses look relatively clear. Condyles look relatively normal.

Waters view shows that there is deviation of the nasal septum with septal spurs present extending over into the left nasal airway and also over into the right nasal airway. Left turbinate appears quite large and the right one appears more moderate in size. There appears to be some airway passage on the right side but the left side appears the most completely obliterated. The sinuses appear to have a lot of loculations in it.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit of sclerosis on the top of the condyle and a little bit of flattening with some very minimal anterior beaking. Joint space appears to be reasonably good in these two cuts. Translation of the joint actually looks fairly good.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that there appears to be reasonable joint space though it may be slightly decreased. On opening, there appears to be good translation of joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has what appears to be a skeletal Class I relationship with skeletal Class III occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway space is about 6 mm at the base of the soft palate and 7 mm at the base of the tongue. Lower incisors appear to be a little bit over-angulated. There appears there is still some adenoid tissue up in the nasopharynx. Very minimal space between the adenoid tissue and the turbinates.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and medial dislocations of the articular disc.
AP maxillary deficiency. Mandibular AP deficiency. Class III end-on occlusion being significantly worse on the right side than the left side.
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.
Anterior open bite 2 mm.

 
Maxillary midline shifted approximately 2 mm to the right, mandibular dental midline shifted 1 mm to the left.
Severe TMJ pain. Severe headaches. Decreased oropharyngeal airway. Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasoseptal deviation and spurring. Nasal airway obstruction. Hypertrophied tonsils causing airway constriction. Malaligned bilateral mandibular third molars and maxillary left third molar. Snoring. Severe daytime somnolence. Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4 mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Place stuff in the archwire so that the 4 incisors are aligned at an elevated occlusal plane level compared to the posterior teeth. Tip the lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomy. Open up 1 mm of space between the crowns of the maxillary laterals and cuspids to help correct for the significant tooth size discrepancy. Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward and to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy. Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and expand the maxilla. Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
Nasal septoplasty. Extract bilateral mandibular third molars and maxillary left third molar.
Bilateral tonsillectomy (by Dr.  )
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

