B399 
B399 is 60 years old and referred by Dr.  . He smokes 1 ½ ppd of cigarettes. B399 has high blood pressure the is treated with medications. His primary concerns are: Pain in the jaw joints.
Closed lock with inability to open mouth adequately to eat.
Snoring.
Daytime tiredness.

B399 became aware of having jaw pain 2-3 months ago when he had endodontic treatment. He feels the device used to open his mouth and suction fluids caused the problem. B399 has had no treatment for his jaw condition to date. Dr.  does not feel B399 can be treated without surgery.

B399 takes the following medications:
Lipitor 40 mg qd.
Motrin 800mg bid
Lisinopril 20mg qd
Hyzaar 100-25 qd.
B399 rates his TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 6, disability at 0. He gets headaches on the left side at a level of 3.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B399 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is probably about -1 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline and so is the mandibular dental midline. Chin may be just off the right side probably 2 to 3 mm. In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably 3 to 4 mm. Maxilla is at least 6 mm AP deficient. Chin is probably about 10 mm AP deficient. Chin neckline is short, and chin neck angle is not well defined. He does have a head postured forward neck position. Intraorally, B399 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. It is possible that the second molars may be missing and the third molars may have drifted forward into the second molar position, but difficult to tell clinically. He has a lot of erosion on his lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, he is missing first bicuspids bilaterally and has the rest of his teeth back through the third molars present. He has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship, being slightly greater perhaps on the left side as compared to the right side. He is probably about 3 mm Class II. He has an anterior deep bite of at least 4 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy and anatomically appear to be normal. Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderate in size. The septum appears reasonably straight. Luminal valves appear somewhat constricted, but he may have some nasal airway obstruction, but B399 reports that he is not aware of any difficulties breathing through his nose. To palpation, B399 has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Maximal incisal opening is 37 mm and excursion movement to the right 7 mm, to the left 10 mm. Joints function relatively smoothly. Jan's main factor is that he cannot open wide enough to eat properly and normally. The restriction he feels is on the left side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary first bicuspids and the mandibular second molars, but the mandibular third molars have drifted forward into the second molar position. In the upper arch, the third molars are present. The sinuses look relatively clear as best that can be seen. It is difficult to evaluate the condyles. He has a lot of crowns particularly on the maxillary incisors and on the mandibular first molars, right mandibular bicuspid and cuspid as well as the maxillary right bicuspid. Waters view shows that he does have a deviation of the bony nasal septum. Nasal airway does appear somewhat obstructed. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Tomograms are not taken since we did have an I-CAT. Basic diagnoses for B399 would be as follows:

AP maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia. AP macrogenia. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction. Decreased oropharyngeal airway. Sleep apnea. Class II end-on occlusion.
Missing maxillary first bicuspids and mandibular second molars with the third molars drifted forward into the second molar position, but with significant mesial inclination. Anterior deep bite of 4 to 5 mm.
Crowns on the 4 incisors as well as on some of the posterior teeth. TMJ pain. Headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Open up 1 mm of space between the upper lateral incisors and cuspids bilaterally. Align and level mandibular arch. Try to level the third molars.
Sleep study. Discontinue smoking. Surgery.
Maxillary osteotomy to advance it forward approximately 6 to 8 mm. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance it forward about 8 mm. Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry as necessary to maximize the occlusal fit.

I did discuss with B399 about his significant smoking problem, and it would be extremely important for him to stop smoking beforehand. The smoking will significantly increase the potential risks for complications including infection and interference with the healing process. He understands and he will heed my recommendations to stop smoking several months prior to surgery. I did review all the other major factors in reference to complications and answered all the questions that he had at this time in reference to the diagnoses and recommended surgery. I strongly suggested he get a sleep study as well.

B399  I-CAT  
AGE: DOB:
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation: 
I-CAT shows in the sagittal view that the mandible is postured forward perhaps secondary to splint wear. There is arthritis on the head of the condyle with some anterior beaking and some narrowing that is anteroposterior particularly in the mid-part of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The condyle is positioned down and forward on the articular eminence. In the right side, the condyle is positioned down almost beneath the articular eminence. The condyle has a little bit better shape on the right side, although it does have a little bit of hockey stick shape to it. Articular eminence may be a little bit steeper on this side compared to the opposite side. In the axial view, both condyles are fairly broad mediolaterally.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has some sclerosis in the head of the condyle. The condyle is postured forward in the fossa so it is difficult to evaluate any joint space.

Right condyle appears to be a little flat on top, but again is postured forward so unable to evaluate the joint space.
IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis. Right TMJ mild bony changes.

B399 MRI  
AGE: DOB:
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation:  
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good morphology. Articular disc appears to be in position. Articular eminence is relatively normal in angulation.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that towards the medial aspect is quite narrow and pointed superiorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting almost beneath the articular eminence. There is fluid in the anterior joint space. Disc on the left side actually appears to have fairly good morphology yet, but is definitely anteriorly displaced. There is peaking on the head of the condyle.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. There is a little bit of a lateral osteophyte extending almost beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. There appears to be discal tissue anterior to the condyle. Left TMJ open view shows significant restriction of translation and the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There is narrowing of the joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint with the disc slightly medially displaced. On opening, there appears to be restricted translation, but the disc is in a normal position.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction. Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc that maybe slightly medially displaced.

