B400 
B400 is 34 years old. B400 has had some previous surgery including right knee arthroscopy 20 years ago. She had bilateral TMJ surgery 9 years ago and had sinus surgery 8 years ago. She had a laparoscopy 8 years ago and a hysterectomy 7 years ago. The surgeries were done on both jaw joints 9 years ago. Apparently there was a bone spur on the right side that was removed and then the discs were repositioned. Dr.   did the initial surgery.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS
Ultram.
Lexapro 20 mg.
Estratest q.d.
Fioricet p.r.n.
She has had a reaction to penicillin, Ancef (anaphylactic shock), codeine and hydrocodone where she has a rash and vomiting.

B400 states that her temporomandibular joint problems began as young as 5 to 6 years of age when her jaw would pop of unknown etiology. Before the temporomandibular joint surgery she did have orthodontics and splint therapy that was to no avail. 9 years ago she had the bilateral temporomandibular joint articular disc repositioned and she apparently had a bone spur removed from the right temporomandibular joint. She did not really experience any improvement in her symptoms following the surgery. She has had the following treatments in reference to the temporomandibular joints besides the surgery:
Orthodontics x3.
Splint therapy x6.
Maxillary front teeth capped to help improve her occlusion.
Equilibration.
Physical therapy.

She gets earaches and vertigo sometimes and she gets decreased hearing in the right ear but no problems with tinnitus. Other joints that bother include a right shoulder, right wrist, right hand, right fingers and right hip. She is very aware of clenching and bruxing at night and also she does it at times during the day. She gets some daily headaches about a level of 4 being worse on the right temporal sides compared to the left temporal side. These headaches can escalate to a level of 7 to 8 and actually initiate nausea and vomiting. The headaches are daily and frequently she will wake up with them but the other days she will develop them later on. She rates her average temporomandibular joint pain at 4, average daily pain at 6, jaw function and diet at 7, disability at 5.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Temporomandibular joint pain.
Headaches. Muscle pain to the jaw areas.
Pain underneath the lower jaw.
Difficulties eating and chewing.  

Speech affected.
Snoring. Daytime tiredness.
Chronic clenching and bruxing.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, middle and upper third face appear to have fairly good symmetry. In the lower third face, the angle of the mandible and body of the mandible on the right side appears to be probably about 4 to 5 mm lower than the left side. Right angle is a little more prominent than the left angle transversely. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper-tooth-to lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Actually the maxillary midline is 1 mm off to the left. Mandibular dental midline is about 2.5 mm off to the left and chin is about 6 mm off to the left. In profile view, she has fairly good projection of the upper lip with no more than 1 to 2 mm of AP deficiency. The chin is probably 10 to 12 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is extremely short and chin-neck angle is not well defined. Intraorally, she has had lower first bicuspids removed. Some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. Minimally adequately attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch she is missing first bicuspids. A little bit of crowding of upper anterior teeth. Little bit of a division II occlusion relationship. She has just a slight Class II about 1 to 2 mm at the most. She has about a mm vertical overbite. Intraorally, the oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. The uvula is a little bit elongated but the soft palpate and the faucial pillars appear relatively normal. B400 has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane in the upper arch with the right cuspid being 3 mm lower than the left. In the lower arch, the left side is probably just 2 mm higher than the right. Intranasally, turbinates are very mildly enlarged but not too significant. There appears to be adequate airway. The mucosal looks reasonably healthy. The septum appears relatively straight. To palpation, she has moderate discomfort over the temporomandibular joints, styloid areas and milder tenderness over the temporalis masseters, SCMs and posterior neck. Maximal incisal opening is 27 mm and about 20 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movement is about 2 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars and all 4 first bicuspids. Sinuses look relatively clear. Condyles look short in vertical height and appear arthritic.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. The bony septum appears straight. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.
Left temporomandibular joint tomograms show some significant arthritis in the condyles and some sclerosis. There appears to be significantly decreased joint space between the condyle and fossa. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Decreased superior and anterosuperior joint space.

 
Right temporomandibular joint tomogram shows a condyle that has developed some arthritic changes. Articular eminence is deeper on this side. Joint space looks a little bit better balanced at least in one of the cuts. In another it appears that the joint spaces are more diminished. There is a pseudocyst in the back of the head of the condyle. Condylar head and neck on the right side is a little bit longer than on the left side. On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she is AP deficient in both the maxilla and mandible. Occlusal plane is elevated. There is a discrepancy in the inferior border of the mandible at the angle with the right side being about 6 to 7 mm higher than the left side. Oropharyngeal airway is decreased with only about 3 to 4 mm at the most and about 4 mm at the base of the tongue.

OTHER SYSTEMS
B400 has problems with her right shoulder, right hand, right wrist, right fingers and right hip. She got frequent urinary tract infections from about the age of 4 to 10 that occurred on a frequency of about 1 time per month. Her periods were irregular and she had excessive pain prior to her hysterectomy 7 years ago. She has not had any miscarriages or fertility problems. She does have 2 children ages 12 and 10. The hysterectomy was required because of the endometriosis. She also had history of ovarian cyst. She has had pink eye a few times in the past and she has had a few bouts of conjunctivitis. She gets burning, itching and dryness of her eyes but does not wear contacts. She has allergies related to sinus problems. She smokes 1 pack of cigarettes per day and has done this for 16 years. She gets earaches, occasional vertigo and gets occasional infection in the ear and has lots of hearing in the right ear. She gets bronchitis about 3 times a year and this has occurred for about the last 9 years. She had pneumonia once when she was 8 years old. No gastrointestinal problems reported and she is not aware of any exposure to chlamydia. She does have fatigue problems. She was around birds from about the age of 15 to 17 when the brother had 2 doves and also had about 5 to 8 pigeons. She has had cats all of her life and currently has 3. Some of those ate birds, rodents and other stuff. She has had a dog since about the age of 13 and the dog catches squirrels and rabbits. She has been exposed to horses and cows in the past. She is not aware of having any implants in her body.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Severe bilateral temporomandibular joint reactive arthritis.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia and transverse asymmetry.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia. Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion. Decreased oropharyngeal airway of about 3 to 4 mm (normal 11 mm.)
Temporomandibular joint pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Earaches and occasional ear infection on the right side.
Nocturnal daytime clenching and bruxism.
 

Significant limitation of jaw movement.
Masticatory dysfunction.
RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level mandibular arch.
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol) of the TMJs and jaws. Surgery.
Bilateral temporomandibular joint reconstruction and mandibular advancement using TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla slightly and down graft it posteriorly. Bilateral coronoidectomy.
Bilateral fat grafts to the TMJs (harvest from the abdomen.)
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B400  MRI Evaluation 
Age: 34, F
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite deformed. There is a lot of artifact around the joint probably related to previous surgeries in the area. There are osteophytic extensions from the condyle with an obvious one medial and then one going superior to the lateral extent of the remaining condyle. On one view it looks like there may have been a condylar fracture with the remaining condylar head medial to the condylar neck.

Right TMJ lateral view shows that whatever is left at the condylar head is masked to be cause of interferences probably related to previous surgery. The neck of the condyle appears to be laterally positioned towards the lateral extent of the fossa. I do not evaluate any functional interrelationship between the fossa and condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view, shows a condyle that is better seen in this view. It is quite arthritic with degenerative changes and osteophytic formation. There is bone development in the joint and extending in a posterior direction off of the articular eminence. There appears to be a lot of fibrosis in the joint. There appears to be less bone-on-bone contact. There is a lot of interference indicative of previous surgeries. There may be some inflammation around the joint. It is difficult to tell if there is any translation because of the significant interference in the joint.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows some imaging of the condyle. There are significant degenerative changes in this joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There may be some discal tissue in place on the left side in one view but there is a tremendous amount of interference particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. There may be some inflammation in the bilaminar tissues. On opening, there is some mild translation. There appears to be a fluid at the posterior head of the condyle. There may be some discal tissue within the joint space but it appears to be fairly degenerated. Towards the medial aspect of the joint, it appears that there is almost bone-on-bone contact.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ severe arthritis with no identifiable disc and severe interference seen in the area of previous surgery.
Right TMJ severe osteoarthritic changes with evidence of some discal tissue but highly degenerative and evidence of previous surgery.

