B401 
B401 is 46 years old and referred by Dr.  .
Patient History
B401 does have some earache problems on the left side that have been there “forever” and predominately at night. She gets occasional tinnitus. She has problems with vertigo, and she has some hearing loss. She is under a lot of stress apparently with her jaw problems, her daughter's impending marriage in May, and, of course, all the problems with American Airlines now. She is aware of clenching at night at times. She has been in orthodontic treatment for about 9 months. She had a T&A as a child. She takes AcipHex q.d., and she takes aspirin for her headaches. She gets headaches about twice a week, and they occur predominantly in the frontal and temporal area at about a level of 5. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, overall pain at 5, jaw function at 8, diet at 6, and disability at 4. She does report having a colonoscopy 2 years ago. Other joints that bother her include her hands, fingers, knees, ankles, and toes.

Clinical Examination
Upper tooth length is 20 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is 1 mm. Maxillary dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is probably 4 mm at least off to the left side. Chin is also about 3 or 4 mm off to the left side. Chin and lower dental midline are fairly closely aligned to each other if the cant in the lower arch is taken into consideration. Left side of the mandible may be 2 to 3 mm vertically longer than the right side.

In frontal view, B401 has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose. Has about a 90 degree nasolabial angle. Mandible is retruded probably about 10 to 15 mm. Chin-neckline is not well defined. As she postures her mandible forward, it does improve her overall facial balance.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Lower teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled. She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch. Significant cant in the occlusion. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Upper lateral incisors look small indicative of probably a tooth-size discrepancy. Maxillary right central incisor appears vertically short compared to the left one. She has a buccal crossbite on the right side extending from the cuspid all the way back to about the first molar. On the right side, her teeth line up more appropriately although in a full Class II malocclusion. Both sides are full Class II malocclusion. The bicuspid teeth on the left side are probably 1.5 to 2 mm lower than the cuspids and other teeth. In the lower arch, the left cuspid is probably 3 mm lower than the right cuspid. The right central and lateral incisor are elevated significantly higher than the teeth on the left side. Oropharynx appears clear. Palate looks relatively normal as does the uvula. She does have some small palatal tori present.

Intranasally, she has a deviation of the septum off toward the right side with a fairly significant septal spur present at the base of the septum. That airway seems somewhat constricted particularly compared to the opposite side. B401  has an anterior deep-bite of about 8 mm. She has an overjet of probably about 6 to 7 mm. Maxillary incisal opening is about 53 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 11 mm and to the left 8 mm.

To palpation, she has some moderate tenderness over the right styloid area and mild to moderate tenderness over the left masseter, left TMJ, and milder tenderness over the left medial pterygoid and bilateral SCMs. Putting pressure on the mandible retruding it posteriorly created no tenderness for B401 .

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, and there is a root canal on the maxillary left first molar. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear a little bit large. Condyles appear relatively normal in appearance. Left side of the mandible appears larger in the body area vertically as compared to the right side. Styloid processes are prominent. The accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch is quite evident. She may have an ankylosed mandibular left first bicuspid as there is really no pulp chamber seen in it, and you can see one in all of the other teeth.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears fairly large. The fossa has a moderately steep articular eminence. Joint space appearing posteriorly looks reasonably good. In fact, the joint space may be a little bit increased over what would be considered perfectly normal. This may be due to chronic posturing of the mandible forward.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology and perhaps some mild anterior beaking. The articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space looks fairly well balance, although the posterior joint space could be just slightly decreased.

On opening, there is good translation in both joints.
Waters view shows the sinuses appear clear. Some deviation in the bony aspect of the nasal septum particularly at the upper heights of it. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged particularly on the right side. Vertical asymmetry in the jaw line is seen with the left angle being significantly lower. Very prominent low angle facial morphology.

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class II relationship. Lower anterior teeth are overangulated. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 6 mm and at the base of the tongue closer to 9 mm. Appears to have good posterior vertical choanae area at the back of the throat.

Dental model analysis
There is a mild tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 2 mm. Appears to be some significant buccal tipping of the posterior teeth particularly on the right side. Has a little bit of tooth-size discrepancy in the bicuspid area. On dental model analysis, the lower incisors are biting and occluding into the palate about 5 mm posterior to the maxillary incisors.

Basic Diagnoses
AP mandibular deficiency
Anterior mandibular dental alveolar hyperplasia
Mandibular asymmetry with the posterior teeth particularly in the bicuspid area on the left side being lower than the same teeth on the right side
Mandibular asymmetry with the right cuspid being 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid
Cant in the occlusal plane with the left cuspid being about 3 mm lower than the right cuspid
Mandibular dental midline shifted about 4 mm off to the left
Chin shifted about 3 to 4 mm off to the left
Buccal crossbite involving the maxillary right cuspid and bicuspids
Left side of the face about 3 mm longer vertically than the right side
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of approximately 2 mm Slight buccal tipping of mandibular right molars

Recommended Treatment
MRI of left and right TMJs
Presurgical orthodontics
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Try to intrude the right first bicuspid as it is extruded 1 to 2 mm below the adjacent cuspid and second bicuspid. This would be important in order for us to get a good functional fit
Continue to align and level the lower arch but use steps in the arch wire. Place a vertical step between the left lateral incisor and cuspid so that the lateral incisor becomes elevated compared to the cuspid. On the right side, place a step between the cuspid and first bicuspid. On the right side, tip the first bicuspid root distally and the cuspid root mesially. On the left side, continue to correct the rotation of the left cuspid and tip the root distally. Keep the lateral incisor root tipped mesially to make room for the interdental osteotomies. Try to decrease the curve of Wilson in the posterior teeth particularly on the right side by tipping the roots labially and the crowns lingually

Surgery
Anterior mandibular subapical ostectomy to level the occlusal plane
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward
Left mandibular body osteotomy to achieve a good vertical and anteroposterior symmetry in the mandible
Consider left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor if it is confirmed by MRI that the articular disc is displaced

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B401 MRI Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition:	 
Date of Interpretation: 

Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Could be some slightly decreased lateral joint space. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. Could be some slight medial disc displacement but difficult to tell. Cortical bone appears to be intact in both the fossa and on the condyle.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Condyle may stick a little bit out beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. Articular disc appears to be in position but could be slightly medially displaced.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows the condyle appears to be intact. May be some slight flattening on the anterior head of the condyle over medially and a little flattening on the posterior head. Out laterally, the disc is not identifiable. The disc appears to be in fairly good position. Joint space may be a little bit narrow posteriorly on one view but overall is fairly well-balanced. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the articular disc with them in good position. No T2 films available on the left side.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that may have a little bit of flattening on the anterior head. A little bit of a hockey stick shape on the condyle. Posterosuperior aspect of the condyle appears to be a little bit sclerotic. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Seems to be some loss of cortical bone at the medial aspect of the condyle. Articular disc anteroposteriorly appears to be in fairly good position. This is more difficult to see at the lateral aspect of the joint. Fluid present in the superior and inferior joint spaces.

On opening, there is good translation, and the disc appears to translate well with the condyle and be in good position. Appear to be some areas of sclerosis on the head of the condyle.

Impression:
Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc in good anteroposterior position but may be slightly lingually displaced
Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc in good anteroposterior position but may be slightly lingually displaced

