B402 
B402 is now 37 years old.
Patient History
He had right TMJ surgery 11 years ago for disc repositioning and arthroplasty. 10 years ago, he had maxillary and mandibular osteotomies. He has been developing increasing pain and discomfort associated with the right TMJ area. He has no problems with earaches but gets tinnitus on the right side and gets occasional vertigo. He has no other joint problems. He feels he may clench and brux his teeth a little bit at night.

He gets headaches about every two weeks, being worse on the right side at about a level of 4 and on the left side at a level of 3, and these occur in the frontal and temporal areas. Almost on a daily basis, he gets some significant TMJ pain that he rates at about a level of 6 to 7. On an average day, his pain levels are about at a 7. He rates jaw function at 3, diet at 2, and disability at 7.

Current Medications
Imipramine Klonopin
Propecia
Clinical Examination
Incisal opening is 49 mm. Excursive movement in each direction is about 7 mm. On opening, he has audible crepitation in the right joint. In the left joint, he does have a pop at about 35 mm of opening and at about 30 mm of closing. It is possible this could be just going over the articular eminence. To palpation, he has moderate pain over the right TMJ, right masseter, and milder pain over the right styloid area and right temporalis muscles.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows evidence of previous orthognathic surgery with four bone plates in the maxilla and synthetic bone grafts in those areas. In the mandible, there are a lot of screws, particularly on the right side, and also some bone screws on the left side. Both condyles appear extremely large. Sinuses appear clear. Nasal airway appears patent.

Right TMJ tomogram shows an extremely large condyle that is actually probably larger than the fossa. Joint space actually looks reasonably good although may be decreased posteriorly. Some significant anterior beaking is present. Articular eminence has a long, gentle slope to it.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some peaking at the top portion of it. Condyle appears large compared to the size of the fossa. Articular eminence is quite steep on this side. Joint space seems somewhat narrow anteriorly but appears to be more than adequate posteriorly and superiorly.

Cephalometrically, he appears to have a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship and good facial balance. Oropharyngeal airway looks very good.
Basic Diagnoses

Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc degeneration with perforations
Right TMJ pain
Headaches Right-sided myofascial pain
Recommended Treatment
Right TMJ condylectomy, debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis

Fat graft to right TMJ (harvested from abdomen)
Placement of arch bars
B402 has had at least two previous TMJ surgeries, one performed by me 11 years ago. I did see him at his last appointment here 5 years ago. His symptoms have gotten progressively worse since that time. I believe he would benefit from this treatment. Discussed with him in detail the potential risks and complications of the procedures. He understands.

B402  MRI Evaluation 
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with very good mediolateral width. Difficult to tell if the fossa cortical bone is intact. It appears there may be some discal tissue present but it appears to be more lateral and hard to identify medially. It is really difficult to identify the fossa component, but it appears there may be some degenerative changes there.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with evidence of previous surgery. It appears that there is metal infarct in the condyle. It appears that the discal tissue is in place, but there may be degenerative changes up in the fossa. It appears that there is adequate joint space, and it appears that the disc is in place.

Left TMJ, axial view, shows that the left condyle is quite large and broad in width. It has an anterior portion that comes forward a fair amount. Condyle appears extremely broad mediolaterally.

Right TMJ, axial view, shows a condyle that has a little bit of a distorted shape to it, curving quite a ways forward at the most medial aspect. Condyle has a fairly good width.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has osteophytes sticking up posterior to the condyle at the lateral aspect. There is some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. Disc appears to be in place.

On opening, there appears to be moderate translation of the condyle and articular disc. Appears to be decreased joint space out laterally indicative of a medial displacement of the disc. A minor amount of fluid in the inferior joint space.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has fairly good shape to it. A lot of artifact present probably because of metal being in the area. It appears that there may be some discal tissue in position. Out laterally, there may be some osteophytic changes in the articular eminence. Disc may be rather degenerated.

On opening, there is moderate translation. It appears that there may be discal or scar tissue present from the condyle and the articular eminence. Articular eminence appears a little bit more shallow on this side as compared to the opposite side.

Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc in good AP position but could possibly be slightly medially displaced
Right TMJ arthritis and probable degenerative changes of the articular disc


