B403 
B403 is 48 years old, referred by Dr. _. Previous surgeries he has had includes turbinectomies 11 years ago and then repeated last year. He had a chin implant 16 years ago, rhinoplasty 7 years ago, and 20 years ago he had a tonsillectomy, turbinectomy, and septoplasty. Medications he currently takes includes:
1. Ambien 5 mg p.r.n.,
2. Elavil on weekends only.
3. Flexeril occasionally.

B403's TMJ problems began in the mid-80s and that is when his joints began to click and pop and he developed vertigo and some other pain issues. He had orthodontic treatment as a child from 31 to 35 years ago and it was treated with head gear at that time. He also had full braces, too. 6 years ago, he was treated orthodontically with removable appliances. Early this year, Dr. _gave B403 a sagittal device to help open up some spacing.

B403 had splint therapy from approximately 17 to 22 years ago. He seemed to do okay for a little while and then developed problems again. He has been in splint therapy essentially since 11 years ago. He has had myofunctional therapy for about 6 months and this has seemed to help him somewhat. He has also had equilibration.

B403 gets headaches about 10 per week at a level of 5 in frontal and temporal areas bilaterally. He rates his TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 3, diet at 3, and disability at 2. He has some earaches, occasional tinnitus, and occasional vertigo. No joints bother him, but he does have some muscle issues affecting his back, neck, elbow and thigh. He is aware of clenching and bruxism at night and he is aware of clenching during the day.

Primary concerns that B403 has includes the following:
1. TMJ pain. 2. Chronic mouth breathing. 3. Sleep disturbance. 4. Bruxism. 5. Receding gums. 6. Cannot close mouth comfortably. 7. Bite is off. 8. Insufficient space for his tongue. 9. Chronic fatigue. 10. Headaches

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B403 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1.5 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline. In profile view, B403 has some AP deficiency in the maxilla of probably about a good 6 mm. Chin is AP deficient by probably 8-10 mm. Chin neckline is not well-defined. Chin is prominent relative to the projection of the lower lip, but he does have a chin implant that has been placed there. Intraorally, B403 is missing probably the mandibular second bicuspids with the first ones in position. There is some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch. He appears to have adequate attached gingiva and has had a previous gingival graft to the lower anterior arch. The upper arch is missing probably upper first bicuspids. There is some significant gingival resection around his upper teeth, greater on the right side than the left side. He has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship. Lateral incisors are elevated upwards probably about 2 mm. He has maybe 0.5 mm of vertical overbite relationship. Intraorally, the soft tissues of the oropharynx airway looks relatively healthy. Uvula is moderately elongated as is the soft palate. Faucial pillars are moderately constricted. Tonsils are gone. Intranasally, the turbinates have been reduced in size and as best I can tell are not causing any significant airway problem. However, there are some protrusions from the base of the septum extending into the left side of the nose, and, in the right side of the nose at the very anterior aspect, there is some spurring that may be causing some blockage in that area. There is some constriction of the luminal valves intranasally as well. B403 is primarily a mouth breather. B403 has moderate snoring. He has moderate daytime somnolence and probably mild to moderate sleep apnea symptoms. He probably has moderate sleep disorder. To palpation, B403 has some moderate tenderness over the TMJs and a little bit of moderate tenderness over the masseter muscles and styloid areas. He has a little bit of a glitch on early opening in the left joint, but otherwise smooth and the right side was fairly smooth. Maximal size opening is 45 mm, opening comfortably at 30 mm, and excursion movements are 6 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the mandibular probably second bicuspid and upper first bicuspids. The left sinus appears a little bit cloudy at the inferior aspect. Difficult to evaluate the joints, but the right one looks a little bit flattened on the front end. Waters view shows that the bony septum is a little bit deviated, but not too significant. Turbinates appear relatively small in size. Left sinus appears a little bit full at the inferior aspect as there is a mucus retention cyst there. The rest of the sinuses look clear. Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have reasonably good morphology. Superior and posterior joint space appears somewhat decreased. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There appears to be slight increased joint space. On opening, there is fairly good translation of both joints. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the presence of a chin implant that measures about 6 mm in thickness. It has reverted back into the mandible probably at least a couple of millimeters. Maxilla and mandible appear retruded. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 5-6 mm. Occlusal plane angle appears relatively normal. The Bolton's analysis shows there is a tooth size discrepancy of about 3 mm.

The basic diagnoses for B403 would be as follows:
1. Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations.
2. AP maxillary deficiency.
3. AP mandibular deficiency.
4. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
5. Sleep apnea.
6. TMJ pain.
7. Headaches.
8. Missing mandibular second bicuspids and maxillary first bicuspids as well as all four third molars.
9. Hyperplasia of the soft palate and uvula.
10. Previously placed silastic chin implant.
11. Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics.
a. Align and level the maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies if they are necessary. b. Align and level the mandibular arch. Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy. 2. Surgery.
a. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it. b. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance it. c. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
d. Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) procedure. e. Removal of previously placed silastic implant and recontour anterior mandible.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B403 MRI EVALUATION 
AGE: 48/M
DOB: 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has very good mediolateral width. The lateral pole actually extends out to and just maybe slightly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. The condyle appears it might be a little bit wider than the opposite side. It appears that the disc is medially displaced as the lateral one-third of the condyle appears uncovered. Decreased joint space between the lateral rim of the fossa and the condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. There is some slight anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is relatively normal in inclination. Laterally, there is not much disc evidenced. There appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact at the lateral aspect of the fossa. More medially, the disc appears to be a relatively normal position. In the mandibular tissues, there appears to be a little cystic mass directly over the top of the condyle and just posterior to the posterior band of the disc and measures probably about 3 mm in diameter. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the articular disc and the disc is in a reduced position.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. There appears to be decreased joint space at the lateral rim of the fossa, and the disc appears to medially displaced. The outer half of the condyle appears uncovered.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head towards the lateral aspect of the joint. Articular eminence is relatively normal in inclination. Laterally, the disc is not as readily identifiable indicative of a perhaps medial displacement. There is some decreased superior posterior joint space. The disc appears to be in reasonable position through most the joint, however, medially there is evidence of significant discal tissue that may again indicate medial displacement. On opening, there appears to be good translation of the condyle and the disc with the disc in a reduced position.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc medially displaced. There is a small mass superior to the condyle and just beneath the posterior band of the disc towards the medial aspect of the joint. Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc medially displaced.


