B404
B404 is 60 years old, referred by Dr. xx. B404 was in an aggravated assault 4 years ago sustaining trauma to the facial structures with what appears to be LeForte III mid facial fractures. He has had 14 total procedures involving his facial reconstruction. Relative to his TMJ, he had surgery 4 years ago, where he underwent the following procedures:
Debridement of left TMJ with diskectomy.
Removal of well-positioned left glenoid fossa hardware.
Partial removal of anterior maxillary exposed hardware.
Left coronoidectomy.

Last year, he underwent the following surgical procedures:
Right TMJ disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Right mandibular partial coronoidectomy and debridement.

These procedures were performed by Dr. XX. B404 continues with significant problems.
PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Severe pain.
Limited jaw function.
CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Nexium.
Xanax.
Ambien.
Zocor.
Hydrocodone.

He has no problems with earache, tinnitus and vertigo, nor does he have any problems with headaches. He rates his TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain at 10, jaw function at 6, diet at 0, disability at 7. B404 has good facial balance. Occlusally, he has a Class III cuspid molar relationship that is probably about 4 mm Class II. He has a crossbite on the right side, tendency on the left side and has almost an incisor relationship. Maxilla is fairly solid, however. B404 tends to hit posteriorly on the right side in the molar area and he has had some adjustments on that but still feels that it is high and hits before some of his other teeth. Maximal incisal opening is 31 mm. Excursive movement to right 1 mm, to the left 2 mm. B404 does have all of his teeth back through the third molars present. The uvula appears moderately elongated. The soft palate looks relatively normal, as do the faucial pillars. Intranasally, it is difficult to see because of the scar tissue around the nose. He says he can breathe fairly well on the right side. The left side is somewhat blocked up. I could not see any obstruction anterior. Most likely it is in the middle or posterior aspect of the nose.
 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the presence of numerous bone plates and screws. There is a bone plate extending back towards the right TMJ and crosses over the condyle area. He does have crowns on almost all of his teeth. The condyles appear arthritic, as do the fossas.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is arthritic with some anterior beaking. The condyle is postured forward towards the inferior aspect of the articular eminence. It appears that there could almost be bone-on-bone contact. Significantly increased posterior joint space probably 4 to 5 mm. Also, increased vertical joint space at the posterior aspect of the condyle compared to the depth of the glenoid fossa. Left TMJ opening view shows that there is virtually no translation. Evidence of a previous coronoidectomy is noted.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a Mitek anchor it in. Significantly increased posterior joint space and the condyle is postured down forward against the inferior aspect of the articular eminence. The condyle appears quite arthritic. Evidence of previous coronoidectomy is noted. On opening, there is virtually no translation of the condyle. Probable bilateral fibrous ankylosis of both TMJs.

Waters view shows presence of numerous bone plates and screws. The septum appears reasonably straight in the bony area. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Facial structures actually look fairly symmetric considering the nature of his injury. Maxillary sinuses are obliterated and fairly opaque. Frontal sinuses are fairly clear.

Lateral cephalogram shows that he has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship although he appears to have 1 mm of vertical overbite. He has numerous bone plates and screws in place. He has had previous cranial bone grafts to the nose. He has good airway space almost 10 mm at the soft palate level and about 11 mm at the base of the tongue.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and fibrous ankylosis.
Severe TMJ pain. Severe myofascial pain.
Limited jaw function.
RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
CT scans of the jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Application of arch bars.
Removal of arch bars approximately one month post-surgery.
Jaw rehabilitation exercises.

B404  MRI  
Date of Acquisition:  
Date of Interpretation:  
Left TMJ axial view shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good mediolateral width and relatively normal anterior dimension.

Right TMJ axial view shows a condyle that appears a little bit smaller in size. Bony structures in the condyle and condylar neck appear a little bit more sclerotic on the right side as compared to the left side.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat arthritic. There is sclerosis at the head of the head of the condyle and unevenness across it. The fossa appears relatively flat with a very minimal downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa. There appears to be some degenerative changes in the fossa. There is decreased joint space vertically. There may be discal tissue anteromedially to the condyle. At the medial aspect it appears that there could be bone-on-bone contact as well as at the lateral aspect. In one view there is very narrow joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant degenerative changes. The condyle is narrow mediolaterally. It appears there may have been previous surgery done here perhaps even Mitek anchor placement? The condyle is very arthritic. The fossa also appears to be arthritic. Minimal downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa. There appears to be debris out lateral to the condyle with mostly a small calcified part. Degenerative changes on the right side are much worse than the left side.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is arthritic with flattening on the superior head. There appears to be significantly degenerative changes in the fossa. There is anterior beaking present on the condyle. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. There appears to be some fluid in the superior joint space. There may be a fair amount of fibrosis present. On opening, there is very minimal translation. There appears to be discal tissue anterior to the condyle. There is also some kind of scar tissue versus calcification versus remnants of discal tissues posterior to the condylar head. There appears to be significant degenerative changes in both the condyle and fossa on this left side.

Right sagittal view shows a condyle that appears quite arthritic and sclerotic. There is significant anterior beaking present. There are a lot of degenerative changes in the fossa and articular eminence. Significantly decreased joint space vertically between the condyle and articular eminence. There is fluid that appears to be surrounding the condyle. There appears to be discal remnants anterior to the condyle. There appears to be remnants of the disc with a calcified mass posteriorly to the head of the condyle. On opening, there was definitely fluid in the superior joint space. Relatively minimal translation achieved. There is a mass anterior to the condyle on the right side that appears to have significant fluid on either side of it. There is relatively minimal translation though slightly better than the opposite side. There does appear to be a lot of calcifications or masses inside this joint. 
 

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ severe arthritis affecting both the condyle and fossa and anteriorly displaced articular disc that is nonreducing.
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with articular disc dislocated and calcified bodies within the joints. Evidence of previous TMJ surgery.
Candidate for bilateral total joint prostheses.

