B405 
B405 is 13 years old, referred by Dr. XX.

B405 has JRA. She probably developed it around the age of 5 to 6, but was not diagnosed until she was 8 years old. She developed symptoms initially in her fingers and then it has spread to other joints including her hands, fingers, wrists, hips, knees, feet, toes, neck and back as well as the temporomandibular joints. The jaw joints became involved probably around the age of 6 or so. 5 years ago, B405 began orthodontic treatment. This included such devices as a chin cup to try to pull the chin upwards into position. She had a maxillary expander and had what appears to be second bicuspids extracted in all four quadrants.

B405 gets headaches 2 to 3 times per week at a level of 8 in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 9, diet at 8, and disability at 8. She has no problems with earaches, gets some tinnitus and occasional vertigo. She is aware of some clenching at nighttime, although she breathes mainly through her mouth at nighttime as she has significant nasal airway obstruction.

She is on the following medications:
Hydrochloroquine 200 mg q.d.
Nambumetone 500 mg q.d.
Folic acid 1 mg q.d.
Methotrexate 2.5 mg 6 tablets taken at one time per week.
Tylenol 325 mg p.r.n.

In frontal view, B405 has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 7 mm. The maxillary midline is just slightly off to the right side, but the mandibular midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline or perhaps 1 or 2 mm to the left as is the chin. She does have a lip incompetence of about 8 mm. She has significant difficulties relaxing her hyperfunctioning mentalis muscle. In profile view, the maxilla is retruded about 5 to 6 mm. The chin is retruded about 28 mm. She has a head postured forward neck position that is fairly significant. Chin neckline and angle are not defined. She has an obtuse nasolabial angle. Intraorally, she is missing her second bicuspids. She has turbos on the mandibular first molars. Teeth are fairly well aligned and spacing is closed. In the upper arch, she is missing probably second bicuspids as well. Spacing also is closed. She does have some gingival hyperplasia particularly in the upper arch. She has an AP overjet of about 8 mm. She has a full Class II occlusion. She has an anterior open bite of about 1 mm. She has had her tonsils removed. She has scarring in the soft palate and the right side of the soft palate is somewhat elongated maybe due to scar tissue compared to the left side. The uvula is relatively normal. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the masseter muscles and milder tenderness over the medial pterygoids, TMJs, retromandibular area and shoulders. The maximum incisal opening is 44 mm. The excursion movement to the right is 4 mm and to the left 5 mm. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly. She has a wide columella and narrow nostrils.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars. The second bicuspids are missing in all four quadrants. The condyle appear severely resorbed and appear to be postured forward underneath the eminences with the eminences significantly resorbed.

Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight and the turbinates are quite large with the left side creating more nasal airway obstruction than the right side. The sinuses appear clear.

Axial view shows the turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the left side. Sinuses appear relatively clear. The septum appears reasonably straight.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is very small in mediolateral width and has lost significant volume. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. There is decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The condyle appears to be postured forward in the fossa.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost significant volume vertically and mediolaterally. There is an osteophyte growing off the lateral pole of the condyle. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant loss of vertical volume and is somewhat narrow anteroposteriorly. There is no articular eminence on this side.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with a significant condylar resorption. There is a little bit of articular eminence left on this side, but it has been severely resorbed.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows there is:
Maxillary AP hypoplasia, anterior vertical hyperplasia but posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Severe mandibular AP hypoplasia. High occlusal plane angle facial morphology. Skeletal Class II anterior open bite.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of about 2 mm.
Hypertrophied adenoid tissue that appears to obliterate the nasal cavity and almost the entire nasopharyngeal area.
An odd angulation to the vertebrae of the neck probably as a result of her posturing her head forward to try to open up her airway.

Basic diagnoses for B405 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ juvenile rheumatoid arthritis with severe condylar resorption.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia but anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia.
Severe mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of 2 mm (normal airway dimension 11 mm).
Hypertrophied adenoid tissue that is completely blocking the nasopharyngeal airway. Hypertrophied turbinates.
Sleep apnea. Class II occlusion.
Anterior open bite.
Severe occlusal plane angulation of 33 degrees (normal 8 degrees).
TMJ pain.
Headaches. Polyarthropathy.
Impacted third molars x4.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Removal of impacted molars x4.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch. b.	Continue to align and level mandibular arch.
3.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
4.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction and advance the mandible approximately 27 mm with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies. e.	Medpor implant to anterior mandible of 9 mm. f.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. g.	Adenoidectomy.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B405 MRI  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is extremely narrow mediolaterally. The disc is in position but with a reactive pannus surrounding it.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is very narrow in width. There is discal tissue in place with reactive pannus surrounding it. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

In the left TMJ sagittal view, it is very difficult to even see the bone of the condyle and ramus. There is no articular eminence present. The condyle is very small in size mediolaterally as well as anteroposteriorly. There is decreased vertical joint space. The disc is in position, although the condyle and disc are anteriorly postured and there is a pannus that appears to be surrounding the disc. Dynamic imaging shows that there is very little movement of this condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with severe condylar resorption present. The disc is in place, but there is reactive pannus surrounding it. Almost all the articular eminence has resorbed away. There is a little bit of anterior beaking on the condylar head. Right TMJ shows that there is some translation of the condyle in a forward direction. The condyle starts almost beneath the articular eminence.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ severe resorptive arthritis with reactive panni, resorption of the articular eminences and condyles compatible with JAR or similar connective tissue autoimmune disease.

