B406 
B406 is 46 years old and a self-referral.
Patient History
Previous surgeries included a breast biopsy 23 years ago and an appendectomy 34 years ago. Otherwise she is in good health. She has been diagnosed with mitral valve prolapse. She takes Mircette birth control pills. She had an adverse reaction to PENICILLIN and had a rash with KEFLEX.

B406's problems began back 29 years ago when she was in college. Her jaw would lock open at that time of unknown etiology. She has had no treatment for it. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, nor hearing loss. No other joints bother her. Does have allergies to penicillin and Keflex as previously mentioned. She has no problems wearing jewelry. No problems with clenching and bruxism. She gets frequent dislocations of the jaw joints about 15 times a day that she has to reduce. It occurs bilaterally, but the level side is one that tends to lock open more and give her a little bit more of a problem. She gets headaches about once a week at about a level of 4 in the frontal and temporal areas. No particular TMJ pain and no particular facial pain problems except for the headaches that periodically occur. She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 1, and disability at 3.

Patient Concerns
The primary concern she has is frequent dislocations of her TMJs that do occur about 15 times per day with the left side being worse than the right side. This happens primarily when she yawns more than at any other time.

Clinical Examination
B406 has good facial symmetry and balance.
Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Has an accentuated curve of occlusion and transverse narrowness of the arch. Has adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Slight reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship bilaterally. She has an anterior deep-bite of probably about 4 to 5 mm. Oropharynx appears clear.

To palpation, she has some very minimal tenderness over the styloid areas but none around the head and neck area. With joint function, she may have just some very slight noise in the joints due to probably some very thin tissues in there or maybe even a small perforation. Incisal opening is 49 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 12 mm and to the left 11 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but all of the rest of the teeth are present. Crowns on the mandibular first and second molars and on the maxillary first molars. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Joints look okay with a little bit of flattening anteriorly on the left joint and a little flattening superiorly and anteriorly on the right joint. She did have an additional surgery to remove her wisdom teeth.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates may be slightly enlarged. A little deviation of the septum but not too significantly.
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good shape. A little bit narrow at the superior aspect. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle is significantly posteriorly positioned in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some significant anterior beaking present. Decreased joint space vertically and posteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep but not quite as steep as the opposite side.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles, although neither have gone into dislocation position.
Cephalometrically, she has a good skeletal Class I and occlusal Class I relationship with a little bit of an anterior deep-bite relationship. Oropharyngeal airway is adequate.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction with severe deformation of the disc on the right side and moderate deterioration of the disc on the left side Bilateral TMJ chronic dislocation
Headaches
Masticatory dysfunction
TMJ pain

Recommended Treatment
Discussed the following treatment options for B406 :
Treatment Option #1:
When she feels a yawn coming on, place her fist underneath her chin and push upward to decrease the opening, and, thus, the dislocation of the condyles from the fossa

Treatment Option #2:
Bilateral TMJ plication procedures using two Mitek anchors in each joint to prevent dislocation of the mandibular condyles. I am not recommending repositioning of the articular discs since she has relatively minimal symptoms associated with it, and the discs are so deformed and nonsalvageable that the prognosis for doing disc repositioning is significantly guarded

Treatment Option #3:
Bilateral TMJ joint reconstruction with articular disc repositioning on the left side and possible sternoclavicular disc graft on the right side Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion Bilateral plication procedures to prevent dislocation

Treatment Option #4:
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts
I discussed the options with B406 . Because her symptoms are relatively controlled in reference to TMJ pain and headaches, treatment option #1 may work for her at this time. If she continues to have problems, then treatment option #2 would help prevent the dislocation. Treatment option #3 has a guarded prognosis because of the length of time of dislocation of the discs, the amount of arthritis in the joints, and the overall decreased prognosis when the discs have been out of position for longer than four years. Treatment option #4, the TMJ total joint prostheses, would probably solve all the issues, however, is a major procedure to undergo based on the level of symptoms that she currently has. However, if she begins to have worsening joint-associated symptoms where open joint work would be required (except for the plication procedures), then total joint prostheses would likely give us the best prognosis.

B406  MRI Scan Evaluation  
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Reading:  
Age: 45-year-old female
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears somewhat arthritic. Difficult to define the head of the condyle on this side. Could possible be some type of growth or formation in the condyle. Difficult to identify the medial aspect of the condyle. Appears to be decreased joint space vertically, however, it is possible that there could be a disc in position.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is quite narrow mediolaterally. The condyle appears to be arthritic. A little sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Appears this condyle may have undergone some resorptive changes. Hard to identify the roof of the fossa in some areas particularly toward the anterior aspect of the fossa. Discal tissue appears to be anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has moderately good width at the lateral aspect, but toward the medial aspect the condyle is extremely narrow anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Toward the medial aspect of the joint, the condyle appears somewhat sclerotic and is extremely narrow anteroposteriorly. Significantly decreased joint space where the condyle actually appears to be against the posterior wall of the fossa. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced but still appears to have a fairly good morphology associated with it. There is one aspect in the fossa toward the medial side where it appears that there may be some discontinuity perhaps even in the fossa roof. Disc may be medially and anteriorly displaced. No particular fluid level or significant inflammation seen within the joint, although there could be some inflammation around the joint area toward the lateral aspect of the joint.

On opening, there is restricted translation, and it appears that the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is fairly broad anteroposteriorly. There is significant anterior beaking present with some sclerosis in the beak area. Condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced with fairly significant degenerative changes associated with it. It is very short anteroposteriorly and may not be a salvageable disc. There is significantly decreased posterior and superior joint space. No particular inflammatory process seen around the joint.

On opening, there is restricted translation, and the disc remains nonreducing. The disc may be adhered to the articular eminence as it barely moves beyond its original position.

Impression:
Left TMJ significant arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe deformation and nonreducing
Left disc appears salvageable; right disc may be nonsalvageable

