B408 
B408 is 25 years and 11-1/2 months old and has a twin sister who has red hair. B408 has black hair. She was referred by Dr. XX.

Patient History
B408 has had problems with clenching and bruxism all of her life essentially. Beginning about the age of 10, she was started on splints and wore about four different splints from the age of 10 to the age of 20. She kept wearing through the splints with chronic clenching and bruxism. However, her current problems began in approximately last year. She was out for a walk and yawned widely and heard a crunching noise in the right side, and since then has had significant problems. She says the left side also pops and cracks at times, but most of her symptoms are isolated to the right side currently. Earlier this year, Dr. XX made a splint for her to try to unload her joint. This made her jaw pain worse, and when she wore the splint, the pain was there all the time. Dr. XX injected her with local anesthetic on the right side apparently through her masseter muscle, and this lasted about a week and did give her some relief, but then the pain returned. Of interest is her dad has TMJ problems as well. 2 years ago, she was in orthodontics by Dr. XX  who performed orthodontics on her for 1 year. Dr. X is in XX.

B408 gets earaches on the right side. She has no tinnitus but gets vertigo when she gets severe headaches. She has some hearing loss on the right side. No other joints bother her. She did have elbow surgery x 3 for a nerve entrapment problem, and it required some nerve repositioning, and she is doing fine from that now. She has severe clenching problems that are present day and night, and she has significant bruxism at night. Her clenching and bruxism are so severe that she has lost three teeth secondary to trauma. She gets headaches three times a week that are fairly severe and go into migraines that cause nausea and vomiting. They occur predominantly on the right side involving the frontal, temporal, and posterior head level at a level of 8. She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 10, jaw function at 7, diet at 6, and disability at 7. She is unable to work at this time because of her pain problems.

Current Medications
Singulair 10 mg q.d. Flonase 50 mcg q.d.
Zoloft 150 mg q.d.
Allegra 180 mg q.d.
Valium 2 mg h.s.
Robaxin 750 mg q.d.
Patient Concerns

Pain in the right jaw, face, and head area
Migraines that develop into nausea, vomiting, and vertigo
Difficulties eating and chewing
Severe headaches
Jaw freezes on the right side

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B408 has good facial symmetry and balance. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline.

In profile view, she has fairly good facial symmetry. A little bit of decreased vertical dimension but not too significant. Chin-neckline looks relatively normal. Chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth except she is missing the lower left first molar and has been replaced with a three-unit bridge. She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch. Has adequate attached gingiva. Seems to have quite a bit of wear on her teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch and a slight reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch. She has an anterior deep bite of probably about 5 to 6 mm. She is basically a Class I cuspid on the right side and slight Class II on the left side by maybe a couple of millimeters. Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably healthy. Tonsils are present with the right one being a little bit hyperplastic compared to the left one. B408 has no complaints of problems breathing through her nose.

Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged. Mucosa for the most part looks inflamed and reddened. She has been on Flonase for about six years.

To palpation, she has high moderate to low severe pain over the right masseter muscle and moderate pain over the temporalis muscles, right TMJ, right styloid area, and mild tenderness over the SCMs.

On opening, she had a click in the right TMJ at about 10 mm of opening and about 5 mm of closing. She also had a similar click on the left side. Palpating over the joints, the click was actually a little bit more obvious on the left side than the right side. However, placing fingers in the external meatus, there were obvious noises on the right side which were greater than on the left side.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the missing mandibular left first molar with a replacement with a three-unit bridge. She is missing both mandibular third molars and I believe the maxillary left second molar with the third molar drifting forward into its position. On the right side, she has an impacted maxillary third molar. Sinus on the left side looks a little bit cloudy compared to the right side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. There appears to be some deviation of the bony nasal septum. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. Right turbinate appears larger than the left turbinate.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit flattened on top. Articular eminence is moderately steep and somewhat elongated. Joint space could be a little bit narrowed at the most vertical aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that may have a little bit of flattening on the top. Articular eminence is moderately steep and doesn't appear to be quite as long as the opposite side. Joint space may be a little bit narrowed.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyles with both of them coming down beneath the articular eminence with slightly greater translation on the right side as compared to the left side.

Cephalometrically, she has a good oropharyngeal airway. She is skeletal Class I and also occlusal Class I. May have some decreased vertical dimension primarily involving the slightly short vertical height of the mandible.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations
Relative mandibular hyperplasia
Accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch
Reverse curve of occlusion, upper arch
Severe headaches
Severe TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Vertigo
Right-sided earaches

Recommended Treatment
Medications to control clenching and bruxism
Klonopin
Neurontin
Valium (increased dose only if the first two are ineffective)
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch
Align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the bite to decrease the deep overbite and create an open bite in the cuspid-bicuspid area utilizing an interocclusal splint

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
I gave B408 a prescription for Klonopin 1 mg tablets, disp. 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x 3. She is to call me in about four days or at least within a week to let me know how she is doing so we know whether to adjust the medications.

B408  MRI Scan Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Reading:	 
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is fairly broad mediolaterally. Condyle actually sticks out lateral to the lateral rim of the fossa. Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. In one view toward the more posterior aspect of the joint, the disc appears to be somewhat medially displaced. Otherwise it appears that there is distal tissue between the condyle, although there also appears to be discal tissue anteriorly.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that likewise is fairly broad mediolaterally with the lateral pole of the condyle extending beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Difficult to tell if there is distal tissue in the joint space. There does appear to be some distal tissue over medially. There also appears to be distal tissue anterior to the condyle. There appears to be vertically decreased joint space, and the superior surface of the condyle appears to have some erosive degenerative changes associated with it. Does appears that the disc is displaced medially.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows that there is some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. Appears to be a little bit of an osteophytic formation extending superior to the condylar head posterior to the disc. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. On some of the views, the disc is very hard to see and identify.

On opening, it shows a condyle that appears a little bit flattened on the anterior head. A little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular disc appears to be in position. There are restricted translatory movements.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is flattened anteriorly with some slight anterior beaking but not too significant. Appears to be slightly decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint. Appears to be a little osteophytic formation extending up posterior to the disc. Disc is anteriorly displaced but based on the open views does reduce relatively early.

On opening, unfortunately it appears that the mandible is postured forward. There is some flattening of the anterior head of the condyle with some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep and somewhat elongated. Articular disc appears to be in position. There is minimal translation of the condyle on this side, although the disc is in position.

Right TMJ, sagittal T2 view, shows a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space anterior by the articular eminence and superior to the condyle. Difficult to identify where the disc is on these views.

Left TMJ, sagittal T2 view, shows a small amount of fluid in the superior joint space. It is difficult to identify precisely where the disc is in this joint.

Impression:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reductions but restricted translation of the condyles. The translation on the MRI is not compatible with the clinical which shows good translatory capabilities

