B409 
B409 is 29 years old and in good health. She has had no previous surgeries.
CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Allegra.
Albuterol inhaler.
Zetia.
Lexapro.

PRIMARY CONCERNS: Jaw pain.
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints.
Ear pressure.
Neck pain.
Frequent tension headaches.
Anxiety that she feels may be a factor.

She does not get any earaches per se but does get pressure in her ears. No tinnitus. She had some problems with vertigo about 3 months ago but currently it is not a major factor. No hearing loss. Left wrist bothers her some. She does have some environmental allergies. She has difficulty wearing cheap earrings although her navel piercing is doing well. She is aware of clenching at night. She gets headaches about two to three times per week about a level of 4 and predominately in the posterior head area. She rates her average TMJ pain at 2, average day pain around 2, jaw function at 1, diet at 2, disability at 1. She is aware of mild snoring and does breathe predominately through her nose when she sleeps. However, she states she has no daytime somnolence nor sleep apnea symptoms. She does have difficulty breathing through her nose.

In frontal view, B409 had fairly good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 6 mm. Maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to the left. Mandibular dental midline and chin appear pretty much on the facial midline. In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is slightly posterior to subnasale. The maxilla may be about 4 to 5 mm AP deficient. Chin may be retruded about 20 mm. Chin-neckline is short. She does have a head postured forward neck position. Intraorally, B409 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth are nicely aligned level in the lower arch. She has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, B409 is missing upper first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth all the way back to the third molars. In fact, she has lower third molars in as well. She is fairly close to be being Class I cuspid but has Class II molar relationship and has a slight anterior open bite about 1 mm. She has bilateral posterior crossbites. Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear relatively normal in size and shape. Intranasally, turbinates appear relatively large compared to the size of the available airway and appear also a little bit purplish and boggy. The septum may be a little bit deviated off to the left side but not too significant. The columella is a little bit wide and the nostrils are narrow. The luminal valves are somewhat constricted. Susan did have previous orthodontics as evident by the extracted maxillary bicuspids. She had this done back in XX.
 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except for the absence of probably second bicuspids in the upper arch but difficult to tell which one. The sinuses look reasonably clear. Difficult to evaluate the condyles on this x-ray.

Waters view shows that she does have a deviated septum with a septal spur in the bony area off towards the left side. Turbinates are quite large and appear to fill almost the entire nasal cavity. Sinuses appear relatively clear. There could be a little opacification in the right ethmoid sinus. The frontal sinuses do not show up very well on this radiograph.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that there appears to be decreased joint space superiorly and posteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep.
Right TMJ tomogram likewise shows decreased superior and posterior joint space. On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows B409 has a high occlusal plane angle and a Class II skeletal relationship although she is closer to a Class I cuspid relationship. Oropharyngeal airway is surprisingly open. She does demonstrate vertical maxillary excess and perhaps some vertical mandibular excess anteriorly as well. She does have some calcification up in the ethmoid sinus area. To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area. She has a little bit of noise in the joint which probably occurs with about 15 mm of 10 mm closing. Closing click sometimes is a little bit more noticeable than the opening. Incisal opening is 46 mm, excursive movements are about 7 mm in each direction.

B409's onset of joint problems began earlier this year. Etiology is unknown although she was having a root canal procedure done about the same time on her left maxillary central incisor.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations. Vertical maxillary excess.
AP maxillary deficiency. Transverse maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Anterior open bite.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasoseptal deviation with septal spur. Nasal airway obstruction. Malaligned mandibular third molars times 2. High occlusal plane angle.

 
TREATMENT OPTION I:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip the lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to provide room between the roots for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to decrease the over angulation and correct for a mild tooth size discrepancy. Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning with ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly, expand it and advance.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Nasal septoplasty.
Extract mandibular third molars times 2. Vertical reduction, AP augmentation genioplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

TREATMENT OPTION II: Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies.
Application of arch bars.

B409  MRI Evaluation  
Age: 29/F
Date of Acquisition:  
Date of Interpretation:  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little lateral extrusion by the lateral pole that extends just slightly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Cortical bone appears to be intact. Decreased vertical joint space. There appears to be some discal tissue displaced medially and also anteriorly.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has sort of a larger lateral extension of the lateral pole of the condyle and extends beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Decreased superior joint space. Discal tissue appears to be anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of sclerosis in the cortical bone but not too significant. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced but appears to reduce early on.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking but not too significant. Perhaps a little bit of sclerosis in the cortical bone. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced but reduces early on in opening.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocations with early reductions.

