B414 
B414 is 53 years old. Referred by Dr. XX.
B414 has diabetes type 2. Additional medical conditions that she has include:

Blood clot 12 years ago related to Factor V Leiden. Migraines. Chronic fatigue syndrome.
Borderline high blood pressure. Sinus problems. Fibromyalgia.
Sleep disorder.

She takes numerous medications and that list is attached to our records. She gets migraines about 6 to 7 days a month. She has headaches, however, daily that are different than these. B414 rates her regular daily headaches that are predominantly on the left side in the frontal, temporal, and behind the eye at about a level of 6. She has had headaches since senior year in high school. The headaches that she got in junior high may have been migraine headaches as well. Her migraines occur predominantly on the left side as do her regular headaches. B414 rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 2, diet at 2, disability at 2. The popping noises in her jaw joints began some time around last year, to the best of her knowledge. The etiology is unknown. She was involved in a motor vehicle accident 13 years ago. She did have a splint 12 years ago because a chiropractic doctor at that time thought that her headaches could be related to her TMJs. The splint did help some, but not enough for her to wear it continuously. She then got a split again in 3 years ago. This splint from 3 years agoagain was placed to try to help with the headaches and it was primarily to try to prevent her from clenching her teeth at night. She had orthodontics from 4 to 6 years ago. She had orthognathic surgery 5 years ago to include a mandibular advancement and a chin augmentation by Dr. XX.

She gets moderate earaches, occasional tinnitus, and occasional vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her knees, neck, and back. She is aware of clenching at night time and also during the day. She used to get the migraine headaches almost every day and that was up until just a couple of years ago. She has since been able to have better results with her medications and less headache occurrences.

In clinical exam, B414 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. The midlines are all fairly well aligned with each other. In profile, B414 has fairly good facial balance. She has a little fullness in the submental area, but otherwise AP dimensions appear good. Intraorally, B414  has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. In the upper arch, she also has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship. She has about a 2 mm anterior deep bite relationship. She has some slight over inclination in the maxillary incisors. To palpation, she has very mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles, but no where else around the head and neck area. Joints seems to function reasonably smoothly. Maximal incisal opening was 36 mm with about 5 mm of excursion movement in each direction. She does appear to have hypertrophied masseter muscles.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of 3 bone screws in each anterior semi-ramus. There is also a bone plate in the chin appears. Sinuses appear relatively Turbinates appear relatively small in size. The septum is deviated off a little bit towards to the left side, but otherwise appears fairly straight. Coronal view shows just that the turbinates are moderate in size, but sinuses appear clear. Axial view shows that the turbinates appear relatively small and the sinuses appear clear. Left TMJ sagittal view shows condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head. There may be a small little osteophyte sticking up in the mid to posterior aspect of the condyle. The articular eminence is moderately steep. The condyle appears to be posteriorly positioned in fossa with an increased anterior joint space. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present. Right TMJ shows a condyle that has a little flattening on the head, otherwise appears reasonably normal. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle is somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Both joints appear to have reasonably good vertical joint space. Left TMJ coronal view tomogram shows that there may be some decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint. The condyle may extend a little bit beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears slightly larger than the opposite side. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. B414 also states that she has had 3 sleep studies in the past showing that she has sleep apnea. These were done 10 years ago. She cannot tolerate the CPAP machine. She continues to have significant sleep apnea. Her oropharyngeal airway has a significantly decreased AP dimension with about 4 mm at the soft palate level and about 5 to 6 mm at the base of the tongue. Clinically, she also has significant decreased transverse width between posterior fascial pillars which I believe are contributory. The uvula is hyperplastic as well. Basic diagnoses for B414 would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with reduction earlier on the left side and later on the right side. TMJ pain. Headaches. Myofascial pain being the worst involvement with the right masseter muscle.
Hypertrophy of the masseter muscles being greater on the right side than the left side. Hyperplastic soft palate and uvula. Significant constricture of the fascial pillars. Decreased oropharyngeal airway. Sleep apnea. AP maxillary and mandibular hyperplasia.
Chronic clenching and bruxism.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Sleep study. Consider medication alteration by elimiting the Xanax and adding in Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s. to see if this helps with the clenching. Orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concept total joint prostheses. Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 5-6 mm. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP procedure).
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B414 MRI  
AGE: DOB:
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation:  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some mild arthritic changes. There is a little bit of sclerosis and some slight anterior beaking present and a little bit of peaking on the top of the condyle, particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint. There is decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced, more so at the lateral aspect of the joint and in a little bit better position medially. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. On partial opening, the disc appears to reduced. On wider opening, the disc is reduced. There is decreased translation of the condyle and disc. The condyle does not go beneath the articular eminence.

The right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears fairly narrow anteroposteriorly and a little sclerotic on the top of the condyle towards the medial side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The disc is anteriorly displaced and thickened. The disc appears more degenerated on the this side than the opposite side. There is decreased superior and posterior joint spaces. There is significant fluid in the superior joint space.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. There is decreased superior and lateral joint spaces. The disc is anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. It is a little sclerotic in some areas. The joint space is decreased vertically and particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The disc is anteriorly displaced. On the right side on partial opening, the disc remains anteriorly displaced. On wider opening, the disc partially reduces medially, but remains anteriorly displaced out laterally. There is decreased translation of the condyle and disc. The condyle does not go beneath the articular eminence.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs dislocated with relatively early reduction on the left side and intermediate reduction on the right side, but both joints display decreased transitory movements.

