B415 
B415 is 32 years old. B415 is a self-referral.
B415 began developing migraine headaches at about the age of 10. He has been under all different sorts of medications to try to control his migraines since that time. His migraines were severe, but did not occur nearly as often as the current occurrence rate. At about the age of 20, B415 developed clicking and popping in his jaw joints of unknown etiology. One year ago, he hit a tree straight on while skiing and his TMJ stopped clicking, but the pain really set in at that time.

Previous treatment included orthodontics from the age of 9 to 12. He had a night guard from about 11 to 12 years ago. As his pain intensified last year, a TMJ device of some type was tried by his dentist that was ineffective. He has had the TMJ splint since last year which likewise has not eliminated his problems. B415 was scheduled for surgery with Dr. XX earlier this year, but Dr. XX apparently took a medical leave of absence and B415  was unable to get his surgery.

B415 rates his headaches at a level of 8 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area when he gets his migraines. He also gets his migraines 2 to 3 times per week, but sometimes even daily. His average TMJ pain is about a 7 and can escalate up to an 8. Average daily pain is at 7, jaw function at 7, diet and disability at 6. He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, nor hearing loss. Other joints that both him include just the joints in his fingers and hands. He is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also during the daytime particularly when the splint is in place.

He takes the following medications:
Axert.
Elavil 50 mg q.h.s.
Neurontin 300 mg t.i.d. Hydrocodone 7.5 mg tablets 1 to 3 per day.
Dolobid 500 mg b.i.d. Parafon Forte 2 to 3 times per day.

He does have a history of moderate snoring at night, but does not claim any problems with daytime somnolence nor sleep apnea. He believes he breathes through both his mouth and his nose at nighttime. B415 has had a sleep study done that apparently showed he had a mild sleep apnea problem.

In frontal view, B415 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 2 mm. The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are pretty much on the facial midline. A little bit of deviation in the nasal tip with the base of the dorsum being just slightly to the right and with the tip probably 1 to 2 mm to the left. In profile view, B415 has AP deficiency of the maxilla of at least 6 mm and the chin appears to be about 18 mm AP deficient. Chin neckline is not as short and chin neck angle is not defined well. Intraorally, B415 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. The teeth are slightly crowded anteriorly, but he has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has a reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch and an anterior deep bite of about 6 mm. He has just a slight Class II occlusal relationship. This may be related to the deep bite relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably normal, although the uvula is slightly elongated. Nasally, B415 has an extremely wide columella and the nostrils are extremely narrow. Intranasally, the turbinates are moderate in size. The septum is deviated off towards the right side with a septal spur present. The nasal airway on the right side has some fairly significant obstruction to a greater extent than the left side. Holding the nostrils open significantly improved B415's ability to breathe through his nose.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex demonstrates the absence of all four third molars. Sinuses are clear. Condyles appear arthritic.
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some significant anterior beaking. There is a little sclerosis on the top of the condyle. Joint space appears reasonably well balanced, but articular eminence is vertically oriented and fairly long in length.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some anterior beaking, although not quite as significant as the opposite side. However, there appears to be significant flattening of the head of the condyle towards the lateral side of the joint. Joint space appears narrowed on this side compared to the opposite side both superiorly and posteriorly. Articular eminence has a more shallow inclination. The condyle appears to be positioned posterior in the fossa.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. The joint space looks reasonably good. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width, but more narrow than the opposite side. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 mm. The joint space is consistently diminished in this side compared to the opposite side.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. There is a large septal spur that comes off on the right side and touches against the lateral nasal wall and causes significant airway obstruction in that area.

Coronal view likewise shows a large septal spur that obstructs against the lateral nasal wall. The turbinates are moderate in size, but the right side appears to be significantly obstructed because of the turbinate size and the fact that the septum deviates off towards the right side with the large septal spur present. Sinuses appear clear in this view.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B415 has maxillary AP and probably posterior vertical hypoplasia and AP mandibular hypoplasia. The oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 7.5 mm at the base of the tongue.

B415 has some mild tenderness over the left temporalis, masseter, TMJ and retromandibular area. No tenderness on the right side. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly. The incisal opening maximally is 42 mm, but only 20 mm without pain. The excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.

Basic diagnoses for B415 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs dislocated with severe deformation and non-salvageable. Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Deviated nasal septum with airway obstruction.
TMJ pain. Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Class II end-on occlusion with an anterior deep bite of 6 mm.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Snoring.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Consider slenderizing the lower anterior teeth slightly to keep from flaring them too far forward.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement (15 mm at pogonion) using TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction approximately 8 mm at the incisal tips. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies. e.	Nasal septoplasty. f.	Reconstruction of columella to open up the nostrils and nasal airway.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B415  MRI 
DATE OF ACQUISITION: 
Left side shows a condyle with fairly good shape, but with some anterior beaking present. The joint space is fairly good around the condyle. The articular eminence is quite steep. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. There is some significant degenerative changes in the disc with it being quite short anteroposteriorly and the posterior band is quite thickened. There is fluid in the superior joint space that fairly well surrounds the articular eminence.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is somewhat flattened on top. The articular eminence is less steep and more shallow compared to the opposite side. The articular disc is anterior displaced and sitting along the posterior aspect of the articular eminence. The superior and posterior joint space appears decreased compared to the opposite side. The right joint has some fluid in the joint space as well.

On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyles and articular discs remain anteriorly displaced without reduction, however, it is possible that the right side may reduce on opening. In full opening mode, the left condyle comes down forward beneath the articular eminence, but the thickened deformed disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. On the right side on maximum opening, there is good translation. It appears that the disc may be reduced, and the anterior aspect of the disc is much denser than the remaining part of the disc. On some views in the right joint, it appears that the disc does not reduce and remains anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width and there appears to be good joint space. However, the disc appears to be anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is smaller in size than the opposite side. The joint space may be a little bit decreased in this side. The disc appears to be anteriorly and medially displaced.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction and with severe deformation and with effusions in the joint. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with possible mid to late reduction with degenerative changes of the disc.

