B416 
B416 is 21 years old. B416 is having orthodontic treatment done by Dr. XX.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Open bite.
Chin shifted off to the right side.
Pain in the right side of the jaws and the jaw joints. Pain when opening her mouth.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Wellbutrin 300 mg daily.
Effexor 75 mg daily.
Depo-Vera.
Albuterol occasionally for asthma concerns.
B416's problems as far as she is aware began about 2-1/2 years ago when she was taking a bite out of a burger and her jaw locked on the right side where she could not open. She had decreased opening for about 1 year. She has received no treatment for her situation until 1 month ago. This year, she began orthodontic treatment by Dr. XX. She has occasional problems with earaches on the right side but no tenderness, occasional vertigo but no hearing loss. No other joints other her. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

She rates her TMJ pain of 2, average daily pain 3, jaw function 8, diet at 6 and disability at 8. She has no problems with headaches.
CLINICAL EVALUATION:
In frontal view, B416 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. She has asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 3 mm. Maxillary dental midline is on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right side. Chin is probably about 3 to 4 mm off to the right side. Inferior border in the left side appears to be lower by maybe 3 or 4 mm compared to the right side. The left side of the face appears more full than the right side. In profile view, B416 has some problems with the nasal dorsum. She has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip. Upper lip is somewhat retrusive by probably about 3 to 4 mm. She has a lip incompetence of about 7 mm. Chin appears retruded by about 10 to 12 mm. Chin-neckline is quite short although the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined. Intraorally, B416 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch. She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. She has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm. She has an end-on Class II occlusion on the right side by about 3 mm and probably 2 mm on the left side. She has a transverse cant in the plane with the left side being 2 to 3 mm lower than the right side. In centric occlusion, she occludes only on the second molars. Oropharynx appears clear. The uvula and soft palate looks normal. The faucial pillars might be a little bit constricted because of fairly enlarged tonsils.  

The tonsils do not appear inflamed. Transverse width of the nose appears perhaps a little bit constricted. Right turbinate appears enlarged and may cause some obstruction. The left turbinate appears relatively normal in size. The luminal valves appear somewhat constricted in both the left and right side. As I held the valves open, she could breathe significantly better. B416 has tendency towards a cross bite on the right side but is really not in a crossbite. On the left side she has as little bit tendency towards as buccal crossbite. To palpation she has moderate tenderness over the SCMs, mild to moderate tenderness over the right TMJ, right masseter and bilateral shoulders. Maximal incisal opening is 28 mm, opening without pain and discomfort 25 mm. Excursive movement to the right 4.5 mm, left 7 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex, taken last year and ours taken today, shows the absence of all 4 third molars. There are periapical lesions around the mandibular right first molar that have actually increased in size during this time. She has periapical lesions beneath the mandibular right first molar indicative of probably leakage in the root canal. She also has a root canal in maxillary right first bicuspid, maxillary left second bicuspid first molar. Right turbinate appears enlarged in both films. Sinuses look relatively clear. There may be a little bit more cloudiness in the left side than the right side. The condyles cannot be evaluated on our film but on the previous film the left condyles and condylar neck are much larger in size than the right side. There appears to be an uneven articulating surface in the left condylar head on the right condyle.

Waters view shows that the nasal septum appears significantly deviated. The turbinates appear moderate in size. There appears to be some fluid or mucocele in the left maxillary sinus. Some vertical asymmetry is seen in the mandible and a cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being lower than the right side. The left condyle is significantly larger than the right condyle. There is vertical growth that can be seen off the medial pole of the condyle.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. The condyle appears arthritic with some anterior beaking and there appears to be loss of condylar volume. Articular eminence is relatively shallow.

Left TMJ tomograms show that there appears to be arthritic changes and perhaps enlargement of the condyle on this side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is restricted in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B416 has slight Class II skeletal relationship. Both the maxilla and mandible appear to be somewhat retruded. She has an anterior open bite and Class II occlusal tendency. Inferior borders of the mandible actually appear relatively symmetric relative to vertical positioning. She has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1.5 mm. Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch with the 4 incisors being about 2 mm higher than the posterior teeth. In the lower arch, the lower incisors may be just slightly elevated not more than about 1 mm. A little bit of crowding in the lower anterior arch.
 
BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Left TMJ osteochondroma/osteoma.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and with significant degenerative changes. Mandible deviated off to the right side. AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side of the maxilla and mandible being 3 mm lower than the right side.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior open bite of 2 mm. In centric relation occludes only on the right second molars. Right TMJ pain. Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1.5 mm. Difficulties eating and chewing. Right maxillary hypertrophied turbinate. Partial nasal airway obstruction. Mucocele, left maxillary sinus. Increased curve of Spee, upper arch. Anterior open bite of 2 mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch in two occlusal plane levels. Align the cuspids through first molars at one occlusal plane level and place a step in the archwire to align the 4 incisors at an elevated plane level. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Leave second molars out of the archwire. Align and level mandibular arch. Leave the second molars out of the archwire. Slenderize the lower anterior arch removing about 1 mm of tooth structure to help correct for mild tooth size discrepancy. Surgery.
Left TMJ low condylectomy with articular disc repositioning and ligament repair.
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back on facial midline and level it transversely as well as advance it.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and level it transversely.
Right mandibular turbinectomy. Remove mucous retention cyst from left maxillary sinus.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B416  CT Scan 
Date of Acquisition: 
Axial views show that the left condyle appears to have fairly good morphology. There appears to be depression in the mid part of the condylar head at the most superior aspect of the condyle. The right condyle appears smaller in size.

Coronal view of left TMJ shows an arthritic condyle with a large osteophyte projection coming off the medial head of the condyle going superior in towards the depth of the fossa. There is a notch in the head of the condyle just lateral to the osteophytic formation. Joint space appears decreased in these views. The top of the condyle does appear irregular.

Right TMJ coronal view shows an abnormally shaped condyle that appears smaller than the left side. The lateral pole of the condyle is significantly lower than the medial pole. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. The condyle appears to be sitting and angled somewhat lateral. There appears to be osteophytic formation off the medial aspect of the condylar head. There appears to be decreased joint space.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis.
B416 MRI Evaluation  
AGE: 21/F
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation:  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has some osteophytic formation and what appears to be erosive areas in the joint. There may be an osteophyte sticking up medially. Significantly decreased joint space by the medial bony extrusion. Significantly decreased joint space. There may be some discal tissue anterior but difficult to tell. There may be discal tissue actually in the joint area. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa about 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite flattened with the lateral pole significantly lower than the medial pole. Decreased vertical joint space at both the medial aspect and lateral aspect. It appears there is some kind of tissue present between the condyle and lateral rim of the fossa. Otherwise, difficult to identify discal tissue.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has somewhat irregularity. There is significant erosion in the head of the condyle towards the medial side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is reasonably good translation of the condyle and the articular disc.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little bit smaller in size compared to the opposite side. There is some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. In fact it is quite flat towards the medial aspect of the joint. The disc is anteriorly displaced and is sitting beneath the articular eminence. Disc appears to be significantly deformed and degenerated. Articular eminence appears quite steep at the lateral aspect of the joint. On opening, there is some restricted translation of the condyle and the deformed articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ arthritis with possible medial displacement of the articular disc but the disc otherwise is in a reasonably good position. Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and severe deformation.

