B419 
B419 is 21 years old. She was referred by Dr. XX.

B419's TMJ problems began she was 15 years old of unknown etiology. She had orthodontics from the age of 11 to 14. She began splint therapy few months ago, but this has made her pain worse.

B419 rates her headaches at a level of 7 that occur in the temples and posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 7, diet at 8, disability at 7. She states that she hears clicking and grinding in her right jaw joint. She gets occasional earaches, occasional tinnitus, moderate occurrence of vertigo, but no hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She does have a reaction to wearing cheap jewelry and it causes swelling and infections in her ears. She cannot wear necklaces unless they are a high quality metal. She is aware of clenching at nighttime and sometimes during the day as well particularly if she wears her splint. She takes the following medications:

Prozac 40 mg q.d.
Tylenol p.r.n. pain.
She was on Flexeril and Mobic for a week or two recently, but she has stopped those medications. The Flexeril did help decrease some of her muscle tension, but it made her very sleepy and she could not function well at school. The Mobic did not seem to make any difference for her.

In frontal view, B419 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4.5 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm off to the left as is the chin which is probably 5 mm off to the left. B419 has a lip incompetence of about 8 mm. In profile view, the maxilla is retruded about 4 to 5 mm. The chin is retruded about 18 to 20 mm. Chin neckline is very short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. She has a hyperfunctional mentalis muscles. Intraorally, B419 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. She has some periodontal stripping around the mandibular left central incisor. The rest of the teeth seem to have adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Upper lateral incisors are a little bit small in size. B419 has a Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by about 4 mm and on the left side she is closer to a Class I but just about 1 mm Class III. She has about 0.5 mm of a vertical overbite anteriorly. She has a cross bite tendency on the left side. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. Intranasally, the nostril opening is somewhat constricted and the luminal valves are constricted as well. Both of the nostrils are narrow. Columella is moderately wide. Turbinates appear moderate in size with probably a moderate nasal airway obstruction. She has a slight head postured forward neck position. B419 has moderate tinnitus throughout most of the head and neck area. The maximal incisal opening is 27 mm, opening without pain 10 mm. The excursion movements are less than 1 mm in each direction. On opening, she does have crepitus in the right joint, but the left joint seems to function smoothly with the limited amount of opening.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear enlarged. Both condyles appear arthritic in nature. The articular eminences are relatively shallow.

Coronal view shows that there is just some slight increased thickness of the sinus membrane in the medial and floor of the nose. The inferior turbinates are significantly enlarged and appear to block a good part of the airway. The septum deviates a little bit off towards the left side.

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight. Turbinates are enlarged and may block a good part of the airway. The sinuses are clear.
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost vertical volume. There is a little bit of tendency for anterior beaking. There is flattening on the head of the condyle. The articular eminence is shallow. The joint space is narrowed particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The condyle may be postured slightly forward in the fossa.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is flattened and appears to have lost volume vertically. The articular eminence is very shallow. The condyle is actually postured forward in the fossa which may account for the shift of the mandible towards the left side and the midline being off as well as the slight increased Class III occlusion on the right side compared to the left side. Out laterally, it appears that there may be almost bone-on-bone contact.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show that there are little cystic formations within the head of the condyle. There is loss of vertical volume of this condyle. There is some decreased lateral joint space. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant resorption with loss of vertical volume. There is a lateral osteophytic type of formation that appears to occlude against the lateral rim of the fossa likely accounting for the crunchy noises she hears in that joint. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with a downward curvature of less than 2 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B419 has a retruded maxilla and mandible. The oropharyngeal airway is actually better than anticipated with an AP dimension of about 8 mm at the soft palate level and 7 mm at the base of the tongue. The tongue fills the majority of the oral cavity. The occlusal plane is excessively high. The maxilla demonstrates anterior vertical maxillary excess, but AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia. The mandible is almost prognathic with the position of the lower incisors, but significantly deficient in the chin projection.

Tooth size analysis shows that there is a Bolton's difference of 1.5 mm.
Basic diagnoses for B419 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with significant degeneration.
Progressive condylar resorption.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia, but anterior vertical hyperplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
AP microgenia.
High occlusal plane angulation of 19 degrees (normal angulation is 8 degrees).
Class III end-on occlusion being worse on the right side than the left side.
Hypertrophied turbinates with nasal airway obstruction.
Stillman's cleft left mandibular central incisor.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1.5 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Periodontal evaluation and grafting of mandibular anterior arch.
2.	MRI of left and right TMJs of good quality.
3.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Keep lateral incisors roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b.	Align and level lower arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1.5 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower incisors too far forward and to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
4.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol), if it is determined that total joint prostheses are the best treatment option to reconstruct the joints.
5.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction versus bilateral TMJ disc repositioning with Mitek anchors and bilateral sagittal split osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance in a counterclockwise direction. c.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. d.	Chin implant of 5 mm. e.	Bilateral coronoidotimies. f.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
6.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B419 MRI 
Side 1 sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant degenerative changes. There is flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. The eminence is relatively flat. the disc is in partially reduced position, but does not cover the head of the condyle. Out laterally, the joint space is quite narrow so the discal tissue may be medially displaced. There appears to be some reactive tissue around the condyle. The condyle has fairly good anteroposterior width out laterally, but medially is more narrow. There appears to be decreased posterior and superior joint space. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle and the disc appears to be in position, although there may be a reactive pannus surrounding the disc.

Side 2 shows a condyle that has severe degenerative changes. There may be a reactive pannus around both of these discs. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space and posterior joint space. The discs may be in position but severely degenerated. On opening, there is moderately good translation. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced, partially reduced and degenerated.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ advanced arthritis with degeneration of the articular discs. I feel that the discs may not salvageable and may be significantly degenerated. The patient may best benefit from total joint prostheses.

