B421 
B421 believes her jaw joint problems may have begun as young as when she was a teenager, however, it was not until she was in her 30s that she developed significant pain problems. The etiology is unknown. She had orthodontics x3 the first time when she was age 16 to 18 and then she had them on for about 6 months at age of 22 and then at 45 she had them for about 3 months. She gets headaches about once every 2 weeks in the posterior head area that gets to a level of about 7. She rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 7, diet and 7, and disability at 2. She has no trouble with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus and vertigo. She has mild hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her hips, knees, left foot, lower back and possibly her neck. She does have irritable bowel syndrome, GERD, and she has reflux. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime. She does state she has bursitis in her hips. She is on a significant list of medications that is included in her chart. She does take clonazepam 10 mg as needed for anxiety. There are about 18 medications on her list. She does state that she has sleep apnea and was diagnosed with that 6 years ago. She had a recent study done last year.

In frontal view, B421 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm. The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline. In profile view, B421 has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably 4 to 5 mm and chin appears retruded about 15 to 18 mm. The chin neckline and angle are not defined. Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids. She has some mild crowding. The transverse width of the lower arch is narrow. She has adequate attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch. Left cuspid is in lingual inclination. In the upper arch, she is missing probably first bicuspids. She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She does have transverse deficiency in the arch width. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal. Soft palate appears relatively long likely related to the retruded position of the jaw structures.

B421 states that she has had previous rhinoplasty, but I believe it was mainly internal work done to straighten the septum and reduce the turbinates. At least radiographically and clinically, it does not appear that she has any major nasal airway obstruction at this time within the nasal cavity itself. B421  is supposed to be on a CPAP machine, but to make a long story short she was asked to turn in her CPAP machine to one sleep center and somehow they lost the machine and they have not replaced it for her yet. She has been about a year now without having access a CPAP machine. She does have an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm. B421 did have her wisdom teeth removed, but did get dry sockets with that experience. To palpation, she has high moderate to low severe pain to palpation of the TMJs, retromandibular area, and posterior neck area and masseter muscles. She has mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles. With jaw function, she has audible crepitus in both temporomandibular joints. The maximal incisal opening is 41 mm, opening without discomfort 32 mm. The excursion movement to the right is 8 mm, to the left 7 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. She has root canals on the right maxillary and mandibular first molars and maxillary left sec bicuspid. The condyles appear severely arthritic. The sinuses appear relatively clear and turbinates appear relatively small in size.

Coronal view shows that the nasal septum has some deviation in it. The turbinates are actually small in size.
Axial view shows that the nasal septum is deviated off against the right luminal valve area and appears to block off the airway at that level. The bony septum is fairly straight and turbinates are small in size. The sinuses appear relatively clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows the presence of severe arthritis with anterior beaking and irregular bone in the fossa as well as on the head of the condyle. The articular eminence is relatively shallow. There appears to be bone-on-bone contact within the joint. There appears to be loss of condylar volume.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is severely arthritic. There appears to be loss of condylar volume. There appears to be bone-on-bone contact. The articular eminence has a mild to moderate inclination.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is severely arthritic and has small areas of pseudocysts in the condylar head. There is osteophytic development and areas of erosion in the fossa. There appears to be bone-on-bone contact.

Right TMJ coronal view shows pseudocysts in the head of the condyle and bone-on-bone contact within the fossa. There are advanced arthritic changes in both jaw joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are retruded. The oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 2.5 mm (normal AP dimension is 11 mm). At the base of the tongue, the airway measures about 7 mm (again normal airway is about 11 mm in this area). There is a mild increased occlusal plane angle. The maxilla and mandible appear to be retruded, particularly the mandible.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2.5 mm (normal dimension 11 mm).
Sleep apnea.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Previously extracted four bicuspids.
High occlusal plane angle of 19 degrees (normal 8 degrees).

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
3.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses with pogonion coming forward 15 mm. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction with bone plate stabilization and bone grafting. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B421 MRI   
DATE OF ACQUISITION: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat arthritic. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. Disc tissue appears to be anteriorly displaced. It may be laterally displaced as well. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that apears somewhat arthritic. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim curves inferiorly only about 2 mm.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is arthritic. There is significant anterior beaking present. The articular eminence is relatively shallow. There is decreased vertical joint space. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced, somewhat folded with some fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is significantly degenerated and very short anteroposteriorly. There appears to be perhaps some osteophytic bursts from the fossa. The right joint on opening shows moderately good translation with the condyle coming beneath the articular eminence. The articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. Arthritis is quite progressive in this joint. The condyle actually translates out just beyond the apex of the articular eminence. The articular eminence has a mild inclination to it.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. It appears the articular disc is anteriorly displaced, although there is some tissue going posterior to the head of the condyle that could indicate a posteriorly displaced disc. In some images, it is very difficult to reach. There is some anterior beaking present. On the left side in another view, it shows that the articular disc is anteriorly displaced, sitting beneath the articular eminence and severely degenerated. There may be some heterotopic bone extension off the posterior head of the condyle sitting posteriorly. There is good translation of the condyle, but the disc remains anteriorly displaced and severely deformed. The condyle translates out to just beneath the articular eminence. The articular eminence is quite flat on the left side.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with anteriorly displaced articular discs that are severely degenerated and non-salvageable.
The patient a candidate for total joint prostheses.

