B422 
B422 is 21 years old and referred by Dr. XX.
Patient History
B422 previously has had her tonsils removed. She does have some allergy problems, and this makes her nose fairly stuffy. She did have asthma as a child but not now. She takes birth control pills but no other medication.

B422 's problems began probably a couple of years ago of unknown etiology. She became aware of clicking noises in her joints particularly on the right side. This is of unknown etiology. The past four or five months she has started to get a locking problem primarily involved the right joint, where she can only open so wide and then can't open wider than that. Previous treatments that she has had include orthodontics with three sets of braces in the past. She has also undergone myofunctional therapy, and she has a night guard that she has worn for approximately two years now. This is to help control her clenching and bruxism. She does have nocturnal clenching and bruxism. The splint does disocclude the teeth, but she still clenches with that device in. She has no trouble with earaches, vertigo, or hearing loss but does get occasional tinnitus. The only other joint problem she has is some lower back problems that she feels may be related to her vertebrae. She does have a lot of allergies to environmental things such as grass, molds, mites, trees, dogs, cats, etc. She cannot wear cheap jewelry as she gets contact dermatitis with watches, braces, earrings, etc.

Patient Concerns
Teeth don't fit together very well
Tongue thrust problem
Difficulties breathing through the nose
Clicking in the jaw joints, particularly on the right side

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B422 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm, and upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline. Chin may be just slightly to the right a millimeter or 2. Nasal tip is just slightly to the right 1 or 2 mm.

In profile view, she might have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency of a couple of millimeters. Chin is deficient by 10 to 12 mm. Chin-neckline is short, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. Some fullness in the submental area is present. Does hold her head in a neck postured forward head position.

Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. Has some lack of attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch right adjacent to the central incisors but otherwise has adequate gingival. She occludes primarily just on the second molars bilaterally, and the rest of the teeth are essentially out of occlusion. She has about a 3-mm anterior open bite. Has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship being probably about 2 to 3 mm Class II. Just a slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being about a millimeter lower than the left side. Anteroposteriorly, the cuspids appear to be in fairly good symmetry.

To palpation, she has no tenderness over the head and neck area to palpation. No tenderness over the TMJ areas. On opening, she has a soft opening click at about 10 to 15 mm on the right side and a closing click at about 10 to 15 mm. The left side appears fairly smooth.

Oropharynx appears quite clear.
Intranasally, she has a severely deviated nasal septum off toward the left side. Left turbinate is moderately large in size. On the right side, the right inferior turbinate is moderately large in size, but she has a huge structure above the inferior turbinate that is either an extremely enlarged middle turbinate versus a nasal polyp. The superior aspect of the septum is the area that is deviated far off towards the left side, and this structure up there almost completely obliterates the nasal cavity at that level.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but all the rest of the teeth are present and accounted for. Sinuses look relatively clear. Deviation of the septum is not as easily identified on this film, but it does appear that she can see some of the deviation present. Inferior turbinates look relatively normal in size. Middle turbinate on the right side appears to be quite large and filling a lot of the area cavity, but the left side appears to be blocked because of the severe deviation of the septum off toward that left side. Condyles look a little bit flattened but otherwise not too bad.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. Septum doesn't look too bad in this film. Airway looks reasonable particularly at the inferior turbinate level.

On the right TMJ tomogram, it appears that the mandible is maybe postured forward slightly, and the condyle may be postured down and forward from its more centric relation. It shows that there is good joint space around the joint. There appears to be anterior beaking present. The articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that she may not be occluding together quite all the way. Joint space looks fairly good, although it appears that there have been some bony changes on the condyle. There is some anterior beaking present, and in the anteroposterior direction, the condyle appears a little bit narrow. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There is good, in fact, exception translation of the condyles anterior to the articular eminences.

Cephalometrically, her head is tipped up somewhat. Oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue measures about 4 to 5 mm. This might be even less with better orientation of the head. Lips are forced together. She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch and perhaps just a slight reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch. Tongue is sitting down and does not completely fill the maxillary available volume.

Tooth size analysis reveals about 0.5 to 1 mm of discrepancy.
Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with reductions
Anterior maxillary excess
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Class II end-on occlusion
Anterior open bite
Occluding only on maxillary and mandibular second molars
Anterior open bite of 3 to 4 mm
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch
Slight reversed curve of Spee in the lower arch Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 1 mm
Slight over-angulation of lower incisors
Severely deviated nasal septum
Severely hypertrophied right middle turbinate versus polyp
Nasal airway obstruction
Decreased oropharyngeal airway

Recommended Treatment
MRI of left and right TMJ
Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch in three segments using a continuous arch wire with a vertical step. Align the four incisors in an elevated plane compared to the posterior teeth. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure and retract

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the accentuated curve of Spee and close the anterior open bite
Nasal septoplasty
Removal of severely hypertrophied right middle turbinate versus nasal polyp

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B422  MRI Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition: Date of Reading:  
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. Lateral pole of the condyle seems to extend beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Very minimal downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa of probably only about 2 mm. Cortical bone on the condyle appears to be intact. There is a decreased vertical joint space particularly at the lateral rim of the fossa. There could be some medial displacement of the articular disc. Discal tissue appears to be anteriorly and possibly medially displaced.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly just a couple of millimeters. Appears to be a little bit greater joint space on this side as compared to the opposite side. Difficult to identify discal tissue, however. Condyle appears to extend a little bit beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Possibly could be some medial displacement of the articular disc on this side. Discal tissue appears to be anteriorly and possibly medially displaced.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is flattened anteriorly with some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Appears to be some discontinuity of the cortical bone on the top of the condyle on the anterior aspect of it. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and out laterally appears to be quite thickened in the posterior band area. However, more medial cut shows the disc is not as thickened at the posterior band as it is more laterally. Appears to be some discontinuity on the head of the condyle of the cortical bone. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. More medially, the disc appears to be in a little bit better position and appears to have less anterior dislocation. Joint space looks better balanced toward the medial aspect of the joint. There is some fluid in the superior joint space.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has some peaking at the superior aspect and perhaps a little bit of loss of cortical bone on the anterior leading edge of the condyle. Articular disc is moderately steep. Appears to be some increased superior and posterior joint space. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. Posterior band is slightly thickened but not as significantly as the opposite side. There is some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle and some anterior beaking as we go more medially. More medially, the disc is in a little bit better position but still in a vertical orientation within the fossa. More medially, the disc also appears to become thinner. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces.

On opening, it appears as though there is some restricted translation.
Impression:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction

