B423 
B423 is 44 years old and is in good health with no major medical problems. Primary concerns involve primarily some facial aesthetics and some functional factors.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Facial asymmetry.
Nose shifted to the right.
Bumps on the nose.
Asymmetry around the chin area. Noises in the joints with popping in the left joint and crunching noises on the right side. Left TMJ pain and discomfort.
Right TMJ or jaw discomfort.
Less definition of the mandibular angle on the right side as compared to the left side and desires to have the right side look as prominent as the left side.
Jaws are retruded. Difficulty getting lips together and dimpling of the chin when he does put his lips together. Difficulty chewing on the left side. Nose is not prominent enough in a forward direction and width-wise towards the nasion. Left mandible is shorter vertically than the right mandible particularly in the angle area.
14. He wants a strong chin. 15. Gingival recession

PREVIOUS HISTORY: B423 had a left zygomatic orbital fracture 10 years ago. This was reduced and corrected by Dr. XX. 9 years ago, Dr. XX performed a LeFort I osteotomy as well as bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal splint osteotomies and chin advancement. After that, there was some additional work done to build up the left side of the mandible in the angle area with HA grafts. Finally, a block was placed on the left side along with some other augmentation material. The HA block was actually done before some of lateral buildup was performed. He has had orthodontics x2. The first time from 13 to 15 years ago at the age of 16. The second round of orthodontics was from 14 to 12 years ago at the age of 28. He had lingual appliances at that time and apparently it has caused some extrusion of teeth about a mm or so that perhaps created some periodontal concerns.

B423 takes no medications. He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo. The only other joint that bother him is his right knee. Also, his neck bothers him as he does take chiropractic treatment to treat the cervical problems. His neck has improved significantly with the chiropractic treatment he is currently undergoing. He may clench his teeth sometimes at night. He does not have any trouble with headaches. When he uses his jaw he is aware of clenching noises in the right joint and popping noises in the left joint. He rates his TMJ discomfort at a level of 2 to 3 and sometimes the right side is worse than the left side. The right side is particularly a little bit more sensitive when he opens wide. Average daily pain about a level of 2, jaw function at 3, diet a 2, disability at 2.

 
In frontal view, he has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. B423  is very pleased with his orbital position. He has a little prominence of his lateral nasal bone on the right side of the nose. His nose is just a little bit off to the right side probably about 2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is also off to the right side by at least 2 mm as is the mandibular dental midline. Chin may be just slightly off to the right side as well. The inferior border of the mandible on the right side is a little bit longer vertically in the chin area about 1 to 2 mm perhaps and back at the angle probably 3 to 4 mm vertical difference with the right side being lower. As B423 shifts his mandible about 2 mm to the left, it improves his facial balance transversely. He has some lip incompetence when he relaxes his lips of about 8 mm. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1.5 to 2 mm. He has a transverse cant in the occlusal plan with the left side being about 2 mm higher than the right side. Slight crossbite tendency on the right side. Otherwise, very close to being a Class I. B423 has a yaw in the position of the maxilla and mandible with the posterior maxilla and mandible being shifted about 2 to 3 mm to the right. Intranasally, turbinates appear relatively normal in size. Nasal septum is deviated significantly off to the left side although the tip of the nose is off to the right side. To palpation, he has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Right joint seems to function relatively smoothly. In the left joint there is actually an audible click at about 20 mm of opening and probably closing click at about 10 mm. Maximal opening is 51 mm. Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars. All the rest of the teeth are present. He has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch. He has a couple of bone screws in the right ramus, one in the left ramus and what appears to be interosseous wires in the left ramus area. He has a bone plate in the left zygomatic arch from his previous injury. Sinuses look reasonably clear. Left turbinate appears a little bit large compared to the right.

Waters view shows the presence of 2 bone plates. One in the zygomatic frontal area and one along the arch. Sinuses look relatively clear. Septum appears deviated. Turbinates on the left side appears enlarged and with a little airway on that side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows some arthritis present in the joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The wires in the ramus are seen and may be supporting an HA graft. There is a bone screw in the ramus with some lytic area of rounded.

Right TMJ tomogram is a little bit hard to interpret and there may be some arthritic changes here as well. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is some restricted translation but better than seen on the MRI. The condyle seems to come down close to the inferior aspect of the articular eminence.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a little bit more of a Class II occlusion than his centric relation. He has significant lip incompetence. He appears to have a high occlusal plane angle. Chin may appear a little bit strong compared to the AP position of the mandible.

 
He has decreased oropharyngeal airway with an airway dimension of only about 3 mm between the soft palate and posteropharyngeal wall area. The tongue area appears to have more normal functional airway. When B423 is placed in centric relation, he does have about a 2 mm overjet relationship and a little bit more of a Class II cuspid relationship bilaterally. B423 does have posterior crossbites at least in the first molar area. He says he is not really concerned about that, however.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP macrogenia.
Slight Class II end-on occlusion.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm lower than the right side.
Maxillary midline shifted 2 mm to the right, as is the mandibular midline and chin midline.
High occlusal plane angle.
Maxillary and mandibular posterior yaw with them being shifted towards the right side about 3 mm. Increased prominence of the left angle of the mandible. Patient's perception of the right angle is deficient compared to the left side. Lower lip ptosis with accompanying lip incompetence and hyperfunction of the mentalis muscle. (The patient has had 2 previous chin procedures.) Patient perception that the maxillary teeth on the right side have been extruded by 1 mm and he desires to have these repositioned by orthodontic anchor mechanics. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. Left TMJ pain. Extensive abrasion of most of the posterior teeth. Soft tissue and muscular changes around the chin area.
Gingival recession on the right side, maxillary teeth primarily.
Premature contact of right side teeth and slight open bite on the left side.
Chronic clenching on the right side of jaws.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Consider osteointegrated anchors to intrude the right maxillary teeth if the patient insists on this. (I do not believe this is a very good idea).
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Maxillary osteotomies to level the maxilla transversely as well as advance it in a counterclockwise direction with the incisal tips coming forward approximately 6 to 8 mm as well as correct the posterior yaw shifting the maxilla to the left about 3 mm.
 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible off to the left side about 2 to 3 mm and advance it in a counterclockwise direction. Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
AP reduction and possible vertical reduction genioplasty.
Re-suspension of mentalis muscles. Consider augmentation of left angle and posterior body of the mandible with Medpore implant.
Consider reduction of prominence of left mandibular angle by reducing the HA material approximately 3 mm.
Consider nasal septoplasty.
Consider rhinoplasty. (It may be best to do this as a secondary procedure.)
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Surgery stage II.
a. Esthetic refinements as requested by the patient.

I went through his diagnoses and the recommended treatment with him. He is concerned about his chin and reducing the chin. I told him without doing that his chin is going to be too strong and reducing the chin about 4 mm will fit into better balance with the rest of the facial structures following repositioning of the jaw structures. I answered all the questions I had time to answer today. We just ran out of time because of my schedule and we will try to address more of his questions through the phone or by E-mail.

B423 MRI Evaluation  
Age: 43/M
DOB: 
Date of MRI:  
Date of Acquisition: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have undergone some arthritic changes. Sclerosis on the top of the condyle. There may be some medial beaking but difficult to tell. Decreased lateral joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm. There appears to be discal tissue medial and anterior to the condyle. It appears that there may be some extra bony deposition along the lateral rim of the fossa but difficult to tell.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have arthritic changes although the condyle itself appears a little bit wider than the opposite side. There is definitely decreased joint space vertically. The disc appears to medially displace. A little bit of sclerosis on the top of the condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows as condyle that undergone some significant arthritic changes. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is seen to be anteriorly positioned and significantly deformed. It short anteroposteriorly. Joint space actually looks fairly good. Towards the medial side of the joint the condyle appears very thin and arthritic. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there appears to be restricted translation. The disc appears to remain anteriorly dislocated without reduction.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that also has arthritic changes. It is flattened and toward the medial side is very narrow anteroposteriorly but not quite as severe as the opposite side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On this side it actually looks as though the disc is in position. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present on the condyle. The disc appears to be in reasonable condition. It is almost as there is a pannus surrounding the disc. On opening, there is restricted translation although the disc is in position. There is slightly more translation on this side than the opposite side but still significant limitation.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly and medially dislocated without reduction and with significant deformation. Right TMJ arthritis but articular disc in position but with limited translation.


