B427 
B427 is 18 years old and is referred by Dr. XX. B427 is aware of having TMJ problems since about the age of 15 although it is possible that it could have developed prior to that time. Etiology is unknown. She is very educated and very much aware that has significant joint problems. She has been through orthodontic treatment and has had several splints made.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Constant pain. Difficulties eating most foods. Facial balance is getting progressively worse. Jaw relationship and bite is getting progressively worse.

She is aware of nighttime clenching although she states that when she first started to develop problems she was told that her problems are all related to clenching and she felt otherwise, but she says after she was told so many times she thinks that she probably does clench some now. She has no problems with earaches. She gets some tinnitus but no vertigo. She rates her TMJ at 7, average daily pain at 6, jaw function 8, diet at 9, disability at 8. B427 gets headaches about 2 to 3 times per week that occur basically all over the head at about a level of 3.

In frontal view, B427 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face and asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline slightly to the left. Chin may be just slightly towards the left by about 1 mm or so. In profile view, the upper lip and maxilla appear to be retruded about 3 to 4 mm. Chin appears to retruded about 15 to 18 mm. Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not well defined. As B427  postures her mandible forward probably about 6 to 8 mm, it significantly improves her facial profile and her chin-neckline and angles. Intraorally, B427 has all of her teeth back through the second molars in both the upper and lower jaw. Lower incisor appears to be in a little bit inclination. She has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch she also has all of her teeth back through the second molars. In centric relation, B427's lower midline is probably 2 mm perhaps off towards the left side. In centric relation, she has about a 6 mm Class III occlusal relationship on the left side and probably about 3 to 4 mm on the right side. In her centric relation, B427 only hits on the left second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion. B427 has about a 1 mm open bite. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear relatively normal. Intranasally, the septum appears straight. Turbinates appear to be pretty good size although she still appears to have good airway probably due to the fact that she has probably increased width inside the nose. B427 is not aware of any problems with snoring. She has some daytime somnolence which she attributes to being in college. She is not aware of any sleep apnea problems. B427 has some mild to moderate tenderness over the TMJs to palpation and over the styloid areas but no other areas are particularly tender. B427 has no joints that really bother her. She did fracture her sacrum about a year ago. She rides horses and was injured riding. Maximal incisal opening is about 47 mm. Excursive movements are 8 mm in each direction.
 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows that she has impacted maxillary third molars and mandibular left third molar. Right third molar is absent. Sinuses are clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size. TMJs appears severely arthritic with a lot of loss of vertical component more so on the left side than the right side.

Waters view shows that the bony septum appears fairly straight. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged and there does not appear to be a significant amount of airway. Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows what appears to be a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes. The condyle is actually postured forward in the fossa probably about 3 to 4 mm. Articular eminence has a softer angulation to it.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle postured forward in the fossa about 3 to 4 mm. Not much joint space visible between the condyle and fossa. Relatively shallow incline to the articular eminence. The styloid process on this side is visible and quite long extending and overlapping the posterior border and inferior border of the mandible. On opening, there is reasonably good translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency and posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. The mandible is AP deficient. She has significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway of only about 2 mm through a good portion of it. She has a Class II skeletal relationship. She has a vertical discrepancy at the inferior border and also at the occlusion.

Dental model analysis shows that she has a Class II open bite and it may be occluding primarily on the first and second molars. She has a Class II end-on occlusion. She has a slight anterior open bite about 1 mm and an overjet of probably about 4 to 5 mm. When placed in a Class I cuspid relationship. She has transverse maxillary deficiency and an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Teeth on the left side in the molar area appear to be significant worn and to a lesser extent the molars on the right side. I do not know if this is from equilibrations or if this is from clenching and bruxism.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ severe destruction and presence of reactive pannus. AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Class II occlusion being worse on the left side than the right side. Occludes only on the left second molars in centric relation.
Anterior open bite of 1 mm. 

Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of an AP dimension of 2 mm (normal 11 mm.) Accentuated curve of occlusion of upper arch. TMJ pain. Headaches. Impacted maxillary third molars and mandibular left third molar.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Surgical removal of mandibular left third molar.
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Open space between the upper laterals and cuspids to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. CT scans of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, expand it and down graft it posteriorly.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Surgical removal of impacted maxillary third molars.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B427 MRI Evaluation 
Age: 18/F
DOB: 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation:  
A Left TMJ coronal view reveals some type of tissue in the joint space. The condyle actually appears to be more anteriorly positioned and has undergone significant resorptive changes. Almost the entire head is gone but it appears that there is a large, sort of amorphous mass within the joint space. There is actually increased vertical joint space. There may be a little bit of discal tissue left over the top of the condyle and perhaps maybe some anterior. The condyle is very narrow mediolaterally. Fossa cortex appears to have some degenerative changes. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view likewise shows a condyle that appears to be completely resorbed and just some of the condylar neck left on the mandible. There is a slight increased joint space. There may be some discal tissue present that is highly degenerated. Minimal downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa. There appears to be degenerative changes in the fossa. The condyle is positioned far anterior in the joint with a mass of amorphous soft tissue predominately in the joint space.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that there is severe resorption of the condylar process. Remaining remnant of the condyle appears a little bit long anteroposteriorly. The condyle is sitting somewhat up towards the articular eminence. There is discal tissue present in the joint space between the condyle and posterior slope of the eminence. It is surrounded by what appears to be a reactive pannus. It appears that there are some changes occurring on the articular eminence itself and towards the medial aspect of the joint the eminence is fairly shallow. There is a significantly increased posterior joint space. There appears to be increased uptake posteriorly indicative of probably some kind of an inflammatory process. Difficult to tell what occurs on opening because the condyle is out of the image on opening.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe resorption. It is evident in about 2 or 3 views. It is actually significantly decreased vertical joint space. The condyle was positioned somewhat forward. On this side, the disc is not identifiable. There is some significant flattening of the articular eminence. There is increased uptake in the bilaminar tissue indicative of probably inflammatory process. On opening views there is some translation of the condyle. In one view, it appears that there may be disc present but it is anteriorly displaced. The condyle does translate forward some. However, joint space remains quite constricted.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ severe condylar resorption with the articular disc in position but with a reactive pannus surrounding it. Right TMJ severe resorptive arthritis with minimal evidence of discal tissue but with a reactive pannus in its place. Rule out juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.

