B429 
B429 is 8 years old and referred by Dr. XX.
Patient History
B429 has had two previous surgeries, a tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy, 4 years ago and then a pectus excavatum Nuss procedure this year. She gets occasional earaches, occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo. Her wrists bother her at times, and her legs hurt daily but not specifically in any of the joints. They are not aware of any clenching or bruxism at night. B429 used to be pretty much of a mouth breather and also had some snoring problems prior to her T&A but doesn't really have that problem anymore unless she gets some significant nasal congestion. The only medication B429 takes is Motrin but only about two times per week. She gets her headaches daily, and they are almost continuous. She rates them at about a level of 5, and they occur mainly on the top of the head toward the posterior aspect of the top. She doesn't feel as though she has any pain in the jaw joint area. Her average daily pain would be at about a level of 5. Her diet is at 0. When she gets her bad headache at a 10 level, it is usually at night at an hour before she goes to bed. There is no specific time during the day that she feels the worst. She can wake up with headaches.

Patient Concerns
Headaches
Teeth and jaws do no align
Restless sleep
Retruded lower jaw
Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B429 has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm on the left and about 2 on the right. Maxillary dental midline is about a millimeter to the left. Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm to the right as is the chin. Lower dental midline and chin midline are fairly well-aligned with each other.

In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, and cheeks, and nose. Chin is probably about 15 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is short, although chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. Lower lip is well postured behind the upper lip. Has just a slight obtuse nasolabial angle.

Intraorally, she has her lower incisors in place. She has retained primary C's and D's. Six-year molars are in bilaterally. No room for the permanent cuspids to erupt in at this time. In the upper arch, she has permanent centrals, and laterals are beginning to come in. She has her six-year molars in. She has retained C's, D's, and E's in the upper arch. Upper lateral incisor is in significant lingual inclination. Upper arch is relatively symmetric anteroposteriorly. She has a super Class II occlusal relationship bilaterally. She has posterior crossbites. She has an overjet of about 13 mm. She has about a 3-mm overbite relationship. She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth although it is quite thin around the left central.

Turbinates are moderate in size, but it appears she may have adequate airway around them.
To palpation, she has some mild to moderate tenderness over the temporalis muscles, TMJs, styloid area, and a little milder tenderness over the masseters, medial pterygoids, SCMs, posterior neck, and shoulders.

On opening, she has an occasional click on the left side at about 15 mm of opening and about 5 mm of closing. Sometimes when she opens, the disc is nonreducing. Right side seems to function reasonably smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is about 48 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 8 mm and to the left 7 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows that the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear fairly large. In the upper arch, she has retained C's, D's, and E's. In the lower arch, she has retained D's and E's. All the permanent teeth are either erupted or are developing. Third molars are not observed at this time. Second molars are unerupted as are the permanent cuspids, first and second bicuspids bilaterally. In the lower arch, the C's, D's, and E's are developing. Appears that there is not going to be room for all those teeth on both sides, and she may need a first bicuspid perhaps extracted in that lower arch. Condyles appear reasonably well-formed. Articular eminences appear relatively normal in size. Mandibular cuspids are positioned at the inferior border of the mandible and have some slight mesial inclination. She has had some primary teeth extracted.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit flattened on the posterior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep and long. Good joint space is present. Concerned as to whether she was in central relationship when this x-ray was taken in centric occlusion.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that seems to have fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There is good joint space. It is quite possible that she could have been in a slightly anterior mandibular position and may not have been in centric relation when this x-ray was taken.

On opening, there is fairly good translation in both joints being a little bit greater on the left side than the right side. Condyle on the left side actually looks a little bit better than the right condyle. The right condyle appears somewhat small.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. Turbinates are moderately large and does not appear to be any significant airway passage.
Cephalometrically in centric relation, she has a very retruded mandible. Oropharyngeal airway is quite constricted with an airway dimension of only about 2 mm at the soft palate level and about 2 mm at the base of the tongue.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation without reduction on the right side and occasional reduction on the left side and significant deformation
Severe AP mandibular deficiency
Transverse maxillary deficiency
Slight posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Super Class II malocclusion
Retained bilateral mandibular D's and E's and maxillary C's, D's, and E's
Maxillary lateral incisors erupting palatally relatively to the other teeth
Severe crowding, lower arch with inadequate room for the cuspids and bicuspids to erupt in
Vertical inclination of lower incisors
Overjet of 13 mm
Lack of attached gingiva around the mandibular left central incisor
Severe headaches
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Earaches Tinnitus
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm (normal 11 mm)
Probable sleep apnea syndrome
Moderately enlarged turbinates
Possible moderate nasal airway obstruction

Recommended Treatment
Sleep study
Surgery, Stage I
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Presurgical orthodontics Maxillary expansion
Align and level maxillary arch Consider extracting mandibular primary molars as well as the permanent first bicuspids
Align and level lower arch

Surgery, Stage II
Mandibular advancement of approximately 13 mm
Consider possible maxillary surgery to provide optimal functional and aesthetic balance
Consider possible inferior turbinectomies if they are found to cause nasal airway obstruction

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B429 MRI Scan Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Reading: 

Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears to have undergone some degenerative changes. Appears to have lost vertical height. Decreased joint space vertically and perhaps bone on bone contact particularly toward the medial side. Lateral rim of the fossa appears to curve inferiorly quite a bit. Some sclerosis present on the condylar head. Kind of small bony mass appears to be present medial to the condyle. Could be some degenerative changes in the fossa.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is narrow mediolaterally similar to the opposite side. Appears to have lost vertical height. Joint space is a little bit better on this side vertically. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly a moderate amount, about 2 to 3 mm. Could be some degenerative changes in the fossa but difficult to tell.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that actually seems to have fairly good morphology though maybe slightly small compared to the size of the fossa. Condyle is postured downward and forward in the fossa related to either postural positioning versus long-term splint therapy versus idiopathic condylar resorption creating hyperplasia of the synovial tissues. Appears to be some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep and long in length. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced with some deformation, although it appears it still may be salvageable. No particular inflammatory process present.

On opening, there is restricted translation with the condyle remaining posterior to the tip of the articular eminence. Disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that toward the medial side appears to be a little bit more degenerated than the opposite side. Out laterally it appears to have a little bit better morphology. Some anterior beaking present particularly toward the medial side. Articular eminence is moderately steep but fairly long in length. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and significantly more deformed than the opposite side. It is sitting down toward the apex of the articular eminence. Could be a little inflammation in the bilaminar tissues.

On opening, there is some restricted translation, and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.
Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with significant deformation and without reduction


