B431
B431 is 29 years old. Referred by Dr XXXX. B431's TMJ problems she believes she began when she was about 13 years of age of unknown etiology. She had orthodontics from about the age of 12 through 15. She gets headaches about once every 2 weeks at about a level of 3 that are predominantly on the right side in the temporal area and up towards the top of the head. She is not aware of any TMJ pain and her average pain around the head and neck area is about a 1. She rates her jaw function at 2, diet at 1, disability at 1. She takes no medications. She has no earaches, occasional tinnitus, frequently vertigo, but no hearing loss. The left knee bothers her. She is allergic to cats and bee stings and has no known allergy to jewelry. She clenches and grinds her teeth at night and also during the day. She is predominantly a mouth breather particularly at night but is unaware of snoring, although she does have some mild daytime somnolence. She is not aware of any sleep apnea problem.

In frontal view, B431 has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third place, but has asymmetry in the lower third face. The upper length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 0. The maxillary dental midline is slightly to the left about 1 mm. The mandibular dental midline is also a little bit off to the left probably about 1 mm. Chin is shifted probably about 5 or 6 mm off towards the right side. The left side of the face is probably about 8 to 10 mm lower than the right side. In profile, she has about 2 to 3 mm of AP maxillary deficiency. In the mandible, the chin appears to have reasonably good projection, but she does have a prominent labial mental fold. The chin does appear a little bit strong compared to the lower lip by maybe 2 to 3 mm. B431 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars in both the upper and lower jaw. She is basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship. She has a significant transverse cant in the occlusal plane. The right cuspids are at least 4 mm higher on the right side than the left side. The lower right cuspid is about 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid in both upper and lower arches. She has slight increased fullness in the left mandibular angle area on the left side compared to the right side. There appears to be a little bit of a posterior yaw in both the maxillary and mandibular arches being shifted towards the left side about 2 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. Intranasally, at least anteriorly the turbinates appear relatively normal and septum appears reasonably straight. She does have about a 3 mm anterior over bite relationship. To palpation, she has some very mild tenderness over the TMJ areas. The incisal opening is 68 mm and opening without discomfort 50 mm. The excursion movements are 13 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. She has a root canal on the maxillary left first molar. Sinuses look relatively clear.

Coronal view shows that the septum does deviate a little bit off towards the right side in the bony area. The turbinates appear enlarged on the left side. The right-sided turbinates are more normal in size.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. The left turbinate is hyperplastic and the right one appears relatively normal in size. The septum appears reasonably straight in this view.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a relatively normal mediolateral width. Vertical height is not too abnormal. The joint space looks reasonably good, although it is decreased at the lateral aspect.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly reasonably morphology. The joint space looks reasonably good.
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have a little sclerosis on the top of it. The joint space looks fairly good. The articular eminence is moderately steep. Condylar head may be somewhat longer than the opposite site.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. There is good joint space surrounding it. The articular eminence is slightly more shallow than the right side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B431 has a low mandibular occlusal plane facial morphology. The left side of the mandible is lower than the right side by probably 5 to 6 mm. There is a vertical difference at the occlusal plane level as well. The maxilla and mandible appear to be AP deficient, although the chin is relatively prominent. Oropharyngeal airway looks fairly good. The turbinates extend posterior to the hard palate. She has a low occlusal plane angle, but basically a Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Left mandibular condylar osteochondroma. Rule out articular disc dislocations.
Maxillary AP and right-sided vertical hypoplasia. Mandibular asymmetry being longer on the left side and shorter on the right side. Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being shorter than the left side.
Class I occlusion.
Left nasal turbinate hyperplasia with nasal airway obstruction. Headaches.
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Medications: Klonopin to see if this decreases her nocturnal clenching and relieves her of morning headaches.
2.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
3.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. b.	Align level mandibular arch.
4.	Surgery. a.	Left mandible high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning with ligament repair. b.	Maxillary osteotomies to level it transversely, advance it, and down graft it in the front. c.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies to align on the facial midline. d.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to decrease chin prominence. e.	Left nasal partial turbinectomy.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B431 MRI 
DOB:	
DATE OF ACQUISITION:
DATE OF INTERPRETATION:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. It appears there may be some discal tissue present on the joint, but there is some discal tissue anterior to the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view show a condyle that appears larger than the opposite side. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm. There appears to be some discal tissue anterior to the condyle. There is some decreased lateral vertical joint space.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. There is a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. The disc is positioned just slightly forward in the fossa more so at the lateral extent of the joint. Medially, the disc is in a little bit better position but out laterally it is just slightly in a forward position. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology in this view. The disc is slightly anteriorly positioned particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. The condyle is somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa. There is a greater amount of fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces as compared to the opposite side.

In the dynamic view, left TMJ shows a reduction and fairly good translation of the disc and condyle. The disc appears at least at this cut to be in reasonable position, although just slightly forward from the most ideal place.

Right TMJ dynamic view shows that there is an early reduction of the condyle in the right joint and fairly good translation of the disc and condyle. The disc itself does not seem to slide very much and may have an adhesion anteriorly to the articular eminence.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ relatively normal anatomy with just possible slight anterior position of the disc.
Right TMJ articular disc anteriorly displaced with early reduction.

