B432
B432 is 42 years old. She has been diagnosed as having rheumatoid arthritis. She takes the following medications:
Methotrexate 1 times per 5 pills.
Lamictal 200 mg once per day.
Lexapro 5 mg per day.
Ambien 10 mg q.h.s.
Advil 600 to 1200 mg per day.

Other medicines she takes p.r.n. include Lyrica, hydrocodone or oxycodone.
Her primary concerns include the following:
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Lower jaw is retruded.

HISTORY OF CURRENT CONDITION. She was diagnosed as having rheumatoid arthritis 10 years ago. Last year, she fell sustaining a left subcondylar fracture. She was not treated until 4 weeks post injury and then her jaws were wired together for 5 weeks. She now has the severe TMJ pain and headaches.

Clinical examination shows that she is fairly symmetric in the middle and upper third face, but in the lower third face she is asymmetric. Lower dental midline is shifted to the left 2 mm and chin 6 to 7 mm. There is a transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being up 2 mm. The left side of the face is 4 mm vertically shorter. In profile view, she has fairly good balance with the upper lip, cheeks, and nose, but the chin is retruded at least probably 6 to 8 mm. She is just slightly Class II by about 2 mm on the right side and about 5-6 mm Class II on the left side. She has an anterior deep bite of 2 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy, although she has some constricture to fascial pillars. She has a huge perforation in her nose with two-thirds of the septum gone. She may have some mild snoring, but no reported sleep apnea issues. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness in the medial pterygoid muscles and in the left styloid area. She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 9, diet and disability at 8. She gets daily headaches in the frontal area bilaterally and left temporal area at about a level of 7. Incisal opening is 37 mm, but only 18 without pain. Excursion movements are 3 mm in each direction. Most of her other joints are a problem for her pain-wise due to the rheumatoid arthritis.

Radiographic evaluation shows that she has a subcondylar fracture with a malunion on the left side over the functioning articular eminence. On the right side, she appears to have an arthritic condyle. She is missing all four third molars and most of the crown is gone on the maxillary left second molar. She has lots of crowns on her posterior teeth.

Waters view shows that her nasal airway and sinuses appear relatively clear.
Right TMJ tomogram shows an arthritic condyle and some flattening of the articular eminence.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a subcondylar fracture with the condyle functioning beneath the articular eminence. On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a high occlusal plane angle and a skeletal Class II relationship and decreased oropharyngeal airway.

Basic diagnoses:
Malunion left mandibular subcondylar fracture.
Bilateral tempomandibular joint rheumatoid arthritis.
Mandibular hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Maxillary hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Decreased posterior oropharyngeal airway.
External nasal deformity.

Recommended treatment would as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch.
Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward.
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Multiple maxillary osteotomies with bone plate stabilization and hydroxyapatite grafting.
Abdominal fat grafts to bilateral TMJs.
Bilateral coronoidotomies.
Nasal reconstructions.
HGR implant to ensure mandible.
Postsurgical orthodontics.

This treatment plan should get her the best possible treatment outcome.
B432 MRI EVALUATION
AGE: 42/F
DOB:
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:

Left TMJ coronal view shows a fossa that has a fairly good shape. The condyle is not in the fossa, but was actually positioned forward more on the articular eminence area. There is severe condylar resorption and sclerosis on the head of the condyle. I do not see any disc tissue. There appears to be some erosions on the articular eminence with the condyles articulating. There appears to be a mass of bone that extends off the medial aspect of the condyle. There appears to be a degenerative kind of tissue up in the fossa area.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe degenerative changes. The condyle is functioning on the inferior posterior aspect of the articular eminence. There is significantly increased posterior joint space of probably 6-8 mm. There appears to be bone-on-bone contact. There are erosions and osteophytes sticking off the condylar stump. The articular eminence has areas of erosion with a moderate inclination. There appears to be a inflammatory process. There is a hot spot in the bone aspect beyond the joint area. There is some discal tissue anterior to the condyle, but appears significantly degenerated. On opening, there is some moderate translation, but the remnant of the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. Again, it appears that there could be bone-on-bone contact in this joint. In the opening sequence, the condyle is actually positioned a little bit better in the fossa, although it is still about an estimated 3-4 mm anterior to its normal position.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle also appears to be postured forward in the fossa. There is significant degenerative changes associated with this condyle. Most of the condylar head is gone. There are erosions in the remaining condylar head. There may be some degenerative changes in the fossa as well. There may be discal tissue medial and anterior to the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that actually does appears to be in a little bit better position within the fossa, but with a decreased superior and posterior joint space. There may be some discal tissue anterior to the condyle. Some degenerative changes appear to be present in the fossa. It appears that there is probably bone-on-bone contact. On opening, there is a significantly restricted translation and residual discal tissue remains anteriorly positioned. There is some anterior beaking on this condyle and degenerative changes within the condylar head.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocated without reduction severely deformed. Right TMJ severe arthritis. The patient candidate for total joint prostheses.

