B433
B433 is 36 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX.
Patient History

B433 is in good health except for her TMJ problems. She has an allergy to TETRACYCLINE. B433's problems began when she was about 18 years old. She believes it began because of stress. She first became aware of significant problems when she was at a rugby game where she apparently developed a dislocation of her jaw. She was treated with some medications. Since then, she underwent extensive splint therapy and TENS treatment. Then she married her husband, who was in the service, and went to an Army doctor, and they essentially destroyed her splints, and since then she has been on and off splints. She received her most recent one about six months ago. Initially it fit okay, but then she started noticing that her bite was changing and that the splint no longer fit together, and she was getting a significant shift in her bite as well. She has undergone physical therapy, yoga, massage therapy, stress reduction classes, and the Rolfing treatments.

She currently takes Advil 800 mg, usually at the most twice a day. She occasionally takes Restoril probably the 15 mg dose that she takes at night to help sleep but no more than once a week. She just takes it when she is so exhausted that she needs to get a good night's sleep.

She has no problems with earaches, does get some tinnitus, but has no vertigo or hearing loss. She does get some popping in her shoulders but has no problems with any of her other joints. She does have a history of twisting, spraining, or fracturing her ankles, but they don't cause any problems for her now. She does have some chronic fatigue problems. She thinks she may clench her teeth some at night but does not know that for sure. She rates her headaches that she gets about twice a week at a level of 7 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. She does have continuous headaches at a level of 3, and her headaches can escalate to a 9.

Patient Concerns
Noises in the joints such as clicking, popping, and crepitus
Severe headaches Severe TMJ pain
Neck pain
Sleep disorder
Bite worsening
Difficulties eating and chewing

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B433 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline and chin are just slightly off to the right side about a millimeter.

In profile view, she has fairly good balance with the upper lip and cheeks, although the upper lip may be just slightly AP deficient. Distance from chin to neck is short. She has some fullness in the submental area. Chin-neckline is not well-defined. Chin is retruded by approximately 10 mm.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. She appears to have adequate attached gingiva round the lower teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm. She has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship, a little bit worse on the right side as compared to the left side. Has an overjet of probably about 4 mm. B433 feels that her open bite has developed and has been progressing more rapidly during this past year. She does have problems with snoring. She also has a very restless sleep. She does get extremely tired during the day and has to have a Diet Coke about 2 o'clock in the afternoon in order to keep going. If she doesn't have her Diet Coke in the afternoon, she feels that she may have difficulties falling asleep while driving. This is the only caffeine that she drinks. There is just a slight cant in her occlusion with the right cuspid being elevated about a millimeter.

Oropharyngeal airway looks clear.
To palpation, she has moderate pain over the temporalis muscles, styloid areas, TMJs, posterior neck, and mild tenderness over the masseter muscles, SCMs, and shoulders. Maximal incisal opening is 38 mm but opening with significant discomfort 21 mm. Excursive movements in each direction are about 5 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows that she is missing her four third molars but has all the rest of her teeth. Sinuses appear clear. Nasal airway appears clear. Turbinates appear fairly small or relatively normal in size. Condyles appear very sclerotic and degenerated with the right one appearing a little bit worse than the left one. Articular eminences are extremely flat.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone significant condylar resorption. There is some peaking at the posterior head of the condyle and maybe a little osteophyte growing off there. Articular eminence is relatively flat. Extremely flattening on the head of the condyle with a significant downward anterior slope. Some anterior beaking is present. Decreased vertical joint space.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a significantly decreased superior and anterior joint space. Posterior joint space appears slightly increased but may be due to the fact that the mandible appears postured forward slightly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There appears to be breakdown in the trabecular bone of the condylar head itself. Opening shows very minimal translation bilaterally. Both condyles look significantly resorbed and arthritic.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear, and the nasal airway appears good. Fairly reasonable facial symmetry seems to be present. Maxillary midline appears just a little bit off toward the left side of the nasal septum.

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class II occlusal relationship. She has a decreased oropharyngeal airway with a dimension at the soft palate level being somewhere between 3 to 5 mm, and at the base of the tongue it appears to be only about 5 mm in one area. She has a significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway. B433's head is tipped up some for the lateral cephalometric radiograph, and if her head would have been in a little bit better position, her airway may have been decreased even more than the dimension on the ceph being analyzed.

There is a tooth-size discrepancy of only about 1 mm.
Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis
Mandibular AP hypoplasia
AP maxillary hypoplasia
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia
Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
Class II end-on occlusion
Anterior open bite of 2 mm and overjet of 4 mm
Slight accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
Severe headaches Severe TMJ pain Myofascial pain
Masticatory dysfunction
Sleep disorder
Sleep apnea symptoms Snoring Daytime somnolence
Tooth size discrepancy of 1 mm

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch. Try to extrude upper incisors slightly to help correct for the accentuated curve of Spee
Align and level mandibular arch. Consider stripping lower anteriors removing about a millimeter of tooth structure to help correct for the minor tooth-size discrepancy

CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol)
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla, level the accentuated curve of Spee, and advance it
Bilateral coronoidectomies Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
Other Systems
B433 has problems in the right shoulder as it does pop, but she has no pain there. She had about a two-year period around the age of 18 to 20 where she had many infections and perhaps as many as 10. It turned out that her husband was cheating on her, and later on it was felt that this may have been the source of these recurrent infections. She sometimes gets the feeling that she can't empty her bladder. She has four children, ages 14, 12, 9, and 3. She had one miscarriage called a molar pregnancy where there is a fetus and then all of a sudden it just breaks down, and the cells can travel around the body and produce cancerous kind of growths apparently. This can be a recurring phenomenon. This happened after her second child. She had an abnormal Pap smear about five years ago that required a large cone biopsy. Then when she was pregnant, she had to have her cervix sewn shut, and she had a C-section with the last child. During early years in her first marriage, she did have problems with recurrent vaginal yeast infections. She had a lot of problems with pink eye during her high school and college years because she worked a lot with young daycare-age kids. She does get tinnitus. She gets a cold or viral kind of problem about two times per year. She had bronchitis x 5 and pneumonia x 2 as a child. She does have genital herpes. She is quite tired, and she has had her thyroid checked, and it is normal. The other problem that she has had is she had Parvo B19 virus x 2. In a child, this is called Fifth's disease. In children it only lasts about 48 hours, but in adults it lasted in her for each round about three months. She had a parakeet for one year as a child and thinks that they gave it away. For the past year, they have lived in a new home, and they have problems with about 20 to 30 pigeons that have nested in the roof of their house. She had a cat as a child for about four years and then had a cat for one year more recently. About three years ago, they got two kittens from a shelter, and both of these kittens were very sick, and they had them for about two weeks. They would sneeze all the time and were very sick, and they finally took them back to the shelter as when they took them to the veterinarian, they veterinarian said they were quite sick and would cost hundreds of dollars for medications to try to fix them. She has had no exposure to dogs or hoofed animals and no implants.

B433 MRI Evaluation
Date of Acquisition:	
Date of Reading:
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has undergone significant resorption. Condyle is extremely sclerotic. Decreased lateral joint space and vertical joint space. Condyle appears somewhat narrow anteroposteriorly. Fossa appears to be intact, although there may be some bony extrusions from the fossa and some osteophytes protruding downward. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 2 or 3 mm.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has severe sclerosis and loss of vertical height. There are osteophytes extruding medially and out laterally from the condyle. There are some osteophytes sticking down from the fossa, although they don't appear to be quite as extensive as the other side. Condyle is somewhat narrow mediolaterally. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly a little bit more than the opposite side, perhaps 3 to 4 mm. Decreased superior and lateral joint space. May be some discal tissue anteriorly.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has lost significant volume. Significantly decreased posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep and fairly long in length, particularly toward the lateral aspect of the joint. Significant anterior beaking on the head of the condyle. Significantly decreased posterior joint space. Articular disc sits beneath the articular eminence and is severely deformed.

On opening, there is minimal translation of the condyle, and there is virtually no movement of the articular disc itself. The patient appears to be in a closed lock situation if, in fact, she is open as wide as she can open. There is some translation forward of the condyle in the fossa probably about 3 to 4 mm at the most.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that appears to have lost significant volume. Decreased posterior joint space, although not quite as significant as the opposite side. Anterior beaking is present and a lot of sclerosis present through the condylar head and neck. Articular eminence is moderately steep and fairly long. Articular disc sits beneath the articular eminence and is fairly significantly deformed although not quite as severe as the opposite side. Could be a little inflammation in the bilaminar tissue on this side.

On opening, there is a little bit better translation than the opposite side, but the disc remains nonreducing, and there is very minimal translation of the disc at all. The condyle comes down toward the articular eminence but not onto it. Translation is much better on this side as compared to the opposite side.

Impression:
Left TMJ severe osteoarthritis with articular disc dislocations, severe degeneration, and minimal transilatory abilities with a closed lock situation
Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and significant deformation with a closed lock situation
Nonsalvageable left disc and probable nonsalvageable right disc
Probable candidate for total joint prostheses

