B434
B434 is 30 years old. Referred by Dr. XXXX. Three years ago, B434 developed RSD, or chronic pain syndrome, of her right knee and lower leg. It was not diagnosed until two years ago. She currently takes the following medications:
1. Celebrex 200 mg 1 to 2 per day. 2. Wellbutrin 450 mg totally for the day. 3. Yaz. 4. Klonopin 1 to 1.25 mg about 30 minutes to an hour before bedtime. 5. Aleve occasionally.

She has had an adverse reaction to penicillin.
B434's TMJ problems, as far as she is aware, began about last year when she would develop pain in the right joint upon yawning. Last summer was the first that she really noticed that her bite had changed and it was difficult for her to bite with her front teeth. The etiology for her TMJ problem is unknown. She does have a previous history of being thrown from a horse and landing on her tailbone when she was 11 years old. When she was 15, she ran cross-country and developed pain in her back and right-sided sciatica. She was diagnosed with a compression fracture in her back. Relative to her TMJ problems, the first therapy was begun when Dr. XXXX constructed a splint for her. He also placed her on some digital mouth exercises and increased the opening from 30 mm to about 40 mm.

B434 gets headaches once or twice per week at about a level 3 in the temporal and frontal areas predominantly. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 5 that is predominantly in the neck and shoulders. As far as intensity, she rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 3, disability at 1. She gets occasional earaches, but no tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her right knee, left elbow, right foot, back, and she has soreness in her fingers. She was diagnosed has having idiopathic RSD of the right leg and knee . She has had sympathetic nerve blocks for the RSD and the first one helped, but the two or three more that she had after that were of no benefit. She has also had Botox injections and she had no improvement. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and she finds herself doing that sometimes during the day.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B434 appears to have fairly good facial asymmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary mandible are midline so pretty much facial midline. Chin is slightly to the left 2 mm. In profile view, she has fairly good balance with the cheeks and nose. Chin appears retruded. She has some fullness of submental area. Chin neck angles, however, are reasonably well defined. Chin protrudes about 5 to 8 mm. Intraorally, B434 has all her lower teeth back to the second molars. She has some lingual tori present. She has good attached gingiva tissue around the lower anterior arch. Some very mild crowding of the lower front teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars. She has anterior overbite of about 3 mm. She has a Class I end-on cuspid relationship by about 2-3 mm. She probably has an overjet of about 2-3 mm. Biting together, she occludes only on her right second molars. All the other teeth are out of occlusion. If she bites real hard, she may get some contact on the left second molars. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. Tonsils are moderate in size, but uninflamed and she gives no history of having tonsillitis in the last few years. On reassessment, she does state that she last had tonsillitis 11 months ago. She gets pretty sore throats when she does get the tonsillitis. Turbinates appear relatively normal in size and septum appears reasonably straight. I do not believe there is a real significant obstruction. Luminal valves are a little bit constricted. Columella is moderately wide. Maximum opening is about 37 mm, opening without discomfort 30 mm. Excursion to the right is 6 mm and to the left 6 mm. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the temporalis, posterior neck, shoulder, TMJ areas and mild tenderness over the masseters, medial pterygoids, and styloid areas.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows that she is absent of all fourth and third molars. It appears that she probably occludes on the right second molars with the rest of the teeth being out of occlusion. Sinuses look relatively clear. Both condyles appear arthritic. Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Septum is reasonably straight in the bony area. Right turbinate may be a little bit large towards the posterior aspect, and the left side might be slightly also. Right TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle is flattened and appears to have a little erosion in it. Posterior aspect is taller than the anterior. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On left TMJ tomogram, it appears that condyle may be partially forward slightly. There are some arthritic changes in the joint. Posterior and superior joint spaces appear slightly enlarged indicative of perhaps forward posture when this particular x-ray was taken. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is restricted translation of both TMJs. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows she is probably postured forward slightly when this x-ray was taken, not all the way back and centric relationship. Oropharyngeal dimension is about 5 to 6 mm at the base of the tongue and about 2 mm at the soft palate level.

B434's diagnoses would be as follows:
1. Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with changes compatible with connective tissue autoimmune disease.
2. AP mandibular deficiency.
3. Anterior apertognathia.
4. Class II end-on occlusion.
5. Occludes only on the mandibular right second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion.
6. TMJ pain.
7. Headaches.
8. Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1. Presurgical orthodontics. a. Align and level maxillary arch.
b. Align and level mandibular arch. Consider slenderizing the lower anterior teeth to keep from flairing them any further forward. c. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol). 2. Surgery. a. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). 3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine and retain the occlusion.

B434 MRI EVALUATION
AGE: 30/F
DOB:
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has some bony changes with it. There appears to be some resorption on the medial side of the condyle. There is a cystic spot in the central medial aspect of the condylar head. There appears to be discal tissue present in the joint, but the disc seems a little bit short mediolaterally. There may be a reactive pannus around the disc. In other views, it appears that there is a decreased joint space vertically. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to be missing some of the cortex on the superior head. There is a little of anterior beaking present. There are bony changes, actually perhaps almost like an osteophyte sticking out from the articular eminence. The articular eminence is quite long in length vertically. This appears degenerated, perhaps even slightly posteriorly displaced. The anterior part of the disc is very difficult to identify. It appears as though just the posterior band almost is remaining. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. It appears there may be some erosions of the articular eminence. More medial there is almost no evidence of discal tissue which destruction process appears greater medially. It appears the roof of the fossa may have some degenerative changes as well more medially. There does appear to be a little bit of a cystic area in the medial aspect of the condyle where the trabeculation appears to have degenerated. In T2 films, it appears that the disc may be slightly posteriorly displaced, but it appears degenerated. On opening, there is restricted translation of the condyle. The condyle comes about two-thirds of the way down the articular eminence. It appears there is almost no joint space with almost bone-on-bone contact. Residual discal tissue is posterior to the condylar head. There do appear to be degenerative changes along the posterior aspect of the articular eminence. There appears to be progressive pathologic process causing destruction of the condyle as well as degenerative changes on the articular eminence.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost some vertical height. There does appear to be some discal tissue in the joint, but there appears to a reactive pannus around it as well. There appears to be more resorption on the medial side of the condyle than the lateral. The lateral actually has a little lateral point extension sticking out. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. There may be reactive pannus around the discal tissue. The disc is less evident more anteriorly. The condyle appears to have undergone maybe a little bit more resorption than the opposite side.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is undergoing degenerative changes. There is some anterior beaking and there is erosion on the anterosuperior head of the condyle. It appears to have some degenerative changes, although not quite as progressive as the opposite side. There is some fluid in the superior joint space. The disc is a little bit more degenerated as would be expected with autoimmune disease. There may be some discal tissue anteriorly displaced in front of the condyle. On opening, there is restricted translation of the condyle with it coming about two-thirds down the articular eminence. There may be some discal tissue anteriorly displaced and perhaps a little bit posteriorly, but overall it appears quite degenerated. In some areas, it appears there is almost bone-on-bone contact.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ significant degenerative changes of the condyle and fossa with degenerative changes of the articular disc. Right TMJ significant degenerative changes of the condyle and fossa with degenerative changes of the articular disc. Probable candidate for total joint prostheses.

