B435 
B435 is 15 years and 7 months of age. Referred by Dr. XXXX. Primary concerns that B435 has includes the following:

Jaws are out of alignment.
Crowding of the teeth.
Overbite.
He currently takes no medications, but takes Concerta 54 mg daily through the school year. He does not have any significant airway problems. He did have a nasal fracture about a year-and-a-half ago, but it was reduced and he has had no subsequent problems. He gets occasional popping in his joint joints that started at about the age of 13. He gets headaches about ten per month. Headaches occur predominantly in the forehead and temporal areas. He is aware of clenching his teeth during the day. No earaches, but occasional tinnitus and moderate problems of vertigo primarily when he stands up quickly. No other joint problems are present.

B435 states he became aware of some TMJ problems at the age of 13 of unknown etiology where the jaws would occasionally pop. The popping occurs more on the right side than the left side. He rates his average headaches at a level of 4 in the temporal and frontal areas. He rates TMJ pain and discomfort at a level of 1, average daily pain around the head and neck area at a 4, jaw function at 1, diet at 0, and disability at 0. He does not feel that he has any airway problems.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B435 has fairly good left-to-right facial asymmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is zero. The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline. The nasal tip is about 3 mm off towards the left side. In profile view, he has just some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 mm, but the chin may be retruded about 15-18 mm. The chin neckline is shorter, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined. He has a head postured forward neck position. Intraorally, he has got all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. There is some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch. He appears to have adequate attached gingiva. The second molars are slightly covered with soft tissue at the most posterior aspect. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars present. There is just a slight Class II occlusal tendency by about 2 mm. He has about a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship. He has got about a 1 mm overjet. Oropharynx appears clear and normal in architecture. Turbinates appear moderate in size. The septum is deviated significantly off towards the right side. He has no sleep apnea or airway issues that are apparent. To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the retromandibular areas bilaterally, but no other pain around the head and neck area. On opening and closing, his joints function smoothly most of the time, but he would occasionally get a popping kind of noise in the joints. Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm. Excursion movements to the right 10 mm, to the left 11 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of the maxillary impacted third molars and mandibular left impacted third molar. The right third molar is absent. Sinuses look relatively clear. The septum appears deviated off towards the right side. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. The nasal septum is deviated severely off towards the right side, and, in fact, it appears that there is a large septal spur that may be even touching against the lateral wall of the nose. Left turbinate appears quite large. Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle and condylar neck that appear a little small in size. Articular eminence is fairly flat. It is difficult to evaluate joint spaces. Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle where the head and neck appear somewhat short in length. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. The joint space looks a little bit more appropriate on this side as compared to the opposite side. On opening, there is good translation in both condyles. The small size of the condylar head and neck can be observed.
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that unfortunately he was posturing his mandible forward when this was taken. On the ceph, he is biting end-to-end and the incisors are not in centric relationship so this x-ray would need to be redone. Oropharyngeal airway appears reasonably good with an airway of about 8 mm at the base of the tongue and also at the soft palate level. Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation (awaiting MRI for confirmation). AP maxillary hyperplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Impacted maxillary third molars bilaterally and impacted mandibular left third molar.
Nasal septum deviated severely off towards the right side creating nasal airway obstruction.
Left nasal turbinate hyperplasia.
Headaches.
Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.
Overangulation of lower anteriors.
Significant crowding of the lower anterior arch.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
MRI of left and right TMJs to determine health and position of the articular discs.
Extract maxillary second bicuspids and mandibular first bicuspids. Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Lose some posterior anchorage. Open up 1 to 1.5 mm of space between each maxillary lateral incisor and cuspid to correct for the tooth size discrepancy (3 mm). Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors, if MRI confirms discs are displaced. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward in a counterclockwise direction. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward in a counterclockwise direction.
Surgical removal of three impacted third molars.
Nasal septoplasty. Left partial inferior turbinectomy. Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to place bonding or veneers on the maxillary lateral incisors.

B435 MRI
AGE: 15/M DOB:
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone considerable condylar resorption with lots of vertical and mediolateral condylar volume loss. The articular disc is medially displaced and significantly deformed. There is a small osteophyte sticking up in the condyle. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. There is almost no lateral space with bone coming down from the lateral rim of the fossa. There is severe degenerative changes of the condyle and disc.

Right TMJ coronal view shows decreased size vertically as well as mediolaterally. The disc is displaced medial and anteriorly about 3 to 4 mm.
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is small in size vertically and anteroposteriorly particularly towards the medial side of the joint. There is anterior beaking present. The articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is sitting anterior beneath the articular eminence. The disc is thickened and shortened anteroposteriorly. On opening, it appears that the disc may be non-reducing.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is very narrow anteroposteriorly. It appears to have lost vertical height as well. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting down towards the superior aspect of the articular eminence. The disc is short and thickened. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle, but the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ severe condylar absorption and articular disc anteromedially displaced without reduction. Right TMJ severe loss of condylar volume with articular disc anteromedially displaced without reduction.
Probable MRI changes compatible with AICR. The forward disc may still be salvageable.

