B436 
B436 is 46 years old. B436's problems began 7 months ago when she began developing pain around her jaw joints and associated areas. The etiology is unknown except she chewed some gum around the onset of the pain. She had her tonsils and adenoids removed last year as the ENT doctor thought it could be related to the ear pain that she was having. She also has been placed on some medications for treatment. She currently takes:

1,	Ibuprofen 800 mg t.i.d.
2.	Flexeril 1/2 tablet q.h.s.
3.	Synthroid 0.125 mg q.d.
B436 rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 2, diet and disability at 4. She gets headaches at a level of 6 and they have been predominantly on the left side in the left temporal area but now are occurring on the right side as well. She gets earaches on the left side, but no tinnitus and occasional vertigo but no hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism, however, she does wake up hurting in the mornings and also during the day after eating or chewing. She has no problems with snoring, daytime somnolence, nor sleep apnea. She wakes up usually one time at night to take an ibuprofen.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B436 has good facial balance. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 2.5. The maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are pretty much aligned with each other. Chin may be shifted just slightly to the right side by maybe 2-3 mm. B436 does have a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 2 mm higher than the left side in the cuspid area. In profile, she has a reasonably good facial balance, although the maxilla and mandible may be just slightly AP deficient. Intraorally, B436 has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars present and also in the upper arch. She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with about a 4 mm deep bite. B436 has a maximum opening of about 39 mm and opening without too much discomfort at 25 mm. Excursion movement to the right is 6 mm, to the left 8 mm. Intranasally, she has a hypertrophied turbinate of moderate size in the left side of the nose and on the right side the turbinate is more normal in size. The septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side. She may have some slight left-sided nasal airway obstruction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all the rest of the teeth are present. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Left turbinate appears enlarged. Both condyles appear arthritic. Coronal view shows that she has a significantly enlarged turbinate in the left side of the nose. The bony septum appears fairly straight, although there may be some curvature in the cartilaginous portion of the septum anteriorly, at least on clinical evaluation. The sinuses appear relatively clear.

Axial view shows that the left turbinate is quite large and seems to create a decreased functional airway on that side, but the right side is wide open and the sinuses appear clear.

Left TMJ coronal tomogram show what appears to be a significantly decreased lateral joint space and also vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3-4 mm. There is a lateral osteophyte sticking off the condylar head.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic with some loss of vertical volume. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 mm. There is decreased superior joint space and lateral joint space.

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that is arthritic with some anterior beaking and flattening on the superior head and posterior head. There is increased anterior joint space. The articular eminence is moderately steep, but not too long vertically. The condyle appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa.

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that appears to have lost vertical volume and that has anterior beaking. Vertical joint space appears decreased. The articular eminence appears longer than the opposite side and of moderate inclination.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the oropharyngeal airway appears to be about 6-7 mm at the base of the tongue and similar to that at the soft palate level. There was some movement in the soft palate during the x-ray. Maxilla and mandible may be slightly retruded. Occlusal plane angle may be slightly increased. There is a vertical difference in the inferior border of the mandible with the right side being vertically higher than the left side.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
1.	Bilateral TMJ arthritis (worse on the right side) and articular disc dislocations with severe deformation and non-salvageable.
2.	AP maxillary hypoplasia.
3.	AP mandibular hypoplasia.
4.	Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2-3 mm shorter vertically than the left side.
5.	Mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.
6.	Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 6 mm (normal 11 mm).
7.	Headaches.
8.	TMJ pain.
9.	Myofascial pain.
10.	Earaches, left side greater than right side.
11.	Left hyperplastic nasal turbinate.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
2.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction as well as transversely leveling the occlusal plane using TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it a counterclockwise direction and transversely level the occlusal plane. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies. e.	Left nasal partial turbinectomy.

B436 MRI
AGE:	46/F
DOB:
DATE OF ACQUISITION:
DATE OF INTERPRETATION:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost some vertical dimension, but still appears to have reasonable mediolateral dimension. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. There appears to be a medial osteophytic kind of development.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears smaller in size and appears to have lost vertical and transverse dimension. Joint space appears decreased on this side particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is arthritic with some anterior beaking and flattening of the posterior head and vertical head. A little sclerosis is present particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is significantly deformed and short anteroposterior. The disc appears to be rolled into a ball particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint and is a little bit flatter towards the medial side. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space and perhaps an inflammatory response posterior in the bilaminar tissue. On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle, but the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction maintaining severe deformation.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is smaller in size and appears to have lost more vertical dimension. There is anterior beaking present. The articular eminence is moderately steep. The disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence rolled into a ball at the lateral aspect and a little bit flatter towards the medial aspect. The disc is sitting almost beneath the articular eminence. There is a little fluid in the superior joint space and perhaps a little bit of inflammation in the bilaminar tissues more towards the lateral aspect of the joint. On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle, but the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction maintaining severe deformation.

IMPRESSION:
1.	Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction with severe deformation.
2.	Discs probably non-salvageable.

