B437 
B437 is 17 years old, referred by Dr. XXXX. B437 has been diagnosed with asthma. He has a lot of allergy problems basically due to environmental issues. His symptoms gets worse during the seasonal factors. He has had a tonsillectomy and he has had tubes in his ears. He had a tympanoplasty to his left ear probably around fourth grade.

B437 has had clicking and popping in his joints for as long as he can remember of unknown etiology. He has had some orthodontics done probably in around the third or fourth grade when he had an RPE appliance and some head gear. He had some orthodontics on the upper arch for about 9 months when he was about 12 to 13 years of age. He currently has no earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. He has about a 30% hearing loss in his left ear. No other joints bother him. He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

B437 rates his TMJ pain, although he does not always have pain, when he does get it is at about a level of 6. Average daily is at maybe 4, jaw function at 7, diet at 0, and disability is at 0. He does get headaches in predominantly the frontal area that he relates to “sinus headaches”. B437 does have a continuous conjunctivitis bilaterally. This is attributed to his allergies.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B437 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. The nasal tip is just slightly off to the left side about 2 mm. The maxillary dental midline appears to be off to the left side about 1 mm. The mandibular dental is about 2 mm off to the left side. The chin appears to be probably about 2 mm off to the left side. If he adjusts his mandible towards the left side, it does improve his overall facial symmetry. In profile view, B437 appears to have some deficiency in the forward area of probably about 5 mm. The maxilla may be retruded by maybe 3 to 4 mm. Chin may be retruded by about 3 to 4 mm. Chin neckline is exceptionally long and chin neck angle is well defined. B437 does have a head forward neck posture. In his left side profile, the mandible appears to be a little bit more retruded than the right side. Intraorally, B437 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. There is mild crowding of the lower anterior arch. The arch is a little bit narrow transversely in the bicuspid area. He appears to have adequate attached gingiva, although the tissue is fairly thin. In the upper arch, B437 has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. He has a 3 x 3 retainer up there. He has almost a full Class III occlusion on the right side and on the left side it is almost a full Class III, but not quite as severe as the opposite side. He has an anterior open bite of about 3 to 4 mm. He has anterior crossbite. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. Tonsils are gone. Transversely, the maxilla and mandible appear fairly level. Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged, and the septum is deviated towards the left side at its base. There may be moderate nasal airway obstruction. Columella is moderately wide and nostrils are moderately narrow. He is not aware of snoring, daytime somnolence, or sleep apnea. He has no sleep disorder. He may be a mouth breather predominantly at night time and also some during the day. He does have a moderate head forward neck posture. To palpation, B437 has no tenderness around the head and neck area. On opening, he has extremely loud audible clicking and popping in both joints that can actually easily be heard across the room. Maximal incisal opening is 54 mm, and excursion movement to the right about 8 mm and to the left 9 mm. B437 has about 6 mm of incompetence.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Sinuses look relatively clear and healthy. Turbinates appear moderate in size. It is difficult to evaluate the condyles. There is a 3 x 3 retainer wire in the maxillary arch. Condylar heads and necks appear somewhat elongated. Waters view shows that the septum is reasonably straight. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space looks adequate. Right TMJ tomogram shows a condylar head and neck that appears somewhat elongated. Articular eminence is moderately steep. It is difficult to evaluate the joint space. On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B437 has a Class III occlusal relationship and high occlusal plane angle facial morphology. Evaluating some previous x-rays in a lateral ceph taken 3 years ago, shows that B437 is closer to a skeletal I relationship and closer to a Class I occlusion. His occlusion has gotten significantly worse as time has progressed. His oropharyngeal airway looks very good.

In talking with B437's mother, she notes that when B437 sleeps that his eyes do not close all the way. This has been likely the cause for the chronic conjunctivitis that B437 has.

Basic diagnoses for B437 would be as follows:
Bilateral mandible condylar hyperplasia. Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations with reduction.
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Vertical maxillary hyperplasia.
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Bilateral infraorbital hypoplasia.
Inability for patient to close eyes when sleeping secondary to orbital proptosis. Bilateral chronic conjunctivitis.
Class III occlusion. Anterior open bite. Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction. TMJ pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch at 2 plane levels. Align the anterior 4 teeth in an elevated plane compared to the posterior teeth. Try to extrude the cuspids slightly to level them off of the posterior teeth. Therefore, the arch wire should have a step upward from the cuspids up to the lateral and central incisors. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally. The left side is okay now, but on the right side the lateral incisor and cuspid roots are in close contact. Align and level mandibular arch. Try to elevate the lower incisors about 1 mm to level them even with the cuspids and posterior teeth. Also try to expand the lower arch by tipping the bicuspids and molars buccally. Surgery.
Bilateral mandible high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchors. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly, level the curve of Spee, advance slightly, and correct any transverse arch discrepancy. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Bilateral infraorbital augmentation with Medpor implants.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B437 MRI
AGE: 17/M
DOB:
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears fairly large, at least in the vertical direction. Joint space appears decreased at the lateral aspect of the joint. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. The disc appears that it may be medially displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that likewise appears long vertically. There appears to be significantly decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. There is significantly decreased joint space up to the lateral aspect of the joint.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. The condylar head and neck appear elongated. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence at the lateral aspect of the joint. At the medial aspect of the joint, it appears the disc may be posteriorly displaced indicative of perhaps a rotation of the disc on the condylar head with the lateral aspect being anterior and the medial aspect posterior. There is fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is moderately good translation and the disc appears to reduce into position. The length of the condylar head and neck is suggestive of condylar hyperplasia.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a long condylar head and neck. Articular eminence is moderately steep. At the lateral aspect of the joint, the disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. Towards the medial side, it is suggested that the disc may be posteriorly displaced. Again, the disc may be rotated within the joint space. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, the disc appears to be in a reduced position with fairly good translation of the condyle and disc.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ possible condylar hyperplasia with articular disc displaced anteriorly at the lateral aspect of the joint and posteriorly at the medial aspect of the joint.
Right TMJ possible condylar hyperplasia with articular disc displaced anteriorly at the lateral aspect of the joint and posteriorly at the medial aspect of the joint.

