B438 
B438 is 32 years and is referred by Dr. XXXX.
PRIMARY CONCERNS:
TMJ problems. Facial distortion. Ringing in the ears.
Lightheadedness and dizziness.

When B438 was 12 years old she had a closed lock situation that developed. That resolved and she was well after that. Two years ago, she began orthodontic treatment which included extraction of the four first bicuspids. After she started using elastics, she developed clicking and popping in her TMJs.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Vitamins.
Over-the-counter medication that she bought at Walgreens that is specific for joints.
She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at about 1, jaw function at 8, diet at 8, and disability at 9. She gets occasional headaches that are probably at about a level of 3 and recur more in the temple area. She is aware of clenching at night and also during the day. Other joints that bother her include her neck, left elbow and occasionally her knees that just more recently did get a little bit tender when she works out.

In frontal view, B438 has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is shifted about 2 mm to the left. In profile view, she has a little bit of fullness in the upper lip and acute nasolabial angle. Chin-neckline appears a little bit short. Vertical facial height seems to be in good balance. Chin-neck angle is not well defined. Intraorally, going back through the second molars, her right third molar is missing in the lower first bicuspids and is spacing on the right side between the cuspid and the second bicuspid. On the left side she may be missing the lower first molar and has a second and third molar but with a large space of probably 4 mm. It could be that this side does not move posteriorly as well. There is asymmetry in the lower arch with the left cuspid being 2 mm posterior to the right side. In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship. Maxillary left cuspid is about at least 2, maybe 3 mm posterior to the right cuspid. There is a cant in the transverse occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side. Intranasally, turbinates appear to be mildly enlarged but she has no difficulties breathing through her nose. She has about a 2 mm vertical overbite. B438 did have her mandibular left first molar extracted when she was 13 years old. As B438 opens her jaws she deviates significantly off towards the right side and then back to the left. There are definite sounds in both joints. It does not sound like a discrete click or pop but there is definite rubbing characteristics. B438 hears sort of a friction sound in her joints. Today, there was not any discrete click or pop that I could detect though B438 states that they do occur particularly more so in the right side and occasionally the left joint. When she eats she feels a little bit tired and sore in her jaw muscles.

She chews predominately only on the right side. When she tries to chew on the left side the discomfort is worse. B438 noted that when has worn rubber bands in the past such as this past July that she would wake up at night with her mandible postured forward. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the masseters, TMJs and shoulders. Maximum opening is 48 mm and she can open to about 40 with reasonable comfort. Excursive movements were 9 mm in each direction. As she goes into excursive movements, she gets increased levels of pain in the jaws. B438 states that when she wears elastics at times it causes her mandible to shift from side-to-side very rapidly and uncontrollably.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the absence of mandibular left first molar and probably the first bicuspids. In the maxillary arch the first bicuspids are absent. All four third molars are present although, however, the mandibular left third molar is somewhat forward closer to a second molar position. The sinuses look relatively clear. The condyles are difficult to evaluate in this view.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are fairly clear. The septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side. Turbinates are moderate in size with blockage in the left side compared to the right side. Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all shifted to the left side of the facial midline.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is narrow anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Joint space may be slightly decreased posteriorly.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is very narrow anteroposteriorly and appears a little bit more arthritic than the opposite side. Articular eminence is fairly steep. On opening, there is good translation of both condyles with almost hyperfunction.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway is above normal dimensions. Occlusal plane maybe slightly elevated.

Dental model analysis shows that she has asymmetry in the arches as previously described. She has a significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of approximately 5 mm. She has very prominent marginal ridges on the anterior teeth.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation. Left vertical maxillary hypoplasia. Left mandibular vertical hypoplasia. Maxillary dental midline, mandibular dental midline and chin all shifted to the left side approximately 2 mm.
Class II end-on cuspid relationship.


Missing all four first bicuspids and mandibular left first molar. Multiple spaces remaining in the upper arch and lower arch being greater on the mandibular left side.
Transverse collapse of the posterior teeth. Increased curve of Wilson in the lower arch. Loss of facial fullness in the transverse direction bilaterally. TMJ pain. Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of almost 5 mm. Abnormal shape to the incisors.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level the maxillary arch. Do not retract the incisors anymore but instead create spacing of about 1 mm around each of the upper anterior 6 teeth to compensate for the significant tooth size discrepancy. Recontour the lingual aspect of the four incisors to allow a better occlusal fit. Align and level mandibular arch. Consider closing the space on the right side but open space on the left side in the second bicuspid area to improve lower arch symmetry and to shift the mandibular dental midline 1 to 2 mm around towards the right side. Open up space in the left second bicuspid area to equal 6 to 7 mm or equivalent to the adjacent bicuspid. Expand the lower arch transversely approximately 5 mm if possible in the molar area. Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible slightly and level transversely. Multiple maxillary osteotomies (the patient does not want to have this procedure done, if avoidable) to transversely level the maxilla and center the dental midline along the facial midline. Consider placement of osseointegrated implant in left first molar area. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to eliminate the spacing in the anterior upper arch and enlarge those teeth as well as place a crown on the osseointegrated implant in the left mandible.

B438 MRI EVALUATION
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows an odd appearance to the joint. The condyle appears narrow mediolaterally. There appears to be some kind of mass out lateral to the condyle. It possibly could be ear cartilage. The condyle is narrow mediolaterally. Minimal downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa. Cannot really identify any discal tissue. It appears that there may be just a very small remnant of condyle on the left side. The condyle shows up better on these specific images. There is fairly good mediolateral width to the condyle with a little sclerosis on top. Decreased superior joint space is present. Difficult to identify discal tissue.

Left axial view shows a condyle that is very narrow anteroposteriorly. It appears there is just a small nub of a condyle on that side.
Right axial views were much more difficult to read and difficult to identify the condyle. On one view it appears there may be a condyle that has reasonable mediolateral width and anteroposterior width.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears narrow mediolaterally. There is fluid in the superior joint space. The disc is really not identifiable but may be anteriorly displaced. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa about 3 mm. There may be some decreased joint space towards the lateral aspect of the rim but fluid or edematous tissue in the area. Sclerosis is present on the head of the condyle. The condyle does have fairly good mediolateral width but decreased lateral joint space. Significant downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa is evident.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to be quite narrow anteroposteriorly but a little wider at the lateral aspect of the joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. There is a decreased posterior joint space and the articular eminence is fairly steep. The disc in one of the windows look like it has fairly decent length yet although it is thickened vertically in the posterior band.
In T2 films in the superior joint space there is fluid present. On opening, there is actually fairly good translation of the disc and the condyle but the disc remains non-reducing.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit more width but towards the medial side it is also quite narrow. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting along the posterior aspect of the articular eminence. The disc may be in a little bit better condition on this side as compared to the opposite side although it dose appear somewhat degenerated. There appears to be decreased posterior joint space. In the right side, the disc actually appears in a little bit better position although it may be in a vertical direction acting as a wedge pushing the condyle posteriorly. This gives a little bit better morphology in this view. There does appear to be some fluid in the superior joint space. There is significant fluid in the superior joint space more so than the left side. In the right TMJ there is very god translation and also most excessive of the condyle and the disc appears to be in a reduced position.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction but with good condylar translation.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction.

