B440
B440 is 17 years old, and I am seeing B440 at Dr. XXXX.
Patient History
B440 and her mother have been aware of B440 developing facial asymmetry during the past two years of unknown etiology. She had orthodontic treatment from the ages of 12 to 13 with a good result. However, since that time she has begun developing facial asymmetry and open bite anteriorly and a little bit on the left side. Currently B440 takes the following medications:

Ranitidine (stomach medication)
MiraLax (stomach medication)
Albuterol
Flovent
B440 has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her right hip and her left knee. She has had an injury to her left knee and also to her right shoulder. The right hip problem may be related to compensation for a left knee injury. She has no known allergies and no problems wearing jewelry. She gives no history of clenching or bruxism. She has no headaches. She has no TMJ pain or myofascial pain. She rates her jaw function at 2, diet at 2, and disability at 0.

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, upper lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. B440 has good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face, but the lower third face has vertical and transverse asymmetry. Left side of the face is probably about 5 mm longer vertically compared to the right side. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is 1 mm to the right, and chin is probably close to 7 mm off to the right side. Taking into consideration the cant in the occlusal plane, the mandibular dental midline is fairly well aligned to the midline of the chin.

In profile view, she has good projection of the cheeks and nasal dorsum. She has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip. Upper lip appears to be probably about 4 mm AP deficient. Chin is probably about 15 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. As B440 holds her mandible forward, it does improve her profile.

Intraorally, B440 has all of her lower teeth back through her second molars. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in place. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by about 2 mm, and on the left side she is a little bit closer to Class I. She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. She has a 2-mm open bite being just slightly greater on the left side as compared to the right side. As B440 closes her jaws together, she occludes on the right side before the left side. Maximal incisal opening is 52 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 9 mm and to the left 8 mm. To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Joints seem to function smoothly.

Radiographic Evaluation
The only radiographs available include a Panorex and a lateral ceph. Cephalometric radiograph shows that the turbinates are moderately large in size with the left one being a little bit larger and maybe a little bit more obstructed. Sinuses appear relatively similar. She is missing all four third molars. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch. Right condyle shows some significant flattening on the head and appears a little bit sclerotic. Length of the condylar head and neck appears a little bit short on that side. On the left side, the condyle might be somewhat enlarged. It appears to have a little flattening on the head. Condylar neck appears much wider on the left side as compared to the right side indicative of either a vertical growing condylar hyperplasia versus an osteochondroma. Body height of the mandible on the left side is significantly greater than on the right side by probably 5 to 6 mm, but the image is not 1:1. Cephalometric analysis shows that the maxilla appears a little bit AP deficient and mandible appears AP deficient. She probably has a moderately high occlusal plane angle. Occlusal plane on the right side is significantly higher than it is on the left side. Appears to be decreased oropharyngeal airway. She does have a decreased oropharyngeal airway of about 4 mm at the base of the tongue. At the soft palate level it also is about 4 mm. B440 sleeps on her side. She says trying to sleep on her back it is difficult for her to fall asleep.

Basic Diagnoses
Left TMJ condylar hyperplasia in a vertical growth pattern versus osteochondroma
Right TMJ arthritis
Rule out disc dislocations
Mandibular asymmetry with deviation off toward the right side and vertical elongation of the left side
AP mandibular deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary asymmetry with the left side lower than the right side
Anterior open bite
Slight Class II end-on occlusion on the right side, Class I on the left side
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch
Chin deviated 7 mm off to the right side
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 3 to 4 mm (normal 11 mm)
High occlusal plane angulation
Excessive vertical elongation of the mandible on the left side

Recommended Treatment
MRI of left and right TMJs
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch in three segments:
Segment 1: Left cuspid through second molar
Segment 2: Left lateral incisor through right lateral incisor
Segment 3: Right cuspid through right second molar
Keep maxillary lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Right TMJ condylectomy and articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchor
Possible right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor if disc is dislocated
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to shift the mandible back onto the facial midline and advance it
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it and downgraft it posteriorly as well as level it transversely
Left mandibular inferior border ostectomy

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B440 
B440 is 17, and I originally saw B440 in Dr. XXXX. At that time we had worked up a diagnosis and a treatment plan. The treatment plan included to obtain an MRI, which we currently have. It was suspected initially that she could have a type of left TMJ condylar hyperplasia versus an osteochondroma. We also suspected that she may have some displaced articular discs. In addition, she has AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency and some transverse maxillary asymmetry. She has a decreased oropharyngeal airway. Her chin was deviated 7 mm off to the right side.

On opening, B440's joints seem to function fairly smoothly. Of interested, though, when she bites down firmly she does have an audible pop in the left TMJ probably with the disc slipping anteriorly out of position. It probably reduces mainly on opening, and, thus, we don't hear a click when she opens.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Left condyle appears much larger than the right condyle. Right condyle appears flattened and appears to be a little sclerotic on the head of the condyle. Left condyle could be enlarged.

Right TMJ tomogram shows flattening on the head of the condyle. There is some significant anterior beaking present and decreased joint space vertically. Condyle does appear somewhat arthritic. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Joint space could be a little bit narrow but appears fairly balanced posteriorly and superiorly. Articular eminence is steeper on this side than the opposite side.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. The right condyle appears quite flattened on the superior aspect.
Waters view shows the turbinates are of moderate size. Sinuses appear clear. There is asymmetry in the jaws with the left side being lower vertically than the right side. Chin also is shifted off toward the right side. Cannot judge the size of the condyles very well from this view.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class II and an end-on Class II jaw relationship. There is a high occlusal plane angle. There is an anterior open bite of about 2 mm and an overjet of probably 2 mm. Oropharyngeal airway is decreased at the base of the tongue. On our x-ray, she actually appears a little bit more Class II and a little bit more open bite tendency as compared to Dr. XXXX's x-rays.

B440 did complete her orthodontic treatment about four years ago. At the completion of orthodontic treatment, her teeth fit together fairly well at that time.

Basic Diagnoses
Left TMJ condylar hyperplasia versus osteochondroma
Right TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations with significant deformation of the articular discs
Mandibular asymmetry with deviation off toward the right side approximately 7 mm at the chin area and vertical elongation of the left side
AP mandibular deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary asymmetry with the left side approximately 2 mm lower than the right side
Anterior open bite
Slight Class II end-on occlusion on the right side and Class I on the left side
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch
Reverse curve of Speed in the lower arch with the lower four incisors depressed compared to the cuspids and posterior teeth
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 4 mm (normal 11)
High occlusion plane angulation

Recommended Treatment
Bone scan of TMJs
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch in three segments:
Segment 1: Left first bicuspid through second molar
Segment 2: Left cuspid through right lateral incisor
Segment 3: Right cuspid through right second molar
Place a step in the arch wire to align the anterior five teeth at an elevated level compared to the posterior teeth. Tip maxillary left cuspid root mesially and first bicuspid root distally. On the right side, tip the cuspid root distally and the lateral incisor root mesially to make room for the interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch. Try to elevate the four incisors about a millimeter to help correct the reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch

Surgery
Left TMJ condylectomy (high versus low depending on the pathology) and articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchor
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible and correct the asymmetry
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it, downgraft it posteriorly, as well as level it vertically and transversely

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B440  MRI Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of Reading:
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Cortical bone appears to be intact on the condyle. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. Decreased lateral joint space. Articular disc appears to be medially displaced. Disc is also seen anteriorly. Superior joint space appears to be decreased.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with extreme flattening on the head of the condyle with apparent loss of vertical dimension. Decreased joint space toward the medial aspect of the joint. Appears there may be discal tissue anterior to the head of the condyle.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is enlarged. Articular eminence is moderately steep and fairly long. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the posterior aspect of the eminence. There is significant fluid in the superior anterior joint space and a little bit along the posterior joint space and in the inferior joint space at the posterior aspect.

On opening, the disc appears to reduce, and there is fairly good translation of the condyle and disc. The condyle on this side appears much larger than the opposite side, and it is difficult to tell if there is growth in this joint or just simply resorption in the opposite joint.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is quite flattened and strong evidence of loss of vertical dimension on the condyle. Articular eminence is more shallow on this side as compared to the opposite side. Could be just a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. It is quite distorted and deformed.

On opening, the disc appears to remain anteriorly displaced without reduction. Appears to be sclerotic bone on the head of the condyle at this time, but the condyle looks similar to what is expected in an idiopathic condylar resorption case.

Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and significantly deformed
Left condyle “lights up” much more than the right condyle and could possibly be indicative of an active growth process on the left side

