B441 
B441 is 47 years old, referred by Dr. XXXX. Previous surgeries have included rhinoplasty and other minor facial procedures. He had a fractured left wrist and had a titanium bone plate and screws placed. The left wrist does bother him some particularly with certain functional activities. B441 currently takes Zocor for cholesterol and also Ambien 10 mg q.h.s.

B441 had a sort of orthodontic treatment done when he was approximately 14 years old. He had four bicuspids extracted, but his teeth just went into place so he ended up not having any appliances. When he became aware of having jaw and jaw joint problems was when he was about 19. He began developed migraine headaches and noises in his joints. He has had no other treatment for his jaw problems or dental problems. Two years ago, B441 started orthodontic treatment again. In the lower arch, he is having bicuspid spaces reopened for subsequent placement of implants and crowns.

B441 gets headaches in the frontotemporal and posterior head area that he rates at about a level of 6. He rates his average TMJ pain at 2, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 3, diet at 3, disability at 5.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B441 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is zero in the midline or 1 at the very most. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The nasal tip may be just slightly to the right 1 or 2 mm. Mandibular dental midline may be just slightly to the left, but the mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other. In profile view, he has good fullness of the upper lip and maxilla. Chin may be just slightly retruded, but not too significant, maybe about 3 to 5 mm. Chin neckline and chin neck angle are fairly well defined. At its maximum occlusion, the chin looks slightly more retruded and the chin neckline and angle are not quite as well defined. Chin deficiency may be closer to 6 to 8 mm. Intraorally, B441 is missing the lower first bicuspids. but the spaces have been opened and are being maintained with springs. The teeth appear to be nicely aligned and level. He has adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch, he is missing probably first bicuspids, however, he is fairly close to being Class I cuspid molar relationship on the right side, maybe just slight Class II on the left side particularly in the cuspid area. There is a very slight cant in the occlusion with the left side being about 1 mm higher in the maxilla than the mandible. The mandible appears fairly level. B441 has an anterior overbite of about 2 to 3 mm. To palpation, B441 has some mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles, TMJs, and styloid areas. Incisal opening maximally is about 41 mm and he can open to about 30 without discomfort. Excursion movement to the left is 12 mm and to right 9 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues all look relatively normal. Apparently, B441 had something done to his uvula a few years back and after that he had difficulties talking for about 3 months and, in fact, he could not talk at all. Intranasally, the septum is deviated off to the right side towards the anterior part of the nose. Turbinates are moderate in size.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of two horizontally impacted mandibular third molars, the right one being more horizontal than the left one. There is an erupted maxillary left third molar, but the right third molar is absent. Left sinus appears a little bit fuzzy.

Waters view shows that the bony septum at least is relatively straight, although the cartilage nasal septum is off towards the right side. The right turbinate appears large almost obliterating the airway, but the left side looks fairly open. Sinuses look clear. No formation of the frontal sinuses.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is relatively normal. There appears to be adequate joint space, but decreased joint space posteriorly.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little flattening on top and maybe a little sclerosis. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Joint space appears somewhat compromised vertically as well as perhaps posteriorly. On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B441 has a brachiocephalic type of facial morphology. Oropharyngeal airway actually looks very good with an oral airway to soft palate of about 13 mm and at the base of the tongue at 15 mm.

Basic diagnoses for B441 would be as follows:
1.	Vertical maxillary deficiency.
2.	AP mandibular deficiency.
3.	Bilateral TMJ arthritis and medial displacement of the articular discs.
4.	TMJ pain.
5.	Headaches.
6.	Missing maxillary first bicuspids.
7.	Missing mandibular first bicuspids, but spaces have been reopened to accommodate those teeth.
8.	Slightly over angulation of mandibular incisors.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch. b.	Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Hold the spaces in the lower first bicuspid area.
2.	Surgery.
a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
b.	Maxillary osteotomies and down graft it about 3 to 4 mm. c.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible. d.	Graft to labiomental fold area.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to finalize occlusion.
4.	Restorative dentistry. a.	Place implants in mandibular first bicuspid area.
b.	Place crowns on mandibular implants.

B441  MRI EVALUATION 
AGE: 47/M
DOB:
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There appears to be some degenerative changes in the fossa area. Difficult to identify discal tissue. There appears to be some reactive tissue perhaps in the joint space. A little sclerosis on the head of the condyle. The fossa does look somewhat irregular. Difficult to identify discal tissue.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. Lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm. A little bit difficult to tell where the articular disc is. Joint space looks fairly good. It appears that the disc may be medially displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head towards the lateral aspect of the joint. Difficult to see the disc at the lateral aspect. Disc is more evident in the mid and medial part of the condyles. There does not appear to be any significant inflammatory process present in the joint. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc appears to rotate forward nicely with the condyle and in proper position. At the lateral aspect of the joint, the disc is hard to see.

Right TMJ sagittal view again shows a condyle that has a little flattening of the head at the lateral aspect of the joint. At the lateral aspect of the joint, the disc is not readily seen. More medially, the disc appears to be in fairly good position over the top of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is good translation and the articular disc appears to translate well with the condyle.

IMPRESSION:
1.	Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc possibly medially displaced but otherwise in good position.
2.	Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc may be medially displaced.

