B443
B443 is 64 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX.
Patient History
B443 has had problems with high blood pressure and takes medication for that. He had a hernia repair 50 years ago and had a broken jaw 46 years ago. He currently weighs 205 lb. and is 6 ft. tall. He has a history of stomach ulcers in the past but no further problems with those.

He takes Diovan 80 mg per day and multivitamins.
B443 did fracture his mandible 46 years ago. Apparently he had a left body fracture, and the right TMJ was “shattered.” The left body area apparently had an open reduction, but the right TMJ was treated in a closed fashion. He did well after that with no TMJ problems. About six months ago of unknown etiology he was unable to get his teeth to fit together in the back, and this occurred on both sides. At one point they thought it might be related to a third molar that was causing localized infection. The tooth was removed, and he is still unable to get his teeth together. He went to his dentist again who referred him to Dr. XXXX, then Dr. XXXX requested an MRI, reviewed the MRI, and then referred B443 here. He has no trouble with earaches. He has continuous tinnitus, and this has been present for about 7 to 10 years. He says that this condition runs in his family. He has a low volume form of it. He has no trouble with vertigo but does state he has some hearing loss that he feels is probably related to age. No other joints bother him. He is not aware of clenching or bruxism. He has no problems with headaches, no TMJ pain, and on an average day has no pain around the head and neck area. He rates his jaw function at 2, diet at 0, and disability at 0.

Clinical Examination
Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is probably about -2. Maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin are pretty much on the facial midline.

In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is probably about 5 to 6 mm posterior to subnasale. Maxilla is probably a good 8 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is extremely short, and chin is probably about 15 mm AP deficient.

Intraorally, B443 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Some significant crowding lower anterior arch and accentuated curve of occlusion there. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth also back through the second molars. He has basically a Class I cuspid relationship. Teeth on the left side appear to fit together fairly well. On the right side, could be open just a little bit with probably a 1 to 2-mm open bite as compared to the opposite side. B443 has quite a bit of attrition on the lower anterior teeth. Has an overbite of probably about 4 mm. Uvula appears elongated. Soft palate appears a little bit elongated, and the faucial pillars appear a little bit constricted.

To palpation, he has some very minimal tenderness over the right styloid area; otherwise no tenderness around the head and neck area. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly. Incisal opening is 49 mm counting the overbite relationship. Excursive movement to the right is about 5 to 7 mm and to the left about 5 to 7 mm as well. The hand articulated models that B443 brought along shows that his bite is, in fact, opened up on the right side probably a couple of millimeters, and the mandibular dental midline which originally was off to the right side a millimeter to 2 now is on the midline indicating that the mandible on the right side has come downward and forward slightly. It appears that B443 has had some bilateral forward movement of the joint. Even on the right side, he has just a little bit Class III tendency in the bicuspid area, and with his original models trimmed in best function relationship, he is in a Class I cuspid/bicuspid/molar relationship.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows that he is missing bilateral mandibular third molars. Also missing maxillary left third molar but has an impacted maxillary right third molar. All other teeth are present. Condyles look relatively normal. Sinuses look clear. There is a wire in the left mandibular angle area which means he actually had an angle fracture and not a body fracture. Do not see any evidence of fracture of the right TMJ area.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is postured forward in the fossa probably about 3 mm or so. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Increased superior and posterior joint space. Teeth are slightly apart posteriorly.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is even further positioned anteriorly probably 4 to 5 mm as it approaches down toward the articular eminence. Significantly increased joint space vertically and posteriorly in this joint. Open bite appears to be a little bit greater on this side than the opposite side.

On opening, there is good translation of both joints as the condyles come anterior to the articular eminences.
Waters view shows that there is a significantly deviated nasal septum particularly in the bony area with spurs off to the left end of the right side. Turbinates appear moderate in size. It does appear that there may be adequate airway. Sinuses look relatively clear.

Cephalometrically, B443 appears to have some vertical maxillary deficiency and significant AP maxillary deficiency as well as AP mandibular deficiency. Oropharyngeal airway is surprisingly good in the soft palate area where then is a dimension of about 10 mm. At the base of the tongue, the dimension is only about 5 mm. Maxilla and mandible both appear to be significantly retruded. There is a high occlusion plane angle present as well.

Basic Diagnoses
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with osteophyte off the condyle Significant hypertrophy of the bilaminar tissue related to synovial based mass Differential Diagnosis
Villus synovitis
Early synovial chondromatosis (pre-calcification)
Pigmented villi nodular synovitis
Systemic disease (i.e. sarcoid, amyloid, crystalline arthropathy, gout)
Displaced right condyle in a forward direction
Severe AP maxillary deficiency
Severe AP mandibular deficiency
Vertical maxillary deficiency being greater posteriorly
High occlusal plane angle
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 4.5 mm (normal 11 mm)
High blood pressure of unknown etiology
Severe snoring
Rule out sleep apnea
Right side open bite
Masticatory dysfunction

Recommended Treatment
CT Scan with and without contrast, 1 mm cuts with reformatted coronal and sagittal views
Treatment Option #1:
Surgery
Right TMJ reconstruction with articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor, removal of synovial mass, and removal of osteophytes
Possible right mandibular osteotomy to establish good occlusion

Treatment Option #2:
Surgery
Right TMJ reconstruction with articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor, removal of synovial mass, and removal of osteophytes
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible approximately 15 mm
Maxillary osteotomies to advance it toward approximately 12 mm

B443 MRI Scan Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Reading:
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Decreased joint space vertically. The condyle is really only seen in one view. The fossa appears a little bit rough and uneven. It could be just the angle at which the radiograph was shot. Difficult to identify discal tissue.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Appears to be increased superior joint space. May be discal tissue anteriorly positioned. Appears to be an amorphous kind of tissue between the condyle and fossa. The bone on the roof of the fossa appears fairly thin.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with some flattening on the anterior head. Condyle appears to be postured forward slightly. On some views it appears that the disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence, and there are some others that tend to show a disc that may be in reasonable position. Evidence of displacement appears to be more consistent with the lateral aspect of the joint. The condyle does appear to be positioned forward in the fossa with an increased posterior joint space.

On opening, there appears to be reasonable translation, and the articular disc appears to be in reduced position. Appears on this side the disc may be in position, although there are arthritic changes present.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is postured forward in the fossa with increased superior and posterior joint space. Tissue appears somewhat amorphous. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly positioned and sitting almost beneath the articular eminence but anterior to the condyle. Disc appears to have reasonable length at this time. Could be a little osteophyte sticking up off the head of the condyle. A little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. A little bit hockey stick shape to the condyle. Appears to be some areas in the fossa where there is a continuity defect in the bone structure. There also is some bone extending down into the posterior fossa area.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle, and on some views it appears that the disc reduces in place.
Impression:
Left TMJ appears that the disc is in position with appropriate translation although with increased posterior joint space
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction with osteophyte on the condylar head and also heterotopic bone growing down in toward the fossa from the posterior superior aspect of the fossa

