B445 
B445 is 21 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX.
Patient Concerns
Jaw joints click and pop
Jaw joint pain
Stiffness in the jaws
Headaches Neck pain
Cannot open jaws very wide or comfortably
Difficulty eating some foods
Stuffy nose
Difficulties breathing through the nose
Snoring
Observed apneic episodes
Restless sleep
Daytime tiredness
Frequent lightheadedness and dizziness

Patient History
B445's jaw problems began sometime around sixth grade when her parents first noticed facial asymmetry. She underwent orthodontic treatment from the age of 12 to 15 which included extraction of all four first bicuspids and extensive Class II mechanics. She had all four third molars removed. It has been only in the last two or three years, however, that she has begun to develop the symptoms previously listed. She takes no medications. No trouble with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, but does get frequent vertigo. No hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her neck, wrists, knees, and ankles. She used to run the hurdles in high school and is probably responsible for part of her knee and ankle problems. She has no known allergies. She cannot wear cheap earrings and cannot wear earrings with gold in them as they create problems with her ears and localized reaction. She is not aware of clenching and bruxism. B445 does have reactions to shots and needles and passes out every time those particular treatments are required. When B445 just gets her teeth cleaned or examined, her jaws and jaw joints get quite sore. B445 has problems with recurrent sinus infections. She does take medications although none prescription. She takes ibuprofen, Excedrin, and Tylenol Sinus depending on the nature of her pain and headaches. She gets a lot of strep throat, too, and had it six times last year. She gets headaches in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area that average at about a level of 6. She gets migraines approximately once or twice per month that end up being at a level of 10 which totally incapacitate her. When she gets the migraine headaches, she will take some of the above-listed medications plus she will use a heat pack that she puts around her neck, and she takes mint tea. This seems to rectify the situation most of the time within the same day.

B445 rates her TMJ pain on an average day at about a level of 4 but on the worst days at a level of 8. Average daily pain around the head and neck area is at 6, jaw function at 5, diet at 5, and disability at 6. B445 is a singer and really enjoys singing, and her current situation impairs her abilities to do that. Migraines appear to have no relationship to her menstrual cycle. The migraines B445 feels may be stress induced. B445 feels that her facial asymmetry is continuing to worsen.

B445 does have difficulties driving because of her daytime sleepiness. Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B445 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Lower third face demonstrates some significant asymmetric changes. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 5. Maxillary midline may be about a millimeter off toward the right side. Mandibular dental midline is a millimeter off to the right side. Chin is about 7 to 8 mm off to the right side. Lower dental midline and chin midline taking into consideration the transverse cant in the occlusal plane are fairly well aligned with each other. In profile view, B445 has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip. Appears to have upper jaw AP deficiency by probably about 5 to 6 mm. Chin appears to be AP retruded by probably 12 to 15 mm. Chin-neckline is short, and chin-neck angle is poorly defined. Anterior vertical height of the lower third of the face appears to be fairly good, although she has some slight lip incompetence of probably about 4 to 5 mm.

Intraorally, B445 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars except she is missing the lower first bicuspids that were extracted for previous orthodontic reasons. Transverse width of the lower arch is narrow. Has adequate attached gingiva. She has some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. Lower arch is fairly symmetric anteroposteriorly. In the upper arch, she is missing first bicuspids as well. Upper arch is also transversely narrow. Has just a slight Class II cuspid relationship bilaterally by probably a couple of millimeters. When she closes down, she hits first on her right teeth in the cuspid/second bicuspid area, and then she bites harder and the left side comes together. Has a transverse cant in the maxillary occlusion with the left cuspid being 3 to 4 mm lower than the right cuspid. The lower arch is also about the same with the lower teeth on the left side being about 3 mm to 4 lower than the right side. Intraorally, the soft tissues look relatively normal. Uvula is normal. Soft palate is probably moderately elongated. Faucial pillars appear relatively normal. Tonsils are present with the left one slightly enlarged compared to the right one, but they don't look particularly inflamed.

Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged with the left one being significantly larger than the right side right now. The left one also appears quite inflamed. Septum is acceptable. When B445 sleeps, she breathes predominantly through her mouth. Columella and luminal valves appear relatively normal. She does have the moderate snoring and probably moderate daytime somnolence and moderate sleep apnea problems. She is predominantly a mouth breather particular when sleeping.

To palpation, she has moderate pain over the TMJs and styloid areas and milder pain over the temporalis, masseters, and SCMs. TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly except on the right side she had a glitch the first two or three times she opened, but then it went away. At one point she had a glitch on closing on that right side, but then that went away as well. The left side seemed to function reasonably smoothly and seemed to translate much better than the right side did. When B445 opens her jaw, the mandible seems to deflect off toward the right side probably about 4 or 5 mm. Maximal opening is 35 mm, and she could open to about 26 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movement to the right was 3 mm and to the left 5 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. Turbinates appear enlarged particularly on the left side. Sinuses appear relatively clear, although the right one is a little bit more cloudy than the left one. Left condyle looks relatively normal in size and shape. Right condyle appears as though it is quite small with probable loss of vertical and anteroposterior dimension. There is a greater antegonial notch on the right side as compared to the left side. Vertical height of the mandible on the right side appears significantly shorter than the left side in the main body of the ramus as well as the condylar head and neck.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be sitting posteriorly within the fossa area. Articular eminence is moderately steep. A little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Decreased joint space superiorly and posteriorly. Disc may be oriented in a vertical orientation in this joint.

On opening, that joint appears to translate very well.
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears small in size with apparent loss of condylar volume in a vertical and an anteroposterior dimension. There is significantly decreased joint space vertically and anteroposteriorly.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the right condyle.
Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear, although there could be a little bit more cloudiness in the right sinus as compared to the left one which could be compatible with a sinusitis, or she could have a mucous retention cyst that is large and filling a good part of the sinus. Nasal bony septum shows deviation off to the left side and then off to the right side as well. Turbinates are moderately large and observable nasal airway is fairly constricted.

Cephalometrically, B445 has a slight skeletal Class II jaw relationship. Some asymmetry in the anteroposterior position of the rami but could be related to head rotation. Inferior border of the mandible on the right side is about 9 mm vertically shorter compared to the left side at the angle area and probably about 11 mm in the first molar area. There is an occlusal plane discrepancy with a vertical difference of probably about 4 mm or so at the posterior aspect of the maxilla. Oropharyngeal airway is decreased with an oropharyngeal airway of about 4 mm at the soft palate level and also at the base of the tongue it is about 4 to 4.5 mm. On the lateral cephalogram, B445's head is tipped up a little bit in front.

Basic Diagnoses
Right TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption versus resorptive arthritis with questionable salvageable disc
Left TMJ possible articular disc dislocation
AP maxillary deficiency Anterior vertical maxillary excess
AP mandibular deficiency with significant asymmetry
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 3 to 4 mm lower than the right side
Vertical height of the mandible on the right side at the angle area is 6 to 8 mm shorter than the left side Slight Class II end-on occlusion Lip incompetence of 4 to 5 mm
AP microgenia
Slight anterior vertical mandibular excess
High occlusal plane angle Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of less than 4 mm (normal dimension 11 mm)
Hypertrophied turbinates Nasal airway obstruction TMJ pain
Headaches Vertigo
Masticatory dysfunction
Mouth breathing
Snoring
Sleep apnea symptoms Daytime somnolence

Recommended Treatment
Obtain MRIs to evaluate required TMJ treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch
CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Right TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor (this will depend on MRI findings)
Right coronoidectomy
Fat graft to right TMJ (harvested from abdomen)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward, shorten it vertically anteriorly, and correct the transverse occlusal discrepancy
Left mandibular ramus osteotomy to advance the mandible on that side
Partial turbinectomies
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine and retain the occlusion
B445  MRI Scan Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Reading:

Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is fairly large in size particularly in a vertical dimension. Decreased superior joint space particularly in the lateral aspect of the joint. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa of about 3 mm. There could be some discal tissue medially and perhaps anteriorly but difficult to tell. Disc may actually be in a more medial direction.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is extremely small in mediolateral dimension with the condyle being perhaps a fifth as wide as the normal side. Appears to be a lot of amorphous kind of tissue surrounding the condylar head. Mild downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa of no more than a couple of millimeters. Difficult to identify discal tissue in this joint.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. Some slight anterior beaking developing There is flattening on the anterior head of the condyle and a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. May be an osteophyte formation toward the lateral aspect of the condyle. Out laterally, discal tissue is not seen, but over medially it appears that the discal tissue is in reasonable position. This would be compatible with medial displacement of the articular disc. May be a little inflammatory response in the tissues posterior to the condylar head. May be a little bit of fluid in the anteroinferior joint space.

On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle and the disc, and the disc appears to be in a reduced position.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is small mediolaterally. It actually only shows up in one or two views indicative of significant condylar resorption present. Condyle is dark and indicative of decreased vascularization. Condyle appears postured forward in the fossa. Joint space vertically appears relatively normal. Difficult to identify any significant discal tissue, although there may be some sitting beneath the articular eminence. Appears there is a significant inflammatory process associated with this joint. May be reactive pannus present with severe breakdown of the articular disc with not much discal tissue remaining.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle, and appears that there may be some degenerative discal tissue in place.
Impression:
Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc medially displaced
Severe right TMJ condylar resorptive arthritis and severe degeneration of the articular disc with decrease of the condyle in all three planes of space. Possible pannus involving the disc with severe degenerative changes
Non-salvageable right joint
Right TMJ indicated for total joint prosthesis
Left TMJ indicated for articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor

B445 MRI Scan Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of Reading:
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has a fairly good mediolateral width. Lateral pole of the condyle is located inferiorly compared to the medial pole. Decreased superior joint space. Appears that there is disc tissue displaced medially. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa with it coming down probably a good 3 mm. Has significantly decreased lateral joint space. Condyle has fairly significant rotation to it with the lateral pole being significantly more anterior than the medial pole.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has undergone severe condylar resorption. The condyle is probably a fifth or sixth the width of a normal condyle. Decreased superior joint space. Appears there is an osteophyte sticking off the top. Appears to be significant degenerative changes present in the fossa and condyle area. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. What is left of the condyle appears quite dark.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of sclerosis present. Articular eminence is moderately steep and quite long in length. Articular disc appears to be vertically oriented in the fossa and anteriorly displaced. At the lateral aspect of the joint, the disc is not seen indicative of medial displacement as well. No particularly inflammatory process is seen in the joint.

On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle and reduction of the disc.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is extremely small in size with tremendous loss of volume vertically and anteroposteriorly as well as mediolaterally. Articular eminence is very shallow. Condyle appears quite dark, what is left of it. Condyle is probably a quarter to a fifth of normal size. Could be a retromandibular inflammatory process present.

On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle. Difficult to see any discal tissue in the closed position. On opening, it is difficult to see any discal tissue.

Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation in an anteromedial direction; disc reduces on opening
Right TMJ severe arthritis and severe degenerative changes of the articular disc Probable treatment: Bilateral total joint prostheses

