B449 
B449 is 20 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX.
Patient History
B449 has had a previous tonsillectomy. Otherwise B449 is in good health with no major medical problems. B449's problems began about two years ago when she first became aware of having some clicking problems in her jaw joint. It was about a year-and-a-half ago when she first went into see Dr. XXXX in reference to the situation. He has placed her on some exercises to try to control the clicking and popping noises. She had orthodontics from sixth grade to eighth grade. She has no problems with earaches, vertigo, or hearing loss, but she does have some tinnitus that is fairly constant. No other joints bother her. She is aware of nocturnal clenching and frequently wakes up with headaches in the morning. She rates her headaches that she gets daily at a level of 7 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. She rate her TMJ pain at 0, overall facial pain and neck pain at 6, jaw function at 5, diet at 2, and disability at 3. Her pain is usually worse in the mornings when she wakes up.

Patient Concerns
Right-sided jaw pain
Right TMJ pain
Teeth don't fit together
Lower jaw becoming asymmetric and shifting off toward the left
Difficulties eating and chewing
Headaches
Ringing in the ears

Current Medications
Alprazolam 0.5 mg
Temazepam 30 mg
Bextra 20 mg
Ortho Erva
Fluvoxamine 100 mg
Allergies
She has had and adverse reaction to PENICILLIN.

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B449 has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is probably about 18 mm. Tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the left as is the chin. She has a significant C-shaped curve to the upper lip. Upper lip supranasale is anterior to subnasale by probably 3 mm. Chin actually appears to be in fairly good AP balance. Chin-neckline is relatively normal in length, and chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, B449 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Has some slight lingual inclination of the lower incisors. Roots are fairly prominent labially. Has what appears to be adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has an end-on incisor relationship. She has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the left side by probably 1 or 2 mm and on the right side by probably 4 to 5 mm. She has a tendency toward a crossbite on the left side. Transversely, occlusal plane is fairly level. Oropharynx is fairly clear.

Turbinates are moderately large, but she claims that she has no difficulties breathing through her nose. Claims to have no problems with nasal airway obstruction. Columella is a little bit wide.

To palpation, she has moderate discomfort over the right masseter, right styloid area, and mild tenderness over the left masseter, right medial pterygoid, right TMJ, and left styloid area. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is 57 mm but only about 25 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movement to the right is 7 mm and to the left 8 mm.

There is a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.
Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows that the patient has all of her teeth back through the third molars with the third molars even erupted into a functional position. Turbinates appear fairly large. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Condylar heads and necks are elongated particularly on the right side more so than the left side.

Waters view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged, particularly the left side with not much airway on that side. The rest of the sinuses appear relatively clear. Mandible is deviated off toward the left side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite narrow anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Decreased superior joint space. Posterior joint space looks relatively normal as does the anterior joint space.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit better morphology on this side as compared to the other side. Condylar head itself is a little bit more narrow than further down in the neck area. Articular eminence is a little bit steeper on this side compared to the other side. Joint space appears fairly well-balanced.

On opening, there is good translation in both joints. The articular eminence on the left side is significantly steeper than the right side. Condyle on the left side looks a little more abnormal on wide opening as compared to the right side.

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class III relationship with some overangulation of the maxillary incisors. Oropharyngeal airway looks exceptionally good.

Basic Diagnoses
Unilateral right mandibular condylar hyperplasia. Rule out left condylar hyperplasia growing at a much slower rate
Bilateral TMJ articular disc posterior displacements
Mandibular deviate prognathism
Class III end-on occlusion, worse on the right side as compared to the left side
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Headaches
Tinnitus Nocturnal clenching
Slight lingual inclination of lower incisors
Mild tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of almost 2 mm
Slight accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch. Consider extruding maxillary incisors about a millimeter Align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Right TMJ high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor and possible low condylectomy if active growth is identified in the left joint as well
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly and up into proper occlusion

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B449  MRI Scan Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of Reading:
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears fairly large compared to the size of the fossa. Appears to be decreased superior joint space. Difficult to identify discal tissue. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. A little greater downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa on this side. Decreased joint space vertically. Difficult to see where the disc is. It is possible it could be posteriorly positioned.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has a little flattening on the anterior aspect. Has sort of an odd shape where the head of the condyle actually appears smaller than part of the neck does. Articular eminence is of moderate steepness. Appears that the disc is posteriorly displaced. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space.

On opening, the disc appears to be in good position. Translation is fairly good.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has a little bit of peaking associated with it toward the medial aspect. A little bit better shape out laterally. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Again, it appears that there is discal tissue posteriorly positioned in the fossa. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle, and the disc appears to be in good position.
Left TMJ, axial view, shows a condyle that is quite long mediolaterally. Anteroposterior dimension appears somewhat narrow.

Right TMJ, axial view, shows a condyle that appears long mediolaterally. Anteroposterior dimension is narrow.
Impression:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis with posterior displacement of the articular discs
Rule out condylar hyperplasia

