B450
B450 is 60 years old, referred by Dr. XXXX.
PRIMARY CONCERNS
Sleep apnea.
Daytime tiredness.
Falls asleep at meetings.
Snoring.

Five years ago, B450 developed a rash problem. Dr. XXXX treated him and had initially placed him on steroids. He gained about 20 pounds and this is when he became significantly aware of having sleep apnea problems. Eventually, he was evaluated for this, and last year, he received a CPAP machine. This has fairly well controlled his sleep apnea although he still has daytime somnolence. He still has difficulties even with his CPAP machine of falling asleep during the day.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS Cymbalta 30 mg q.d.
Lipitor 20 mg q.d.
Enbrel 25 mg injections 2 times per week (for itching.)
Keflex 500 mg 3 times per day p.r.n. rash.

Dr. XXXX believes that B450's problems are due to allergic responses to nickel, chromium III, rubber, latex and black dye. He avoids these materials as much as he possibly can and wears no clothing with any kind of rubber or latex in them.

B450 has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo but may have a mild hearing loss. The other joints that bother him include his neck, possibly his back and his fingers. When he points with his index finger, he gets pain in the joint area. B450 now wears light colored clothing. In frontal view, B450 has good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 24 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is -2. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted 2 mm off to the left side. Chin is fairly much on the facial midline. In profile view, B450 demonstrates probably about 6 mm of AP deficiency in the maxilla. Upper lip supralabrale is probably 2 to 3 mm posterior to the subnasale. Chin is retruded by approximately 20 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short and chin-neck angle is poorly defined. The length of the soft tissue from chin to neck is about 20 to 25 mm. Intraorally, B450 has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has crowns on his teeth on the left side from first bicuspid through second molar and the right side from cuspid through second molar. The first bicuspid may be his normal tooth. He has significant crowding of the lower anterior arch. Significantly constricted lower arch. Left cuspid is probably 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. In the upper arch he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has some crowns on his upper teeth including the first bicuspid through the second molar on the right side and the same on the left side. He has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and a Class II end-on occlusion on the left side. He has about a 5 to 6 mm vertical overbite relationship.

Left maxillary mandibular arches are narrow. As he opens his jaws he appears to have some noises in his joint with an opening subtle click about 30 and closing about 20. Incisal opening is about 51 mm and excursive movements are 14 mm in each direction. He reports no problems with headaches, TMJ pain or myofascial pain. He rates jaw function, diet and disability at 0. He has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. He has had some chiropractic treatment for his neck problems which seems to have helped him. On intraoral examination, the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are all relatively normal. Intranasally, the nasoseptum is deviated significantly off towards the left side and there is a septal spur at the base of the septum. The turbinate on the left side does not look too enlarged but the right turbinate is quite large and it appears to extend all the way over to the deviated septum. The columella is moderately wide. The luminal valves look relatively normal. There is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm. On the models the occlusion can be shifted fairly close to a Class I on both sides but he tends to shift a little bit on the crossbite on the side when that is done. No significant transverse discrepancy between the maxilla and mandible although both arches are quite narrow. Both arches demonstrate transverse asymmetry with the left side of the upper arch, bicuspids and molar teeth being tipped somewhat palatally to the opposite side. The same is true in the lower arch with the left side being tipped medially moreso than the right side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows that B450 has crowns on his right cuspid through second molar, left first bicuspid through second molar, maxillary left first bicuspid through second molar and maxillary right first bicuspid through second molar. He has a root canal on the maxillary right second molar. Sinuses look clear. I do not see any other pathology present.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Superior and anterior joint spaces look fairly reasonably.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Relatively steep articular eminence. Bone in the fossa looks a little sclerotic. Condyle has a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it. Eminence is fairly steep. Joint space is a little bit better balanced on this side. Open views shows that there is moderate translation of the condyles bilaterally.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. There is a huge turbinate in the right side of the nose and deviation of the nasal septum. He has a spur off the left side of the septum. The airway looks fairly constricted and obstructed.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B450 has maxillary AP deficiency, posterior vertical maxillary deficiency and significant AP mandibular deficiency. He has a significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measuring about 4 mm and the base of the tongue measuring about 6 mm. He has a high occlusal plane angle.


BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc medially dislocated.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. Severe AP mandibular deficiency. Class II end-on occlusion on the left, Class I on the right.
Crowding of the lower anterior arch.
High occlusal plane angulation.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of AP dimension of 4 mm (normal 11 mm.)
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal septum deviated off to the left side with a large septal spur off to the left side.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Multiple crowns on all posterior teeth and all 4 quadrants. Daytime somnolence.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Try to expand the arch some. Tip the lateral incisor roots mesial and cuspid roots distal to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level mandibular arch. Try to expand the arch some. Strip the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct the tooth size discrepancy. Consider using Class III elastic on the right side and Class II elastic on the left side to try to correct the asymmetry in the lower arch in the AP position of the cuspids. Need to shift the right cuspid posteriorly 1 mm and the left cuspid forward 1 mm if possible. Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance forward and down graft it posteriorly. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Partial turbinectomies. Nasoseptoplasty. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. Restorative dentistry is necessary to finalize occlusion and dental rehabilitation.

B450 MRI Evaluation
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. There appears to be decreased lateral joint space. The disc appears to be medially displaced. The cortical bone appears to be intact although there does appear that there may have been previous loss of vertical height. There is a little bit of sclerosis in the cortical bone on the head of the condyle. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa of probably 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that still may have fairly good width. Decreased lateral joint space. The disc appears to be medially displaced. The lateral two-thirds of the condylar head in some areas is uncovered by the disc. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa probably 2 to 3 mm. Cortical bone appears to be intact although there appears that there may have been loss of condylar volume perhaps. There is some sclerosis in the head of the condyle.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that laterally there is no evidence of discal tissue present. As we approach medially there is discal tissue and it appears to be in reasonable position towards the more medial aspect. Towards the lateral aspect when the disc first comes in to view, it does appear to be anteriorly displaced. On opening, there is reduction of the disc and good translation about the disc and condyle. There is fluid present in the superior joint space. Articular eminence is fairly steep. There is sclerosis on the head of the condyle. A little bit of flattening of the anterosuperior head but not too significant.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows out laterally that the disc is not very evident because of medial displacement. There is some mild flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. There is a little bit of sclerosis present. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is good translation on the condyle and the articular disc with reduction of the disc. When the disc first comes in to view at the lateral aspect of the joint it is anteriorly displaced but towards the medial side it is in better anteroposterior position.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ mild arthritis and medial dislocation of the articular disc.
Right TMJ mild arthritis and medial dislocation of the articular disc.

