B451
B451 is 44 years and is referred by Dr. XXXX. She is in good health except for her jaw problems.
PRIMARY CONCERNS:
No room in her mouth for her tongue.
Back of mouth too far backward and too narrow.
Lower jaw position back too far.
Open lock problems. Cannot rest jaws in any position. Major pain in the jaw and cheek areas.
Cannot sleep because jaws cannot find a comfortable place to fit.

She would like:
To accomplish establishing more room in her mouth.
A comfortable position for her jaws to fit.
Jaws and teeth to fit together properly.
To eliminate pain problems.

She was diagnosed with a congential problem of Bethlehem muscular dystrophy. She has had orthodontic treatment from ages 20 to 23 that included the extraction of likely the four first bicuspids. Following this treatment and removal of her appliances, she began developing pain and the current problems that she is still facing. She developed open lock problems where her jaw would get opened and she would be unable to close it and would have to manipulate it to get it closed. Her bite was off significantly at that time. Six years ago she had cheek implants placed and was told that this would help relieve some of the tension on her jaw area. However, this did not make any improvements. She reinitiated orthodontic treatment again two years ago. Seven months later, she underwent LeFort I maxillary osteotomy to move the maxilla superiorly by Dr. XXXX. The maxilla was moved upwards to decrease the amount of vertical maxillary excess but the bite was not corrected. She is to continue along with the orthodontic treatment.

Her current pain is predominately in the masseter muscles relative to the jaw-associated pain. In addition, she gets severe headaches to a level of 10 that occur in her frontal, temporal, posterior head and top of the head. These used to occur as frequently as two times per week that would require her to essentially be bedridden. She rates her TMJ pain at 0, but rates her pain in her jaw area particularly in the masseter muscle area at a level of 10. She generally wakes up with this pain in the morning. She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 4, disability at 8.

She has no problems with earaches but gets occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo but has no hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is not aware of clenching and bruxism at night or during the day though I suspect that there may be some nocturnal clenching that could be occurring and would account for waking up with the jaw pain that she has.

In frontal view, she has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm. Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all fairly well aligned to the facial midline. In profile view, she has a little bit of fullness in the upper lip by probably about 3 to 4 mm. Chin may be retruded by probably about 6 to 8 mm perhaps. Chin-neckline has moderate length and is just slightly short. As she postures her mandible forward, it does improve her overall facial balance. In profile, she does have low mandibular plane angle of lower jaw morphology. Chin appears slightly strong compared to the AP position of the lower lip. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. She has some spacing between the cuspids and the second bicuspids. The space is a little bit greater perhaps on the left side than the right side. She has springs to activate the opening of those spaces. Transverse width of the lower arch is somewhat constricted. She has about 1.5 mm of spacing on the left side and about 2.5 mm of spacing on the right side in the lower arch. In the upper arch, it shows spacing between the upper cuspid and second bicuspid of probably only about 2 mm on each side currently. She has a full Class II malocclusion currently. It appears that she has a tooth size discrepancy as when she postures forward she is still in a slight Class II cuspid relationship. Upper lateral incisors appear small. When she bites together in centric relation she tends to slide forward a little bit into a little bit more comfortable bite. The AP overjet from centric relation is pretty close to 8 mm. Vertical overbite is probably about 2 mm. As she postures her mandible forward into a better AP relationship, she tends to go a little bit towards posterior crossbite. Oropharyngeal area looks fairly good. She has no tonsils present. The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are all within normal limits. Above the left tonsil, there is a small elevated area that is probably some residual tonsillar tissue above the main part of the tonsil. It has a little whitish portion to it. It probably measures about 4 to 5 mm in diameter. She has had her wisdom teeth removed. Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side. She does have a septal spur at the base of the septum that extends out into the right side of the nose. Turbinates are relatively normal in size. She has a good airway at least anteriorly that we could see on the left side and on the right side it is a little bit more constricted. Maximal incisal opening is 44 mm. Excursive movement to right 7 mm, to the left 8 mm. Opening without significant discomfort about 35 mm. To palpation, she has high moderate discomfort and pain over the masseter muscles, moderate pain over the TMJs, posterior neck and milder tenderness over the temporalis and SCMs. On excursive movements, she has a consistent pop in the left joint. The right side seems to function reasonably smooth.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
: Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. Sinuses appear relatively clear. She has 4 bone plates in the maxilla with 16 bone screws. Braces are present on all the teeth. Condyles appear relatively normal in architecture. Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Waters view shows the presence of the four bone plates in the maxilla. Sinuses appear relatively clear. The bony septum appears relatively straight.

Left TMJ tomogram is a little hard to read. The condyle appears large compared to the size of the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space may be slightly decreased in vertical direction.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also appears slightly large compared to the size of the fossa. Superior joint space may be somewhat decreased. On opening, there is good translation of both condyles anterior to the articular eminence.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a significant skeletal Class II jaw relationship. The head is tipped up somewhat but the oropharyngeal airway from the soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall is about 5 mm and the base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall about 8 to 9 mm. She has a full Class II malocclusion with approximately an 8 mm overjet relationship. Occlusal plane looks almost in a reverse angulation. She is slightly open as well, not in complete centric relationship. She has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Left TMJ anterior dislocated articular disc.
Right TMJ laterally displaced articular disc.
Maxillary transverse hypoplasia. Mandibular AP hypoplasia. Class II occlusion.
Missing all four first bicuspids.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Headaches. Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm. Low occlusal plane angulation.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Expand the arch and open up bilateral bicuspid spaces.
Align and level mandibular arch. Consider either keeping the lower spacing closed or open up space but try to distalize the molars some if possible to keep from flaring the lower anteriors any further forward.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward about 8 mm at the incisor tip, 6 mm at the chin.
Maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla to establish good bite relationship.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B451 MRI Evaluation
Age: 44/F
Date of Birth: 
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation: 

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. Cortical bone appears to be intact. There appears to be a little overdevelopment of bone vertically in the mid part of the fossa. Difficult to identify discal tissue. Joint space, however, looks fairly good except over medially there is maybe slight decreased joint space. There is also a hot spot towards the medial aspect of the fossa. There could possibly be some medial displacement of the articular disc but difficult to confirm. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa of about 3 to 4 mm. Also, the disc could have some lateral displacement but not as evident at the opposite side.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. A little osteophyte sticking off the lateral aspect of the condyle. Joint space actually looks fairly good. Disc appears perhaps slightly laterally displaced. It appears there may be some decreased joint space towards the medial aspect of this joint. Cortical bone does appear to be intact.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows out laterally that the disc is somewhat thickened compared to the medial aspect. The disc is very prominent towards the lateral aspect of the joint. More medially it is difficult to identify. More medially the condyle appears larger than it does towards the lateral aspect of the joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The disc appears to be in adequate position. A little bit of anterior beaking is present. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening there is good translation of the condyle and the articular disc appears to be reduced in all aspects in the opening movement. The disc appears to have fairly good morphology.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears fairly large in size anteroposteriorly. Towards the medial aspect of the joint there appears to be decreased joint space and the bone may be a little bit more uneven as compared to the more lateral aspect of the joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc appears to be in position particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint and again medially not as evident that could be indicative of lateral displacement. In fact, the disc is quite evident towards the lateral aspect of the joint more so than the head of the condyle is evident. The disc has fairly good morphology. It appears to be in good position anteroposteriorly in the mid and lateral aspect of the joint. There could be a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening there is good translation of the condyle and articular disc with the disc in a reduced position.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc with lateral dislocation.

