B452 
B452 is 54 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX.
Patient History
She has had previous surgery including surgery on her right great toe. She has had a tubal ligation and arthroscopy on her knee and had a hysterectomy. She also has had previous jaw surgery. B452 is in good health with no major medical problems. The only medication she takes is Estratest 2 mg daily.

B452's problems began about three or four years ago in reference to having any kind of problems with her jaw joints. She began noticing some clicking occasionally in the right TMJ of unknown etiology. She has no history of earaches, vertigo, or hearing loss but does have some tinnitus that comes and goes. Other joints that bother her include her neck, possibly her left shoulder, and her fingers, which were the product of an injury. She used to have fairly severe clenching and bruxing of her teeth at night to the point that it would wake her up. Since having orthodontic appliances placed, it has not been as significant. She has worn orthodontic appliances for about 2-1/2 years now. Three months ago, B452 was taken to the operating room for bilateral sagittal split osteotomies to advance the mandible. On the first side, which was the left side, there was an unfavorable split. Dr. XXXX elected at that time to put the bone piece back in place and put a bone plate on to stabilize it. She had some temporary loss of sensation on that side, but that is recovering, and she says she notices continued improvement in that area. She does have some areas of hypersensitivity currently as expected as that nerve regains function. She has no problems with headaches, no TMJ pain, and no pain around the head and neck area. She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability at 0.

Patient Concerns
Her teeth and jaws don't align properly
Difficulties eating and chewing because of the jaw alignment
Clicking/popping noises in the right jaw joint

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B452 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm. Maxillary midline is shifted off to the left side about a millimeter. Mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Nasal tip is off to the right side a couple of millimeters. Chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline. She may have just slightly more fullness in the left side of the mandible as compared to the right side by maybe just 1 to 2 mm. In frontal view, when B452 is in centric relation, her mandible and chin are also shifted just slightly off to the left side.

In profile view, B452 has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose. Could be perhaps just a couple of millimeters of AP maxillary deficiency. Chin is approximately 8 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline may be just slightly short, and chin-neck angle is moderately well-defined. She does have some slight lip incompetence of probably about 4 mm. Chin is fairly prominent compared to the position of the lower lip. As B452 postures the lower jaw forward, it does improve her profile and her chin-neck length and angle.

Intraorally, B452 is missing the mandibular right second bicuspid, first and second molar, with the third molar probably in the second molar position. On the left side, she is missing the first and second molars with the third molar tipped forward into the second molar position. On the right side, the bridge has been removed that was there, so she has at least a two to three-unit gap on that side. She maintains her bridge on the left side replacing just the first molar tooth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth on the right side except it looks like she is missing perhaps the first molar with the second and third molar drifted forward into the first molar position. On the left side, she is missing the second bicuspid, probably first and second molars, with the third molar drifted forward into the second molar position. The upper left bridge remains in place. In centric relation, she has a Class II cuspid relationship bilaterally, and she has about a 5 to 6-mm vertical overbite relationship. As B452 slides her lower jaw forward, she approaches a little bit closer to a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She does have posterior open bites in this position. She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch and perhaps a slight reverse curve in the upper arch. There is a significant cant in the maxillary occlusion with the right cuspid being probably a good 2 to 2.5 mm lower than the left cuspid. The lower arch is relatively level. Some significant upper arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being almost 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. The lower arch appears a little bit more symmetrical.

Maximal incisal opening is 45 mm. Excursive movements are about 12 mm in each direction. She may have a little bit of crepitus in the right TMJ area.
Radiographic Evaluation

On Panorex four years ago, it appears that she is missing the mandibular left first and second molars with the third molar drifted forward into the second molar position. On the mandibular right side, she is missing the second bicuspid and first and second molar with what appears to be the third molar drifted forward into the second molar position. She has a full unit bridge on the right side and a three unit bridge on the left side. In the upper arch, she may be missing the first molar on the upper right side with the second and third molar drifted forward, but over on the left side, she is missing the second bicuspid and probably the first and second molar with the third molar drifted forward into the second molar position. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear relatively small in size. Condyles appear to have reasonable morphology, although there are perhaps some changes present.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph from 1four years ago shows that B452 has a Class II, division II malocclusion. Airway looks good. She has a significant difference in the vertical position of the occlusal planes on one side compared to the other side, and there is just a slight vertical difference at the inferior border, but the occlusal plane level shows a much greater vertical variance from one side to the other. Tooth-size analysis shows that there is a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.

Panorex taken today shows absence of the mandibular left first and second molars with probably the third molar drifted forward in the second molar position. Bone plate present on that side with four screws and a four-hole plate and then a single screw higher up. On the right side, she is missing the second bicuspid and probably first and second molars with the third molar drifted forward in the second molar position. It is possible that the two posterior teeth could be second molars, but with their angulation I am not sure. She has a root canal on the mandibular right first bicuspid and has a little periapical pathology at the bottom of that tooth. This may be just residual from previous problems. In the upper arch, she is missing the left second bicuspid, first and second molar, with probably the third molar drifted forward into the second molar position. On the right side, may be missing a first molar with the second and third molar drifted forward. There is a significant space in the right side between the cuspid and first bicuspid and also a smaller space between the right lateral incisor and right cuspid. Pulp canals on the two central incisors are somewhat obliterated. Roots appear somewhat foreshortened with the upper centrals.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Some slight increased anterior joint space. A little bit of peaking at the top of the condyle. Otherwise joint looks relatively normal.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Appears to be good superior and anterior joint space. Condyle appears a little bit flattened on top. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Open views show good translation in both joints.
Waters view shows the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear large. She has a severely deviated nasal septum. Nasal airway, particularly on the right side, appears pretty much obliterated. In this view, the mandible was held forward, and the open bites can be seen posteriorly with it being greater on the left side as compared to the right side. Bone plates can be seen on the left posterior mandible. Left posterior occlusion appears to be a little bit wider as compared to the right side which correlates to the clinical impression of a yaw in the posterior occlusion.

Basic Diagnoses
Rule out TMJ articular disc dislocations
AP mandibular deficiency
Slight AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Class II occlusion
Maxillary asymmetry with the right cuspid being 2 mm anterior to the left cuspid
Maxillary midline shifted to the left 1 to 2 mm
Mandibular dental midline shifted to the left 1 to 2 mm as is the chin
Missing the following teeth: Right maxillary first molar but space closed, maxillary left second bicuspid, first and second molar with the third molar forward in the second molar position, mandibular left first and second molar with the third molar drifted forward in the second molar position, right mandibular second bicuspid, first and second molar with the third molar drifted forward to the second molar position
Maxillary and mandibular yaw shifted to the left 1 to 2 mm
Vertical asymmetry of the maxilla with the left cuspid being about 2 to 2.5 mm higher than the right cuspid
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm
Large space between the maxillary right cuspid and first bicuspid
Left maxillary four-unit bridge, left mandibular three-unit bridge
Deviated nasal septum
Moderate airway obstruction
Transverse cant in the maxillary occlusion with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side
Snoring
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an airway dimension of 3 mm (normal 11 mm)
Daytime somnolence
Sleep disorder with feeling unrested
Frequent nighttime arousals

Recommended Treatment
Redo MRI with the mandible in centric relation in closed position only to assess joint space and disc position in centric relation

Presurgical orthodontics Remove the temporary crown between the right cuspid/first bicuspid
Align and level maxillary arch. Retract right cuspid 2 mm. Shift maxillary midline to the right 1 to 2 mm. Open up space around each upper lateral incisor to equal 1 mm (0.5 mm on each side of each tooth) to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy Continue to align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it posteriorly
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward
Possible bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair if MRI confirms that the discs are displaced
Nasal septoplasty

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
Restorative dentistry to replace bridges and finalize occlusion including bonding of the maxillary lateral incisors

B452 MRI Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of Reading: 
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa by maybe 2 mm at the most. Slight decreased joint space out laterally. Perhaps articular disc seen anteriorly which possibly could be in position.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Downward curvature of the lateral rim is fairly minimal, probably being less than a millimeter. Appears to be fairly good joint space vertically. May be some discal tissue present there. Anteriorly, there is discal tissue seen. Cortical bone appears to be intact on the condyle and fossa in both joints.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that appears to be postured forward in the fossa and is not in centric relation. There is a definite increased posterior and superior joint space. Discal tissue appears to be in position at this imaging level. Articular eminence is moderately steep and relatively short in length. Condyle appears to have fairly good morphology with just some slight flattening on the anterior head but not too significantly.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and of the articular disc.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Could be a little bit of flattening on the anterior head but not too significantly. Condyle appears to be postured forward with increased posterior joint space. Articular disc appears to have relatively normal architecture and appears to be in reasonable position.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and of the articular disc with both remaining in good position. Articular eminence is moderately steep but really short in vertical length.

Impression:
Relatively normal left TMJ but closed MRI was taken with the mandible postured forward
Relatively normal right TMJ but closed MRI was taken with the mandible postured forward

B452  MRI Evaluation
Date of Acquisition:	
Date of Reading:
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. Condyle looks fairly large without evidence of resorption, although there is a little bit of a divot in the center of the condyle. Slightly decreased lateral joint space. Disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. Relatively minimal downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Lateral pole of the condyle actually extends beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. The lateral rim of the fossa is relatively flat but appears to be slightly decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint. Disc appears to be medially displaced, and there is distal tissue seen anterior to the condyle. Cortical bone appears to be intact on both the condyle and in the fossa.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has some peaking and perhaps a small osteophyte sticking off the top part and the middle portion of the condyle. Decreased posterior joint space and superior posterior joint space. The articular eminence is moderately steep but relatively short in length. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the posterior inferior aspect of the articular eminence.

Open views are extremely hard to read, but it appears that the condyle translate beyond the articular eminence and the disc reduces upon translation.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with fairly good shape to it with a little bit of flattening on the anterior head. Cortical bone appears to be intact in both the fossa and on the condyle. Moderate slope to the articular eminence, and the length of the eminence is somewhat short. Decreased superior and posterior joint space present particularly toward the lateral aspect of the joint. The disc is anteriorly displaced but not as significantly as the other side. Toward the medial side, the disc appears to be a little bit better positioned. A little bit of anterior beaking is present on the condylar head.

Open views are very difficult to interpret, but it appears that there is good translation of the condyle, and the articular disc appears to reduce on opening.

Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis with osteophyte formation and articular disc dislocation with reduction on opening
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with very early reduction on opening

