B453
B453 is 10 years old, referred by Dr. XX. B453 is in good health with no major medical problems. She does not really have any headache problems or TMJ pain problems. She occasionally will get some discomfort in the posterior retromandibular area. This is only occasionally and seems to occur occasionally when she eats. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo. Her dad's family has problems with lower jaw. Her mother states that when B453 is relaxed and resting she usually postures her mouth open with her tongue postured out.

In frontal view, B453 has fairly good left to right facial asymmetry. The midlines are reasonably well aligned though may be off just 1 mm. Chin appears to be pretty much on the facial midline. Nasal tip appears to be shifted a little bit to the right side 1 to 2 mm. In profile view, she may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency probably not too much at this time. Chin appears a little bit prominent. She has a high occlusal plane, mandibular plane facial morphological facial type. Intraorally, she has mixed dentition. She has four incisors and first molars in place. She has retained primary Cs, Ds and Es bilaterally. In the upper arch, she likewise has retained Cs, Ds, and Es. Maxillary left lateral incisor is just coming in but the right one is still covered with tissue. She has a Class III occlusal relationship being just slightly greater on the right side than the left side but not quite full Class III. She has bilateral posterior crossbites. She has an anterior open bite of about 2 to 3 mm. Incisors are essentially end-on. She has crowding in the lower anterior arch. All the teeth touch except for the incisors. Incisal opening is about 43 mm. Excursive movement is difficult to tell but is probably around 5 mm as there were perceptual difficulties on doing those movements.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows that she is in mixed dentition. Cs, Ds and Es are still present in all four quadrants. All teeth are present and accounted for. Second molars are developing and it appears the third molars are also developing as well. She has a diastema between her central incisors. Sinuses appear clear and turbinates appear moderately large. Condylar head and neck appears elongated.

Waters view shows that the septum in the bony area is reasonably straight. The turbinates appear large and appear to block most of the nasal airway. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Cuspids are developing in quite high in the maxilla. The face appears to be symmetric.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that does not show up real well, is a little hard to see. Condylar head and neck appears elongated. Joint space I believe is okay but difficult to tell.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle head and neck that appears somewhat elongated. Joint space is narrow but could be related to a narrow disc and thin disc. Opening view is available and it shows moderate translation but clinically she has good translation and mobility.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia. Mandibular prognathism.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.

Slight AP maxillary deficiency.
Class III occlusion.
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.
Anterior open bite. Crowding of lower anterior arch.
Mixed dentition with retained Cs, Ds and Es in all four quadrants.
Unerupted second molars in all four quadrants and maxillary right lateral incisor. Developing third molars in all four quadrants.
Moderate high occlusal plane angulation. Hypertrophied turbinates.
Hypertrophied nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue.
Nasal airway obstruction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: Presurgical orthodontics.
Consider some moderate expansion of the maxilla but no more than 5 mm.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Monitor facial growth and development over the next four years.
Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies to stop the accelerated disc proportion and mandibular growth.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to align the mandible.
Consider maxillary osteotomies if necessary for functional and esthetic quality outcome.
Consider partial turbinectomies if nasal airway problem exits.
Consider adenoidectomy if they have not been removed previously for airway factors.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4

B453
B453 is 14 years and 10 months of age. Her orthodontist is Dr. XX. I had originally seen B453 approximately 4 years ago when she was 10 years of age and we elected to observe her growth until she got a little bit older. The only treatment she has really had since I saw her was removal of her wisdom teeth at Thanksgiving four years ago. She also did wear orthodontic appliances for about 2 years to align the independent arches. B453 has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, nor myofascial pain problems. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is not aware of clenching or bruxing. She is predominantly a mouth breather day and night.

In frontal view, there are some asymmetric factors present. Upper lip length is about 16 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The nasal tip is off to the right side about 3 mm. The mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm off towards the left side, but is in fairly good alignment with the midline of the chin. The chin also is off to the left side about 3 or 4 mm. In profile view, the maxilla appears retruded about 4 or 5 mm. The chin appears to have a fairly good AP projection. The left mandibular ramus soft tissue is about 3 to 4 mm more prominent than the right side. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch and has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has an anterior open bite of about 5 mm. She is almost full Class III on the right side and an end-on Class III on the left side. If the open bite was closed, the Class III relationship would be worse. She has an anterior and left posterior cross bite with a slight tendency towards a cross bite on the right side. She has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. The incisal opening is 35 mm, excursion movement to the right 8 mm, to the left 6 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal. Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged and there is significant deviation of the nasal septum anteriorly off to the left side. The nasal airway appears significantly obstructed.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the recent removal of the impacted four third molars. All the rest of the teeth are present. She does have an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the right side and appear to block a good portion of the airway. The sinuses appear clear.

Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the right side creating some nasal airway obstruction. The sinuses appear relatively clear.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. Vertical joint space is extremely narrow. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 4 to 5 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. Vertical joint space is extremely narrow. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 4 to 5 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears posteriorly and superiorly positioned in the fossa. The articular eminence is moderately shallow. There is increased anterior joint space. The condylar head and necks appear elongated.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears posteriorly and superiorly positioned in the fossa. The articular eminence is moderately shallow. There is increased anterior joint space. Condylar head and necks appear elongated.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla appears AP maxillary deficient. There is an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. High occlusal plane angle is present in the lower arch. Oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal.

B453 does have some aunts that have prominent jaw as well. Her grandfather on her dad's side also had a fairly prominent jaw, so there is probably a genetic factor involved.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia with greater growth on the right side. Mandibular prognathism.
Maxillary transverse hypoplasia.
Class III occlusion being worse on the right side.
Anterior and left posterior cross bite with a tendency towards a cross bite on the right side. Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.
Anterior open bite of 5 mm.
Occluding only on the first and second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion. Mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.
High occlusal plane angle in the mandibular arch.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Deviated nasal septum.
Nasal airway obstruction.
External nasal deformity.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	MRI of left and right TMJs.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch at two occlusal plane levels. Place a step in the upper arch between the lateral incisors and cuspids to align the four incisors at a slightly elevated occlusal plane level compared to the cuspids and posterior teeth. Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Place brackets on second molars, but do not engage the second molars in the arch wire. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Place brackets on the second molars, but do not engage the second molars in the arch wire.
3.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular discs repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition the mandible and achieve good facial symmetry. c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it slightly, expand, and level the occlusal plane to maximize the occlusion. d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. e.	Nasal septoplasty. f.	External rhinoplasty.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B453 MRI 
DATE OF BIRTH: 
DATE OF ACQUISITION:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. The condylar head may be a little bit long vertically. There is decreased vertical joint space and the disc appears to be medially displaced. The disc is thin. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm. There is very little vertical joint space at the lateral rim of the fossa.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good width, but it appears a little bit long vertically. The lateral rim of the fossa is flat with only about a 2 mm downward curvature. The articular disc is thin, but appears to be medially displaced. Vertical joint space is narrow. There is very minimal joint space at the lateral aspect of the fossa.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle appears long in vertical height. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination, but is fairly long in length. Difficult to identify discal tissue. It is possible that the disc may be anteriorly displaced. There is significantly restricted translation.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a long condylar head and neck. There is decreased vertical joint space. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space anterior to the condyle. The articular eminence has moderate steepness and is a little long in length. Right TMJ shows very limited translation.

IMPRESSION:
Elongated condyles bilaterally that could be compatible with condylar hyperplasia.
Thin discs but medial and perhaps anteriorly displaced bilaterally. Severely limited translation of the condyles.

