B458 
B458 is 16 years old and referred by Dr. XX.
Patient History

B458 has had her wisdom teeth removed. She takes minocycline for her complexion. B458 has been in orthodontic appliances for about five years. She started out with some crossbite problems.

Patient Concerns
The primary concerns that B458 has at this time include the following:
Facial asymmetry.
Teeth and jaws don't fit together very well.
Occasional lightheadedness and dizziness.
Clicking and popping in the left jaw joint.

She does get occasional sinus headaches.
Clinical Evaluation
In frontal view, B458 has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face. She does have asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Nasal tip is off to the right side probably a couple of millimeters. Maxillary dental midline is off to the right a millimeter. Mandibular dental midline is off to the right 5 to 6 mm. Chin is off to the right probably around 7 mm. Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly close to being aligned with each other. As B458 shifts her mandible towards the left side about 6 mm, it does appear her overall facial symmetry, though she is a little bit prominent in the left side of the face and still long in the left side of the face as she shifts into that position.

In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Lower lip is a little bit protrusive. Chin is a little bit retruded by probably about 5 mm. Chin-neckline is slightly short, although chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and leveled. Roots of the lower anterior teeth are quite prominent and may be through the buccal cortex. Attached gingiva seems to be adequate.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Has an accentuated curve of Wilson in the upper arch. She has an end-on incisor relationship with the right central. She has a crossbite on the right side, and on the left side, she tends more towards an open bite position. Upper lateral incisors are quite small. Oropharynx appears clear, but she does have rather large tonsils, although they appear non-inflamed. B458 is predominantly a mouth breather, particularly when she sleeps.

Intranasally, she seems to have relatively large turbinates. Septum appears fairly straight. She has some thickening in the lateral alar walls that may constrict her airway a little bit. Luminal valves may be a little bit constricted, however, opening the nares did not seem to improve her airway significantly. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side, Class III on the left side. She has no pain to palpation around the head and neck area. She has a definite audible click in the left joint at about 30 mm of opening, and closing probably about 20 mm. Right joint seems to function reasonably smoothly.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Sinuses look relatively clear. Nasal airway looks reasonable. Left condyle appears quite large compared to the right side, and condylar head and neck appear longer on the left side than the right side. Can still see some evidence of third molar extraction sockets.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears quite small compared to the size of the fossa. Articular eminence has a gradual slope to it. Appears to be decreased superior joint space, although the posterior and anterior spaces look quite good.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Decreased superior joint space. Articular eminence has a relatively shallow slope to it. Condyle looks much larger in size compared to the opposite side. Condylar head and neck length appear longer than the other side.

Opening shows good translation in both joints.
Waters view shows the presence of the asymmetry. Left nasal airway appears a little bit more blocked than the right side. Sinuses appear clear. Symmetry of the mandible is noted.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows an end-on cuspid relationship but a Class II skeletal relationship. Moderately high occlusal plane angulation. Tonsils are quite prominent. Oropharyngeal airway, however, looks very good. Tooth-size discrepancy of 5.5 mm in the anterior six teeth. This is primarily due to the extremely small upper lateral incisors.

Basic Diagnoses
Left mandibular condylar hyperplasia and articular disc dislocation.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
Maxillary asymmetry.
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Class II occlusion on the right, Class III occlusion on the left.
Severe tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 5.5 mm primary due to extremely small maxillary lateral incisors.
Slight overangulation of maxillary incisors.
Cross-bite on the right side.
End-on incisor relationship.
Maxillary midline shifted to the right 1 to 2 mm and mandibular dental midline shifted approximately 5 mm to the right.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics, option #1
Extract maxillary first bicuspids.
Align and level maxillary arch. Retract cuspids all the way and retract anterior teeth but maintain 2.5 mm of space around each upper lateral incisor. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally.
Align and level mandibular arch.

Presurgical orthodontics, option #2
Open up space around maxillary lateral incisors to equal at least a millimeter. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally.
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior six teeth removing approximately 2.5 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the tooth-size discrepancy.

Surgery
Left TMJ high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament with Mitek anchor.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to correct the transverse cant, advance, and correct any transverse problems that are present.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to align the mandible under the facial midline.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B458  MRI Evaluation  
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. There seems to be some unevenness on the condylar head. Cortical bone is not really clearly defined. Articular disc appears to be medially displaced. Decreased superior joint space. Condyle appears wider than the opposite side. Very minimal downward rotation of the lateral rim of the fossa.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Appears to be reasonable joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves down a little bit more than the opposite side. Difficult to identify discal tissue though it could be a little bit medial.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. In a couple of views, the cortical bone is difficult to identify particularly towards the medial side. There appears to be decreased superior joint space. Some discal tissue is seen. Difficult to tell if it is in the proper position. It is difficult to identify discal tissues towards the lateral aspect of the joint, which could be capable with medial disc displacement. T2 films show a little bit of fluid in the posterior joint space, and posterior joint space does extend inferiorly quite a ways. It is possible there could be some posterior displacement of the articular disc. No inflammation seen.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle, and there appears to be reduction of the disc.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that appears a little bit small in dimension compared to the size of the fossa. Fossa has a shallow slope to the articular eminence. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence almost. Disc is foreshortened. No significant inflammatory process seen.

On opening, there is some restriction of translation compared to the opposite side, and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Impression:
Correlated with the clinical evaluation, left TMJ condylar hyperplasia with articular disc dislocation predominantly in a medial direction.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction.

