B459 
B459 is 17 years old. B459 was referred by Dr. XX.

This year, B459 was involved in a motor vehicle accident where the car she was a passenger in was T-boned by an 18-wheeler. B459 sustained a pelvic fracture, right clavicle fracture, a coccyx fracture, and multiple fractures to the mandible including a left subcondylar fracture with significant displacement, left parasymphysis non-displaced fracture, and a right mandibular ramus non-displaced fracture. She was treated with the placement of arch bars and intermaxillary fixation. She was in intermaxillary fixation for 2 months. B459 is now 3 months post injury.

B459 has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, nor myofascial pain, but she rates her jaw function at 7, diet at 7, disability at 6. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, but does get occasional vertigo if she gets up too fast, but this was present prior to her injury. No other joints bother her. She is not aware of clenching or bruxing. The only medications she takes are BCP's. B459 has never had orthodontic treatment performed. Surgery was this year and consisted of closed reduction of the left subcondylar fracture, left parasymphysis and right ramus fractures. She has had the intermaxillary fixation off for 2 months.

In frontal view, B459 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 17 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline. In profile, she has good facial balance. Intraorally, B459  has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has thin attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she also has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with about a 2.5 mm overbite. On opening, B459 deviates about 3 mm to the left. The incisal opening is about 38 mm. The maximal incisal opening is 38 mm and excursion movement to the right 3 mm and to the left 13 mm. To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area except for the masseter muscles on the left side at a level of 4 and the left TMJ at 3. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy. She has very large tonsils, but she does not have much problems with tonsillitis apparently.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. There is evidence of a previous fracture on the right ramus area and also evidence of a left subcondylar fracture. The left parasymphysis fracture is not readily identified.

Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight. Turbinates are of moderate size, but sinuses are relatively clear.
Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. The septum is reasonably straight and the turbinates are of moderate size, but clinically there is no airway obstruction.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows the presence of a subcondylar fracture with the condyle rotated medially. The condylar stump/neck of condyle function against the articular eminence. It is completely out of the fossa.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is postured just slightly forward in the fossa. The condyle otherwise looks relatively normal.
Left TMJ coronal view shows not much present in the fossa. The head of the condyle is completely missing in the x-ray.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good shape to it as well as a good fossa but some decreased lateral joint space.
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows good skeletal Class I occlusal relationship. She appears to have good oropharyngeal airway.

Diagnoses for B459 would be as follows:
Involvement in MVA this year sustaining left mandibular subcondylar fracture with severe displacement, left parasymphysis fracture (non-displaced) and right mandibular ramus fracture (non-displaced) Closed reduction of mandibular right ramus fracture, left parasymphysis, but open exploration of left subcondylar fracture. Malunion of left subcondylar fracture of the condyle at a 90-degree angle to the vertical ramus.
Articular disc positioned between the stump of the mandibular condylar neck and articular eminence.
Class I cuspid-molar relationship.
Maxillary incisors slightly retropositioned since the accident likely due to the arch bars.

The treatment options were discussed with the patient, her boyfriend and her parents and included the following:
Do no surgery and function with the current anatomical relationship. Consider left mandibular TMJ surgery with removal of the condylar stump, placement of the articular disc over the remaining condylar stump, and sagittal split osteotomy to reposition the condyle stump posteriorly and superiorly into the fossa. Left TMJ reconstruction with total joint prostheses.

Since the patient is functioning well with her current normal but adequately functioning left TMJ joint relationship and the fact that she is pain free with reasonably good jaw function, I would suggest option 1 at this time. If she develops symptoms or problems, then option 2 or 3 can be performed at any time in the future. However, her good occlusion, lack of pain, and reasonably good function suggest that option treatment 1 benefits supersede the risks of doing the other two treatment options. However, if the patient develops symptoms such as TMJ pain, headaches, myofascial pain, malocclusion, significant difficulties eating and chewing, etc., then either option 2 or 3 could have benefits that supersede the risks.

B459 and her family understand the risks and I have currently recommended that she follow option 1 unless symptoms develop.
B459 MRI  
DOB:	 

DATE OF ACQUISITION: 
Right TMJ shows a condyle with fairly good morphology and articular eminence with a moderate inclination. The disc appears to be in position in this joint. There is moderate translation. There is some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle, however, the disc appears to be in normal position on this side. There is a large area of fluid filling most of the fossa in the left joint space.

Left mandibular sagittal view shows the condyle positioned beneath and almost anterior to the articular eminence. It appears to the disc is in position. There is some translation of the condyle. The articular disc is sitting beneath the articular eminence and difficult to tell the alignment to the actual head of the condyle, but the head may be tipped over medially.

Left TMJ coronal view shows that the condyle is fractured at the subcondylar neck and the condyle is sitting at a 90-degree angulation to the vertical aspect of the ramus. The condylar head is pointing to the center of the skull. The articular disc is sitting over the condylar neck and not on top of the condyle.

Right TMJ condyle appears relatively normal.
IMPRESSION: Left TMJ subcondylar fracture with the condyle displaced medially at 90 degree angle to the vertical ramus and with the articular disc sitting over top of the neck of the condyle.
Normal right TMJ.

