B460 
B460 is 30 years old and is referred by Dr. XX. B460 has had a C-section 2 years ago and tubal ligation 2 tears agi. She otherwise is in good health. She currently takes Lortab 500 mg 2 tablets per day. She has had an adverse reaction she believes to Sulfa. B460 remembers as a teenager that she had clicking and popping in her jaw joints. Etiology is basically unknown. She does report that at the age of 5 and again at 7, she fell of her bicycle and broke her nose each time. At the age of 18 she began developing headaches. She did have an orthodontic consult and the orthodontist told her that she should have orthodontics and some jaw surgery to fix her jaw problems. Since that time, she has been through significant treatments including splint therapy x4. B460  years ago, her jaw became dislocated. She was placed on a Bionater for a few weeks and then placed in an orthotic type of an appliance. She had extensive physical therapy done as well. In addition, she had steroid injections times 6 or 7 and at least 5 injections in the left TMJ and it is not known how many injections occurred in the right side.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Jaw muscle trismus. Clicking and popping on the left side particularly grinding.
Constant pain in the jaw joints.
Significant facial asymmetry. This is getting progressively worse.
Headaches.
Neck and shoulder pain.
Difficulties eating with increased pain and discomfort after completing her meals.

B460 gets daily headaches in the frontal and temple areas bilaterally at about a level of 5. Her average daily TMJ pain is at 8 but can escalate to 10. Her average daily overall pain is at 7, jaw function at 7, diet and disability at 5.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
: In frontal view, upper lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Nasal tip is off to the right side probably about 2 to 3 mm. Maxillary dental midline is about 2 mm off to the right side. Mandibular dental midline is probably about 5 mm off to the right side. Chin is probably about 7 to 8 mm off to the right side. In profile view, B460 has fairly good vertical and AP symmetry. There is just some slight deficiency in the chin area but not too significant. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a crown on the right second molar. She has Class III end-on occlusion on the left side by probably about 3 mm. She has an end-on incisor relationship and is a Class I on the right side. She has a crossbite extending from the right lateral incisor all the way back to first molar area. Second molar is fairly close to being out of crossbite but is sort of end-on. B460 has had her wisdom teeth removed and she also had supernumerary tooth removed from the maxilla above the second bicuspid bilaterally. B460 has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being approximately 3 mm lower than the right side in the cuspid area in both arches. Oropharyngeal areas look relatively healthy. Tissues look normal. She has a slightly enlarged uvula.  

Soft palate appears relatively normal and faucial pillars appear relatively normal. Tonsils are present and appear healthy and normal. Intranasally there is a little bit of deviation in the septum with a little bit of spurring off to the right side. Turbinates are enlarged particularly on the left side and it appears significantly larger than normal. It seems like there may be some nasal airway obstruction although she does not report any symptoms. B460 does have some crenations on her tongue but not too severe. She does have significant daytime somnolence but not aware of snoring or any sleep apnea problems. She does not sleep well. She wakes up about 6 or 7 times per night. They have tried different medications with her but they apparently have not worked well. She has probably less than 1 mm of vertical overbite. To palpation, she has some rather severe pain over the left TMJ, masseter muscles and styloid areas as well as the posterior neck. She has moderate to high-moderate pain over the medial pterygoids, temporalis muscles, SCMs and shoulders. Maximal incisal opening is 28 mm but it was quite painful and it caused her jaws to jerk quite a bite. Opening without significant pain was only 14 mm. Excursive movement to the right 0, to the left 3 mm. Joints seem to function reasonably well though B460 was aware of crepitus occurring in the left joint. She gets knots on the masseter muscle on the left side. She has no problems with earaches or hearing loss but does have tinnitus and occasionally gets vertigo. No other joints bother her.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Right condyle appears a little bit large but appears to have normal architecture. Left joint is more difficult to evaluate but it appears there are some abnormal changes on the condyle.

Waters view did not come out real well but shows that there is moderate enlargement of the turbinates. Sinuses appear relatively clear.
Left TMJ tomogram shows some abnormal pathology present in the joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.

Right TMJ shows on one view there appears to be decreased superior joint space. The condyle and joint have much better architecture on the side, however. On opening, there are very minimal translatory capabilities.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a fairly good Class I skeletal occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway looks good.
BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Left mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Bilateral TMJ articular discs dislocation.
Left vertical maxillary excess and asymmetry.
Mandibular asymmetry prognathism.
Class III end-on occlusion on the left side.

 
Posterior crossbite on the right side.
End-on incisor relationship.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 3 to 4 mm lower than the right side.
Severe TMJ pain. Severe headaches. Severe myofascial pain. Masticatory dysfunction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Left TMJ high condylectomy.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the maxilla.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition in the mandible into proper position with the maxilla and onto the facial midline.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B460  MRI Evaluation  
Date of Birth 
Date of MRI: 
Axial view of left TMJ shows enlargement of the condyle with significant anterior projection. The right condyle appears relatively normal in size and shape.

Left TMJ coronal view shows that the left condyle appears to have some unevenness on the superior surface with osteophyte formation perhaps. The condyle is somewhat larger than the right side but it does not appear too significantly different. The condyle may be a little bit larger anteroposteriorly. There may be medial displacement of the articular disc. There is a dark spot at the superolateral aspect of the condyle and joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good shape and morphology. There appears to be decreased joint space vertically. Difficult to tell where the discal tissue is. There appears to be lateral osteophyte condylar formation off the condyle that extends out towards the lateral aspect of the rim.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit abnormal shape and texture to it and there appears to be some changes in the trabeculation pattern in the condylar head towards the lateral aspect of the joint. There appears to be an anterior mass in front of the condyle which could possibly be discal tissue or bony tissue. More medial, the disc appears to be in position but towards the lateral aspect the disc appears to be anteriorly positioned. The condyle has a more normal appearance towards the medial side of the joint.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a better shape and morphology. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced towards the lateral aspect of the joint but towards the medial aspect it appears to be in better position. There does not appear to be any significant inflammation although there is one area that shows perhaps a little bit of fluid in the superior posterior aspect of the joint.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ architectural changes in the condylar head and articular disc displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint but in a more normal position medially. There are definite changes in the trabeculation pattern around the condylar head. Right TMJ anteriorly displaced disc at the lateral aspect of the joint.

I-CAT cone beam tomograms show on the left joint that there is significant change at the top of the condyle with what appears to be pathological growth process. Right TMJ condyle and joint space appears fairly well balanced. There is some slight decreased posterior joint space. There is a little bit of flattening in the anterior head of the condyle.

Panorex shows that the dental midlines are shifted off center with the mandible being to the right of the maxilla. Sinuses appear relatively clear. There appears to be a growth process occurring on the left condyle extending above the normal architecture of the condyle. Photographs show that she has developed some significant facial asymmetry. Growth is compatible with osteochondroma versus osteoma.

