B462 
B462 is 25 years old, referred by Dr. XX.
PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Headaches.
Pain in the jaws while awakening in the morning.
Mouth locks open.
Jaw pops frequently. Lips will not shut over her teeth.
Lots of gum tissue exposed when smiling. Teeth are flattening.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: Polyethylene glycol 3350 POWD once daily. Rozerem 8 mg daily.
The only treatment she has had was orthodontics from 13 to 11 or 10 years ago. B462's TMJ problems began about 2 years ago of unknown etiology. She did have orthodontics when she was about 12 to 14 years old. She takes no medications currently. She gets no earaches, occasional tinnitus and moderate vertigo but no hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She does have an allergy to ragweed. She gets some problems when wearing cheap earrings. She is very much aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at nighttime as well as during the day.

She gets headaches about two to three times a week that occur predominately in the temple about a level of 5. She rates her average TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 5, diet at 1, disability at 3.

In frontal view, B462 has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. She has prominent masseter muscles and mandibular angles. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 7 mm. Maxillary dental midline is shifted off to the right about 1 mm. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 1.5 mm off to the right side although the chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline. In profile view, B462 has excessive length in the lower third face. She has a lip incompetence of probably about 7 mm. She has a C-shaped curve in the upper lip. Some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 to 5 mm. Chin is retruded about 15 mm. Chin-neckline is somewhat short though the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined. She does have a slight head postured forward neck position. Intraorally, B462 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. There is some very mild crowding in the lower anterior arch and she has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has basically a Class I cupid molar relationship with about a 2 mm overbite relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars appear normal. Intranasally, the turbinates appear hyperplastic and enlarged. The septum is relatively straight though anteriorly on the right side there is a little bit of spurring off to the right side. She is unaware but she may have some significant nasal airway obstruction. 

The columella and nostrils appear relatively normal and luminal valves appear normal. B462's husband does tell her that she does snore some. She is not aware of daytime somnolence. She says she does wake up sometimes at night unable to catch her breath. She does have a sleep disorder and has had this all of her life. She has difficulties getting to sleep. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the temporalis masseter muscles but no other tenderness around the head and neck area. She has an opening click about 10 mm bilaterally and a closing click around 5 mm bilaterally. Maximal incisal opening is 45 mm but it has gotten quite painful for her. She can open about 22 mm without significant pain. Excursive movement to right is about 8 mm and to the left 7 mm. She has consistent popping in her joints when she goes from side-to-side. There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right cuspid being 1 mm to 1.5 mm lower than the left cuspid. Upper and lower arch appears relatively symmetric anteroposteriorly in the cuspid areas.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars but all the rest of her teeth are present. She has a root canal of mandibular left first molar. It is difficult to evaluate the sinuses on this view. The condyles appear a little bit arthritic.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Frontal sinus may be a little bit cloudy but difficult to tell. The bony septum is fairly straight. The right turbinate appears fairly large and the left one appears moderately enlarged.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has arthritic changes with flattening on the anterior head and some peaking as well as anterior beaking of the condyle. Decreased superior and posterior joint space is present.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is flattened on the anterior head. There is some superior peaking and anterior beaking of the condyle. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is some restricted translation with condyles being a little bit greater on the right side than the left side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B462 has an anterior maxillary vertical excess, significant lip incompetence, high occlusal plane angle and retruded mandible. The oropharyngeal airway space appears fairly good at the soft palate level with a dimension of about 8 to 9 mm and at the base of the tongue it is about 5 to 6 mm. At the second vertebrae down to the third vertebrae is about 5 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with reduction.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP mandibular deficiency. AP microgenia. Anterior mandibular vertical excess.
 

High occlusal plane.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction. TMJ pain. Myofascial pain.
RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward. Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly approximately 7 mm below the occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to reduce the vertical height of the mandible and augment the chin.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to finish and retain the occlusion.

B462  MRI Evaluation  
Age: 25/F
Date of Birth:  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. The lateral rim of the fossa appears inferiorly about 3 mm. Decreased superior joint space particularly laterally and medially. There appears to be discal tissue anteriorly positioned to the condyle. Cortical bone appears to be intact.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. Decreased superior joint space particularly at the lateral rim of the fossa and at the medial aspect of the condyle. There appears to be discal tissue anterior to the condyle. Cortical bone appears to be intact.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is fairly good size anteroposterior as well as vertically. Flattening of the anterior head is present. There is peaking at the superior aspect of the condyle and some anterior beaking present as well. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular eminence is anteriorly displaced particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. Towards the medial aspect it is in a more vertical orientation within the joint space. The condylar head is posterior to the disc, however. There is a lot of fluid in the superior joint space. The disc appears to be in fairly good condition throughout most of the joint except at the lateral aspect of the joint it is quite thick. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc does reduce. There is actually good translation of both the condyle and the disc.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with some flattening on the anterior head and an osteophyte extending superior just posteriorly to the anteriorly displaced disc. The disc seems to have reasonably good morphology. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present but not too much. Decreased posterior joint space is present. There appears to be some fluid in the inferior joint space. On opening, there is reduction of the articular disc and good translation of both the condyle and articular disc.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. Both discs appear salvageable.

