B463 
B463 is 14 years old, referred by XX.
PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Pain in the jaw joints bilaterally.
Cannot open the mouth.
Cannot eat and chew.

MEDICATIONS: Tramadol.
She has a previous history of foot and ankle pain that was considered possible arthritis but she has been evaluated by Dr. XX who does not feel that she has a generalized arthritic situation. She did have braces on the upper teeth that were placed 2 years ago but they were removed for the evaluation. B463 has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her feet, ankles and hips. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. She gets headaches about three to four times a month that she rates about a 7 or 8 and they occur predominately in the frontal area and maybe just a little bit in the anterior part of the temple area. She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 6, jaw function 8, diet at 9 and disability at 8.

In frontal view, B463 has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary, mandibular and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline. In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose. The chin may be just slightly AP deficient. Chin-neckline is somewhat short. Intraorally, she is having some of her permanent teeth erupt in the lower arch. She has all of her teeth back through the second molars except the right second bicuspid is not erupted in and on the left side she has still retained primary E. She has some crowding in the lower anterior arch. She has adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars except the upper cuspids are not erupted in all the way but they are coming in. When she bites together she is probably fairly close to a Class I cuspid relationship. She has a 1 mm overbite relationship. Although difficult to see intraorally because of her restricted opening and pain and discomfort, her uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars appear relatively normal. Intranasally, the structures look relatively normal and no apparent nasal obstruction is visible. To palpation, she has some fairly major pain over TMJs, masseter muscles, shoulders and styloid areas. Milder pain over the posterior neck area. To gently push on her mandible to achieve a centric occlusion creates significant pain for her. Maximal incisal opening was 21 mm and opening without significant pain was only about 13 mm. Excursive movement to the right 5 mm and to the left 1 to 2 mm. On opening, the joints seem to function relatively smoothly but again there was very limited incisal opening. The range of movement is indicative of a closed-lock situation.

 
B463 and her family had a pet parrot for about two years. The patient parrot was not caged but stayed on a stick and she would play with it quite a bit. The parrot died. They are not sure what it died of, just it was a cold day and they came home and the bird was dead. May need to rule out possibility of chlamydia psittaci being present.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except the left second bicuspids still unerupted and there is retained primary E on top of it. All four third molars are developing. Turbinates appear moderately large. Sinuses appear relatively clear. TMJs are difficult to analyze.

Waters view shows that the right turbinate appears quite large. It may be obliterating the right nasal airway. The sinuses are relatively clear. There is no frontal sinus on the left side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is small in stature and AP dimension and appears to have lost some volume. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There is decreased superior joint space indicative likelihood of displaced articular disc. Condyle is quite narrow compared to the left side. The left joint shows the condyle has some flattening on the anterior head. The condyle appears broader in width than the right side. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. Better joint space on this side than the opposite side. On opening, there is restricted translation of both joints with virtually no translation of the right joint and some mild translation of the left.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B463 has a high occlusal plane angle and facial morphology. She has an anterior open bite tendency. Oropharyngeal airway is decreased measuring about 4 mm at the soft palate level and probably 7 mm at the base of the tongue. Mild high occlusal plane angulation is evident. She may not be totally in centric relation. She has an adenoid mass in the nasopharynx that almost touches against the posterior aspect of the inferior turbinate and they are about 2 mm of each other. This could be contributory to nasal airway problems.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with probably inflammatory response and adhesions of the disc to the articular eminence. Bilateral TMJ closed-lock.
Mandibular hypoplasia.
Impacted third molars times four.
Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. Severe limitation of jaw function.
 
RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: of left and right TMJs. Presurgical orthodontics.
Place appliances on the upper arch.
Place appliances on the lower arch.
Surgery (depending on findings.)
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors and bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

 MRI Evaluation   Age: 14/F
Date of Birth:  
Date of MRI: 
Date of Interpretation: 
MRIs are of very poor quality and probably done without coils.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good mediolateral width. There may be a little osteophyte growing off the lateral extent of the condyle. Decreased joint space particularly at the lateral rim of the fossa. Medial tissues light up quite significantly. Difficult to identify discal tissue.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good mediolateral width. There may be an osteophyte extending out laterally. There appears to be some decreased joint space. Difficult to identify discal tissue but it possibly could be anteriorly dislocated.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic and there appears to be flattening on the superior head. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. There is a hot area that appears in the joint superior and inferior to the bilaminar tissue. There may be an osteophyte sticking up off the condylar head. Need to rule out an active pannus around the disc. There definitely does appear to be some hot tissue around the condyle in the lower joint space.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. There is some hot tissue that appears to be around the head of the condyle. The disc may be anteriorly displaced. There is limited translation on opening and it appears the disc may remain displaced.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation and possibly nonreducing.

