B464 
B464 is 55 years old. She is a self-referral. B464 has a history of hypertension that is well controlled with medications. The only surgeries are a C section 22 years ago, then she had dental implants and wisdom teeth removed. She currently takes the following medications:
Doxycycline 100 mg q.d. (for acne rosacea).
Zetia 5 mg q.d. (for increased lipids).
Effexor 150 mg q.d.
Niaspan 750 mg q.h.s.
Pravachol 40 mg q.h.s. Atacand 32 mg/12.5 mg q.d.
Prempro 0.3/1.5 mg q.d.
ASA 81 mg q.d.

B464 has been aware of having some kind of TMJ issues for at least 10 years, but it is unknown if she has had any kind of noise or other relatively vague symptoms associated with the TMJ problems. It was not until last year when she was biting into a deli sandwich that her pain really became exacerbated. However, it was 10 years ago that she was aware that she could not open all the way and around that time she did have some clicking and popping in the jaw joints. Following the development of her more recent pain, she saw Dr. XX and he initiated splint therapy for her. This has helped significantly to reduce her pain level. She has also had physical therapy to the neck and shoulders as well as TENS. She was placed on Robaxin, but this did not help her. She also has taken Celebrex in the past without significant difference. B464  rates her headaches that occur predominantly in the left frontal and temporal area at about a level of 3. She rates her average TMJ pain at about a 3. As she functions her jaws, the pain in the TMJ may get up to 7 to 8. Average daily pain is at 3, jaw function at 3, diet at 5, disability at 3. She is aware of clenching and bruxism that occurs at night time, but also during the day. B464 has had significant improvement with the splint therapy. Without the splints, her pain levels run probably around 7 or 8.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 0.5 mm. Mandibular dental midline may be shifted just slightly towards the left side about 1 mm. Otherwise, facial symmetry looks good. In profile, she has good facial balance. Intraorally, B464  has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some mild flaring and crowding in the lower anterior arch. She has got crowns on the mandibular first molars. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars except she has a dental implant replacing the maxillary right central incisors, but has crowns on the implant as well as on the left central incisor. She has Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and slight Class II end-on by only 1 mm, 2 at the very most, on the left side. She has about a 1-2 mm vertical overlap. The uvula is mild to moderately elongated, but the soft palate, fascial pillars and, as best I could see, tonsils looked okay. Intranasally, the turbinates and septum look normal with no evidence of nasal airway obstruction. She has no snoring or sleep apnea symptoms. She has a mild to moderate sleep disorder related to her pain. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the right TMJ and left styloid area. On opening, she has sometimes audible crepitation in the left TMJ, but the right joints seem to function relatively smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is 38 mm, but she could open to about 30 mm and not have too much pain, but beyond that she had fairly severe pain. Excursion movements are about 5 mm in each direction..

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all third molars and missing the maxillary right central incisor replaced by a dental implant and crown. She has a crown on the maxillary left central incisor as well and both mandibular first molars. Sinuses look relatively clear, though there may be some cloudiness in the left one. Left TMJ condyle appears arthritic. The right side may have a little bit of flattening on the anterior aspect, but difficult to evaluate. Waters view shows there is a little deviation in the bony nasal septum, but not too significant. There could be a mucous retention cyst in the left maxillary sinus. Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of a hockey stick shape to the condyle. A little flattening on the anterior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space is fairly well balanced, but could be just slightly on the narrow side. Left TMJ tomogram shows that there is actually some increased joint space, but some significant arthritis involving the condyle. There is an osteophyte extending off the anterior aspect of the condylar head with a decreased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is fairly steep. On opening, there is restricted translation in the left side and a little bit better translation in the right side, although not outstanding. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the oropharyngeal airway is severely restricted, but this possibly could be due to just tongue posture at the time of the radiograph. B464 relates no problems with sleep apnea. The AP position of the maxilla and mandible look fairly good, both clinically and cephalometrically. Basic diagnoses for B464 would be as follows:
Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc that is displaced, but severely degenerated. Right TMJ mild arthritis and minimal medial displacement of the articular disc, but asymptomatic.
Left TMJ pain.
Left-sided headaches.
Inability to eat or chew on the left side. Sleep disorder secondary to pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. Left TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
b. Left TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).
3. Application and removal of arch bars.

