B465 
B465 is 29 years old. I had previously seen her about 6 years ago. B465  was diagnosed as having juvenile rheumatoid arthritis when she was about 8 years old. She was treated with a Herbst appliance when she was about 12 years old to try and correct her bite problem. She has had no other treatment for the jaw joints. She has not had any bite plates or splints done to date.

The only medication she takes is Cymbalta 60 mg daily. She occasionally takes ibuprofen for pain.
She rates her headaches at a level of 8 and they are more prominent on the left side occurring in the frontal, temporal, posterior head and top of the head area. On the right side the pain level is closer to a 5 in the frontal and temporal areas. She rates her TMJ at 9, average daily pain at 9, jaw function at 7, diet at 6 and disability at 5. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. All other joints are involved with her hands, jaws and cervical vertebrae being the worst. She is aware of clenching her teeth at nighttime and also during the day. She does have significant pain problems down through the left side of the head and neck area and into the shoulder area.

In frontal view, B465  has a little more prominence in the mandible in the right side and left side by 3 to 4 mm. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The nasal tip is about 2 to 3 mm to the left side. Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm to the left and shifts the shin towards the left by probably 3 to 4 mm. In profile view upper lip supralabrale is probably a good 3 to 4 mm posterior to subnasale. Maxilla is probably a good 6 to 8 mm AP deficient. The chin is approximately 20 AP deficient. Chin-neckline is not well defined and is relatively short. When B465 is in the most retruded position with her mandible, it is difficult for her to breathe. When she goes all the way into centric relation from the centric occlusal position, there is an audible pop in her jaw joints. When she opens back up and comes forward popping noises is predominately on the left side. On the right side she hears more of a grinding noise. In centric relation she is Class II end-on occlusion on the left side by probably 5 mm and on the right side by probably 3 mm. She has an overjet of about 7 mm. She has about a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship. When she slides her lower jaw forward she may have a tendency to go a little bit into a crossbite relationship. There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1.5 to 2 mm higher than the right side. There is some asymmetry in the lower arch with the left cuspid being about 1 or 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. The upper arch appears a little bit more symmetric. Difficult to see the oropharynx but tissues appear healthy and as best as I can tell, the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all look relatively normal. Intranasally, the turbinates actually look relatively normal in size. The septum is a little bit deviated off towards the right side. Luminal valves appear somewhat constricted. Holding the valves open enable her to breath easier. The columella and nostrils appear relatively normal. She has moderate to severe snoring. She has moderate daytime somnolence. She is unaware of waking up at night with difficulty catching her breath. However, she never feels rested even after a long night's sleep. Incisal opening is about 30 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 9 mm, left is 8 mm. To palpation she has some mild to moderate tenderness over the TMJs, styloid areas, posterior neck and shoulder areas.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars but all other teeth are present. In fact, on the right side it may be the maxillary right second molar that is missing the third molar in position. Condyles appear to have severe arthritic changes associated with it.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. The nasal septum appears deviated. The turbinates appear moderate in size.
Right TMJ tomograms show that the articular eminence is essentially eroded away. The condyle appears quite arthritic. There appears to be decreased superior joint space.

Left TMJ tomogram shows severe arthritis. Articular eminence has undergone significant resorption. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. Condyles appear to have lost significant volume. On opening, there is very good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a severe Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship. The maxilla also appears retruded. Oropharyngeal airway is quite constricted with an airway dimension of about only 3 mm at the soft palate level and 5 mm at the base of the tongue. She has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology. There appears to be a yaw in the maxilla and mandible off to the right side by about 2 mm. Tooth size analysis showed no real significant discrepancy probably due to the fact that there is a very small mandibular left central incisor that is about 2 mm smaller than normal.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.
Severe AP mandibular deficiency. AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle. Crowding of lower anterior arch.
Mild spacing of upper an arch. There is 7 to 8 mm of overjet. High occlusal plane angle of 26 degrees (normal 8 degrees.) Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 11 mm.) TMJ pain. Headaches. Myofascial pain. Posterior yaw with the maxilla and mandible shifted 2 mm to the right. Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.
 
RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level the maxillary arch in 2 different occlusal plane levels. Align the 4 incisors at an elevate plane compared to the cuspids and posterior teeth. Extrude the cuspids to make sure that they are vertically level with the bicuspids and first molar. Place bands on the second molars but do not incorporate them into the archwire. Tip the lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b. Align and level mandibular arch.
CT scans of TMJs and jaws.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and down graft the posterior aspect as well as level the occlusal plane.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B465  MRI Evaluation 
Age: 29/F
DOB: 
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation:  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes. There is a fair amount of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. The condyle appears small mediolaterally. There appears to be some discal tissue medial. The lateral rim of the fossa has very minimal downward curvature of only probably 2 mm. On some of the views it appears that there may be discal tissue over the top of the condyle but the condyle is very narrow.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that likewise appears fairly narrow in width. Decreased superior joint space. Discal tissue appears to be medial and perhaps anterior. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly a little bit more on this side probably about 3 mm. The condyle looks very narrow mediolaterally.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that she has an extremely flat articular eminence that has completely eroded away. The condyle appears small and appears to have lost volume vertically as well as anteroposteriorly except towards the medial side the condyle looks like it has fairly good width yet. It appears there may be some discal tissue anterior to the condyle but difficult to identify discal tissue above the condyle. In T2 it appears that there may be some remnants of discal tissue but perhaps with a pannus surrounding it. On opening, there is restricted translation and there does appear to be discal tissue between the small condyle and the flattened articular eminence. There is a little bit of tissue between the disc and the eminence.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears small and somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa. There appears to be loss of vertical in the anteroposterior dimension. Articular eminence is fairly flat although it is slightly more pronounced than the opposite side. The anteroposterior width of the fossa appears excessive. It appears there are some remnants of discal tissue within the fossa that appears to be anteriorly displaced. In T2 images it appears that the disc may be anteriorly displaced. However, on opening it appears that there is translation of the condyle onto the disc although there is some extra tissue surrounding the disc particularly between the disc and the fossa area.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ severe arthritic changes including flattening of the articular eminences with significantly degenerated discs that appear to be displaced but appear to reduce on opening. Appearance could be compatible with rheumatoid arthritis.

