B468 
B468 is 17 years old. Referred by Dr. XX.
B468 had orthodontics beginning 10 years ago with a palatal expander. He got his braces removed on 3 years ago with a good result, but within about 6 months the family started to notice that the bite was starting to shift and change. It has been a low but progressive process and it appears that there continues to be some changes occurring in the jaw alignment. B468 has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, and myofascial pain. He rates his jaw function, diet, and disability at 0. He takes no medications. He has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss and no other joints bother him. He is not aware of clenching or bruxing at nighttime nor during the day.

In frontal view, B468 has some increased fullness in the left side of the jaw by probably about 3 to 4 mm. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm to the right and the chin is about 4 to 5 mm to the right. In profile, he has fairly good balance. The maxilla may be retruded just 2 to 3 mm. The chin neckline looks good and chin neck angle was well defined. Intraorally, B468 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and leveled. He has good attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, B468  has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He is pretty close to a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side, but on the left side he is Class III of probably about 3 mm. He has a cross bite tendency on the right side. He has about 1 mm of vertical over bite. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. On the left side, the maxilla and mandible may be down 1 mm compared to the right side. He has a slight transverse yaw with the maxilla and mandible being rotated towards the left side probably about 2 to 3 mm at the occlusal level. To palpation, he has no tenderness around the head and neck area. On opening, he has a click in the left joint at about 50 mm and a closing click at 45 mm. The maximum opening is 70 mm and excursion movements are 9 mm in each direction. In frontal view, the mandible appears to be about 3 or 4 mm longer vertically on the left side as compared to the right side. He appears to be just slightly open in the molar area on the left side. On the right side, he does feel that there are some teeth that touch first on the left side before the right side. Clinically, however, the right side appears to be much better interdigitated, although there is a cross bite tendency. He does have a brachiocephalic type of facial morphology.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Bite looks slightly more open on the left side than the right side. Condylar head and neck appear longer vertically on the left side as compared to the right side by probably 3 mm. The condylar neck appears a little bit wider on the left side compared to the right side. However, the vertical height of the mandible appears similar on both sides. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear relatively moderate in size.

Coronal view shows that the septum appears reasonably straight. The left turbinate appears somewhat enlarged, but the right one appears more normal. The sinuses appear clear.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. The septum appears reasonably straight. Airway is slightly decreased on the left side.
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit of anterior beaking present. The joint space appears a little bit narrow. The condylar neck may be just slightly wider than the opposite side. The articular eminence has just a moderate inclination. The joint space appears a little bit more narrow than the opposite side.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head and some slight anterior beaking tendency. The joint space looks fairly good. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. The vertical height of the condyle appears greater than the opposite side. The condyle appears a little bit larger than the opposite side. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. There appears to be some decreased lateral joint space and vertical joint space is just a little bit less than the opposite side.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 4 to 5 mm. The joint space appears fairly good in this joint.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B468  has almost an end-on incisor relationship but not quite. He has a skeletal Class I occlusion but appears to have a slight skeletal Class III relationship and slight Class III occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 8 mm at the soft palate and the same at the base of the tongue. As B468  shifts his mandible towards the left side, it does improve his facial symmetry, although it is still a little bit prominent at the angle area. As he shifts in this direction, it balances him in a more balanced Class III cuspid relationship being about 2 to 3 mm Class III on this side.

Basic diagnoses for B468 would be as follows:
Left mandibular condylar hyperplasia versus osteochondroma. Mandibular deviated prognathism off to the right side. Maxillary hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Posterior yaw with the maxilla and mandible rotated off towards the left side. Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being lower than the right side. Class I cuspid relationship on the right side.
Class III end-on cuspid relationship on the left side. Cross bite tendency on the left side.
Slight cross bite tendency on the right side.
Tooth size discrepancy in the bicuspid area with the maxillary second bicuspids being 1 mm smaller in size compared to the lower bicuspids and on the right side the upper bicuspids are 0.5 mm smaller than the lower bicuspids.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
2.	a.	Presurgical orthodontics: Align and level maxillary arch. Be sure lateral incisor roots are tipped mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b.	Align and level the lower arch.
3.	Surgery. a.	Left mandibular high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back on the facial midline, correct the posterior yaw, and level it transversely. c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, correct posterior yaw and increase the occlusal plane slightly as well as level it transversely.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B468 MRI  
DOB:	 
DATE OF ACQUISITION: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking present. There is decreased vertical joint space. The articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The articular eminence is moderately steep. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is restriction in translation. It appears the anterior part of the disc may be adhesed to the articular eminence. The disc does not reduce on opening.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit of anterior beaking present and there appears to be some thinning of the cortical bone over the anterior head of the condyle. The articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc appears to be significantly anteriorly positioned. There appears to be increased vertical joint space. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. There appears there could be some erosions in the head of the condyle. Right TMJ cine films show that the disc appears to actually be in good position, but the posterior band is quite thick. The condyle translates moderately well, but the disc does not appear to translate significantly. It appears there could be adhesions of the disc to the articular eminence. There is fluid in the superior joint space.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction. Right TMJ arthritis worse on the left side and articular disc appears to be in reasonable position, but have adhesions to the articular eminence.

