B469 
B469 is 35 years old and referred by Dr. XX.
Patient History
She had viral meningitis. She was diagnosed with this 2 years ago. She probably had the virus for about six weeks, and it wasn't really identified until the end of its course. It did affect her vision and had some affects on her speech. She may have some residual affects on her speech that she is aware of such as stuttering, which she never did before, that that is only occasionally that that happens. She does have a past history of stomach ulcers. The stomach ulcers were diagnosed 4 years ago when she went in the hospital for the flu. She was treated with medications, and this cleared. She takes Wellbutrin XL. She has had an adverse reaction to PENICILLIN. She takes Wellbutrin for anxiety.

B469's TMJ problems began about 25 years ago and may have been related to physical abuse that she sustained from her father. She had surgery 13 years ago that involved bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning procedures. She did fairly well for six years, and then she got pregnant and threw up during the entire pregnancy, and this caused further damage to her joints. 7 years ago, Dr. Steve Fennell performed a left TMJ temporal muscle flap to repair the joint. She has had orthodontics x 2, one after the surgery 13 years ago and then repeated in 7 years ago after that surgery. She has had physical therapy quite a bit as her husband is a physical therapist.

About two months ago, she and her daughter were doing for ear candling, and following this she has had increased pain problems on the left side including increased swelling. She can't stand to get her head wet. She likes to swim with her kids, but she can't really because of the uncomfortable feeling that she gets. She is aware of clenching during the day and may do it also at nighttime. She has tried splint therapy, but that just makes her clench more, so she avoids that.

B469 is aware that she doesn't sleep really well at night and that she frequently wakes up. She does know that she snores. She is aware of being quite tired during the day, but she always attributed that to her two kids more so than any other problem.

Patient Concerns
Swelling on the left side
Knots in the left submandibular area and behind the left ear
Feeling of water in the left ear
Headaches TMJ pain
Muscle pain
Feeling of fluid in the area
Gets a white blanched skin reaction on the left side
Teeth don't fit together in centric relation

Current Medications
Wellbutrin XL for anxiety
Advil or Advil Migraine 2 to 3 tablets q.3-4h. p.r.n. pain and headaches
Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B469 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Some prominence of the masseter muscle with the masseter muscle being significantly larger on the left side than the right side. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary and mandibular dental midline are pretty much aligned on the facial midline. Chin might be just a touch off toward the left side a couple of millimeters.

In profile view, B469 is probably 3 to 4 mm AP deficient in the maxilla and probably about 10 mm AP deficient in the mandible. Chin-neckline might be just a tad short, but chin-neck angle is well-defined.

Intraorally, B469 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth appear fairly well aligned and leveled. In the upper arch, she also has all of her teeth back through the second molars. In centric relation, mandibular dental midline is shifted off to the left side about 1.5 mm. She is end-on Class II by about 2 mm on the right side and probably 3 mm on the left side. She has an overjet of about 2 mm in centric relation. It is on the left side, and the right side appears to be pretty much open. She has a vertical overbite in centric relation of 0. Transversely, the maxilla is fairly level. May be just a slight cant in the mandible with the right side being down no more than a millimeter. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is of moderate size. B469 does state that when she sleeps she does snore. Intranasally, transverse width of the nose might be slightly constricted. Turbinates are moderate-sized and relative to the width of the nose may be relatively large. Septum is a little bit deviated off toward the right side then toward the left side a little bit.

To palpation, she has high moderate discomfort over the left temporalis, right styloid area, and bilateral TMJs. She has moderate discomfort over the left SCM, left styloid area, and milder discomfort over the bilateral masseters, right medial pterygoid, and left SCM. Maximal incisal opening is 35 mm. Opening without severe discomfort is 30 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 4 mm and to the left 5 mm. She has constant headaches at about a level of 4 that occur in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. They can escalate to 9 where she can have significant problems with nausea and vomiting at that level. She rates her TMJ pain average at a level of 3 and average daily pain at 5 but it can escalate to 9. She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 5, and disability at 6.

B469 chews predominantly on her left side which would account for the masseteric hyperplasia involved on the left.
Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars but all the rest of the teeth are present and appear to be in good condition. Sinuses appear relatively clear, although the left one is a little bit foggy. Turbinates are of moderate size, and there seems to be an airway opening. Left TMJ shows significant osteoarthritic changes with some anterior beaking and significant flattening with loss of vertical height. On the right side, the condyle appears to have some arthritic changes. On the left joint, there does not appear to be any articular eminence, whereas on the right side there still appears to be an eminence.

Waters view shows that the sinuses do appear clear throughout the head area. Turbinates are of moderate size with a little bit more blockage on the left side as compared to the right side. Jaws appear reasonably symmetric but maybe just a little bit shorter vertically on the left side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows severe arthritic changes within the joint. There is anterior beaking. Very flat and essentially nonexistent articular eminence. Decreased joint space vertically particularly at the anterior aspect of the joint with probably bone on bone contact there.

Right TMJ tomogram shows evidence of significant arthritis. There is actually an eroded area at the posterior superior aspect of the condyle. There is anterior beaking present and significantly decreased joint space anteriorly as well as posteriorly. Articular eminence has a moderate slope but appears somewhat elongated and sclerotic. Appears there may be some little osteophytic extensions going off the head of the condyle. On opening, there is actually reasonably good translation of the left condyle, much better than anticipated. The right one seems to have some restriction in translation. Both joints appear to have bone on bone contact in the open view.

Cephalometrically, B469 does have a skeletal Class II jaw relationship. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is about 4 mm and at the base of the tongue is about 5 mm. This might account for some of her snoring problems. May have a slightly increased occlusal plane angle. Slight Class II occlusal relationship.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis, being worse on the left side
AP mandibular deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Class II end-on occlusion
Left earache
Myofascial pain
Headaches TMJ pain
Difficulties eating and chewing
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway of 4 mm (normal 11 mm)
High occlusal plane angle of 15 degrees (normal 8 degrees)
Chews only on the left side as she has an open bite in centric relation on the right side

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch Align and level mandibular arch
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol)
Surgery

Bilateral TMJ condylectomy, debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies with bone plate stabilization and HA grafting
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
B469 MRI Evaluation  
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Reading:  

Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has some arthritic changes. Decreased joint space. Some roughness on the superior surface of the condyle. Appears to be some roughness in the fossa as well. Appears to be erosions in the lateral pole of the condyle. There may have been previous surgery in this joint.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has better shape and morphology than the opposite side. Appears to be decreased joint space vertically. There appears to be a significant crater at the lateral pole of the condyle, but it could be just the angle of the cut. Cortical bone in the fossa looks a little bit difficult to identify in some areas and does not appear really smooth. May have been some previous surgery in this joint but is difficult to tell. Some of the anatomy look usual. Cannot identify the disc on either side but may be anteriorly displaced on the right side.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that appears to have lost vertical height and appears arthritic. It appears there may be some anterior beaking present. Fossa is very shallow as though the patient may have had an eminectomy performed before. Difficult to tell if there is any residual disc tissue or not. Appears to be a little osteophyte off the superior aspect of the condyle aimed up toward the roof of the fossa.

On opening, there appears to be some translation but fairly restricted. Appears that remnants of any discal tissue remain anteriorly displaced. Significantly decreased vertical joint space between the condyle and the fossa. On the open view, both the condylar head and the fossa appear to have rough bone. Translation is quite restricted. Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has better morphology than the other side, although there is some distortion in the cortical bone on top. Some anterior beaking is present. Articular eminence is better shaped on this side as compared to the opposite side. Disc appears to be anteriorly displaced, and the vertical joint space appears to be decreased.

On opening, there is restricted translation, and the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.
Impression:
Left TMJ severe arthritis with probable previous TMJ surgery and articular disc dislocated, severely deformed, and nonreducing
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
May be a candidate for bilateral total joint prostheses based on this MRI

