B472 
B472 is 18 years old and is referred by Dr. XX.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Headaches.
Pain in the jaw joints. Bite shifting. Difficulties eating and chewing
She has no history of snoring, daytime somnolence nor sleep apnea problems.

B472's problems began in her early teens of unknown etiology. She had orthodontic treatment when she was about 13-1/2 to about the age of 15 by Dr. XX. Dr. XX has noted that her bite has shifted some.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Adderall 10 mg.
Zoloft 50 mg.
ALLERGIES: ZITHROMAX.
She gets earaches, right side worse than left side but no tinnitus. She gets occasional vertigo predominately when she gets her significant headaches. No hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is aware of clenching her teeth at night. She gets headaches about five days per week and these have been present for about the last three years. She rates them at about a level of 7 in the frontal area behind the eyes and also in the temple areas. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 3, jaw function, diet and disability at 4. In frontal view, B472 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. It appears that she may have a little bit of vertical asymmetry at least in the mandible with the right side being shorter vertically than the left side by probably about 3 to 4 mm. Upper lip length is 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Nasal tip may be just about 1 mm off to the right side. Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right side. Chin is maybe just slightly off to the right side maybe 1 to 2 mm at the most. Left eye may be just slightly elevated by 2 mm.

In profile view, B472 has some AP maxillary deficiency probably about 3 to 4 mm. Chin is AP deficient by probably 12 to 15 mm. Chin-neckline is short although the chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined. Nose appears to be in good balance with the cheeks. Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably a couple of mm. Intraorally, B472 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch. The patient has adequate attached gingiva. Teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and leveled. In the upper arch, she has absence of the first bicuspids but the rest of the teeth are all present. She has a slight Class II end-on occlusal relationship by probably about 1 mm or 2.  

She has an overjet of about 2 mm. Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all look relatively normal. Intranasally, the turbinates appear relatively normal size with the left one being a little bit enlarged. It appears the septum is relatively straight. There does not appear to be any significant nasal airway obstruction. She believes she breathes most of the time through her nose when she is sleeping. She does drool some.

To palpation, she does have moderate pain over the TMJs and moderate pain to palpation over the temporalis, styloid areas, right masseter and milder discomfort over the shoulders and left masseter. On opening, she had a more distinct click on the right TMJ with probably 25 mm of opening and with a closing click of about 20. On the left side she appeared to have a click of about 35 to 40 mm of opening and closing click of probably somewhere around 25 to 30. On excursive movement she had a definite click in the right TMJ. Maximal incisal opening is about 50 mm but only about 18 mm with comfort. Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. She is missing maxillary first bicuspids. She has a 3 x 3 retainer. Condyles appear they may be slightly small but not too significant. The right side is a little bit smaller than the left side. The sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.

Waters view shows that she does in fact have a large left nasal turbinate that seems to block a good portion of the airway. Bony nasal septum appears relatively straight. The sinuses appear reasonably though a little bit of cloudiness in the maxillary sinus towards the lateral aspect of the sinus wall.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle appear to have lost some volume. It seems a little bit short vertically. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space appears within reasonable bounds.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit changed in shape. Joint space appears fairly reasonable. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Lateral view shows good translation of both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B472 has a retruded maxilla and to a greater extent a retruded mandible. She has a skeletal Class II relationship and a slight Class II occlusal relationship. She has a high occlusal plane angle. She has a decreased oropharyngeal airway of only about 4 to 5 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption and articular disc dislocation with reduction on the right but nonreducing on the left. AP mandibular deficiency. 
AP maxillary deficiency. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. Missing maxillary first bicuspids and all four third molars.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm (normal 11 mm.)

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Algin and level maxillary arch. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped forward and cuspid roots tipped distally. Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction and decrease occlusal plane angle.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction down grafting the posterior aspect. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B472  MRI Evaluation 
Age: 18/F
Date of Birth:  
Date of MRI: 
Date of Interpretation:  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology although some subtle changes. Increased joint space vertically. There may be some discal tissue medially displaced. Minimal downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa of only about 2 mm. Cortical bone appears to be intact though in some areas it appears thin.

Right TMJ coronal view shows the condyle may be a little bit mediolateral. Cortical bone appears to be intact although it may be a little bit thin in some areas. Increased joint space vertically. Minimal downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly and a little bit flat along the posterior border. Out lateral, it appears there may be some loss of vertical height but difficult to determine. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. It has a decreased anteroposterior dimension with primarily with loss of the intermediate zone. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction although there is fairly good translation of both the condyle and the disc.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has more of a hockey stick shape and there may be some loss of vertical volume particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint. Increased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is sitting anterior to the condyle beneath the articular eminence. Disc is foreshortened anteroposteriorly. There could be a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space but not too much. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and disc. In one view the disc appears to be reduced and in another view it appears it is anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION:
1.	Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and with significant deformation of the articular disc.
2.	Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and with significant deformation of the articular disc.
3.	Probable salvageable discs.

