B473 
B473 is 32 years old. Her TMJ problems began when she was about 15 of unknown etiology. Her joints started clicking and then locked with jaw pain and shifting of the bite. She has severe pain in the left TMJ and moderate pain in the right TMJ. Her bite has been changing. Her TMJ pain is at level of 9 and her headaches are at a level of 5 that occur predominantly behind the left eye and in the back of the head. She has neck and shoulder pain. She grinds her teeth at night. She has ringing in her ears and lightheadedness and dizziness. Her average daily pain is at 7. She rates her jaw function at 1, diet at 2, disability around 5 to 6. She apparently is not taking any medications.

She has had a lot of previous treatment for her jaw joints including the following:
Splint in 28 years ago.
Splint 14-16 years ago.
Removal of her wisdom teeth 12 years ago. Sinus surgery 5 years ago.
Splint in 17 years ago.
Biofeedback 2 years ago.
Physical therapy 2 years ago.
Splint therapy 2-3 years ago.
Chiropractic treatment from 8 years ago until this year.
Splint from last year until present.
She also had injection therapy including Botox and lidocaine in around 4 to 3 years ago.

B473 does take Advil and occasionally she will require Vicodin to control her pain. Her pain is worse usually in the afternoons, but she frequently wakes up with pain and depending how severe the pain is in the morning reflects on how her day will be.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
: In frontal view, B473  has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. She does have some masseteric hyperplasia, being a little bit greater on the left side than the right side. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 3.5 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular midline is to the left side, and the chin is just slightly to the left side as well. In profile, B473 has good facial balance. Intraorally, B473 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has good attached gingivae around the lower anterior teeth. She has a little bit of spacing in the lower arch, particularly between the laterals and the bicuspids. In the upper arch, B473  has all of her teeth back through the second molars. B473 has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the left side by probably 1 and 2 mm and the same on the right side. She has a slight open bite tendency on the left side extending from the lateral incisor back through the first molar where there is only about 1 mm of opening. She has about a 1.5 mm vertical overbite. In closing, B473 hits predominantly on her left posterior teeth probably extending from the bicuspids through the molars. On the right side, her teeth do not touch, and, although she tries hard, she can get the very back molar on the right side to touch together. Oropharyngeal areas look healthy. To palpation, B473 has moderate discomfort around the TMJs, masseters, styloid areas, shoulders, and milder tenderness over the temporalis, SCMs, and posterior neck area. On opening, she seems to have some crepitus noises in both joints, maybe a little bit more so on the left side than the right side. Maximal opening is 46 mm, but only about 18 mm without discomfort and pain. Excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction. B473 is not aware of snoring problems nor sleep apnea problems. She has moderate daytime tiredness. She has mild to moderate sleeping difficulties.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Sinuses look relatively clear. The left condyle appears smaller than the right condyle. Waters view shows the sinuses appear clear. Bony septum may have some deviations in it. Turbinates appear moderate in size, but it appears that there is a passable airway. Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head. Articular eminence are moderately steep. There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space. Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears smaller than the right side. The condyle may have a reduced vertical joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is good translation of both condyles with the right one having just a little bit greater movement than the left one. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is a definite vertical difference in the vertical heights of the inferior border of the mandible with the left side being shorter than the right side. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue. She appears to have a skeletal Class I relationship. There is a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the maxillary right side being about 1 mm lower than the left side and the mandible being 2 mm lower on the right side than the left side. Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis, left side worse than right side. Slight Class II end-on occlusal relationship. Right side open bite extending from the lateral incisor through the second molar. Severe TMJ pain. Severe headaches. Myofascial pain. Possible connective tissue autoimmune disease.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
CT scan of TMJs and jaws.
Surgery. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Application of arch bars.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics if necessary to refine occlusion.

I gave B473 a prescription for Klonopin 1-mg tablets, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s, refill x5. She is to call me in 1 to 2 weeks to inform me of her status with the medication.

B473  MRI  
AGE: DOB:
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of anterior beaking. Medially, there is fairly significant beaking. There could be a little osteophyte off the head of the condyle towards the lateral aspect of the joint. Joint space looks narrow medially and wider out laterally. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears flattened on the anterior head and there appears to be an osteophyte sticking superiorly, however, medially that disc may be in a little bit better position, but out laterally it appears to be a little bit anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears a little sclerotic on top. There seems to be a projection from the lateral pole extending out lateral. There may be some discal tissue anterior to the condyle.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a lateral pole that is located significantly lower than the medial pole. There is decreased lateral joint space particularly. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. There may be discal tissue displaced medially. On opening, the condyle has restricted translation and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction and does demonstrate significant degenerative changes including decreased anteroposterior length, some increased thickness, and just overall degenerative changes throughout the disc. Right TMJ shows that the disc is in a reduced position on opening, although there is limited translation. There is still amount of flattening on the anterior head of the condyle and superior peaking of the condyle.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated without reduction with significant deformation. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced but with early reduction.

B473  MRI  
AGE: DOB:
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation:  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some arthritis, but there is some sclerosis on it and some anterior beaking. Articular eminence is normal in inclination. Articular discs appear to be significant degenerative and there is moderately decreased joint space without reduction and severely deformed.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle is arthritic with a significant extension of the lateral pole of the condyle. There is decreased superior joint space. The disc is not seen in the views provided.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle is sclerotic on top. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The disc appears to be displaced probably anteromedially. There appears to be decreased superior joint space particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint. On opening, the disc reduces and there is moderately good translation of the condyle. In coronal view, the ________ opposite side. There is decreased superior joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The discs are anteromedially displaced.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with severe deformation and nonreducing. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteromedially displaced with reduction.
B473  MRI 
AGE: 32/F
DOB:  

Date of Acquisition:  Date of Interpretation:  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic with lateral extension of the lateral pole of the condyle. There appears to be decreased superior joint space . It is difficult to identify discal tissue. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly 1 or 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears larger than the opposite side. There is significantly decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The lateral pole of the condyle is significantly lower than the medial. It is difficult to identify discal tissue.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is arthritic. There is some anterior beaking and flattening of the anterior head of the condyle. Articular eminence has some moderate inclination. There appears to be decreased joint space superiorly. The disc is anteriorly displaced and severely degenerated. There appears to be decreased vertical and anterior joint space towards the medial aspect of the joint. On opening, there is restricted translation and the disc remains anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening of the anterior head and sclerosis present. A little bit of anterior beaking is present. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced, particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. More medially, the disc appears to be in better position. On opening, there is restricted translation, although the disc appears to be in a reduced position.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocation without reduction and significant deformation and degeneration. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated with reduction.

