B478 
B478 is 20 years old. Referred by Dr. X.

B478's jaw problems began when she was about 17 years old of unknown etiology. The joints first started to click and pop at that time. At age 18, she began developing pain associated with her jaw areas. When she was 19, she developed a close lock on the right side. B478 gets some headaches at about a level of 2 in the temporal and top of the head area. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 2, diet at 3, disability at 1. She gets occasional earaches, but no tinnitus nor vertigo. She believes she may have some hearing loss. The only other joints that really bother her are her lower back. She does have a history of asthma. She is aware of bruxing at nighttime and clenching during the day.

She takes the following medications:
Dulara.
Singulair.
Albuterol.
Iron, vitamin C and vitamin D.
In frontal view, B478 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 3.5 mm. The maxillary midline is about 0.5 mm to the left. The mandible dental midline is 1 mm to the left and chin is about almost 6 mm to the left. In profile, B478 has fairly good facial balance. Intraorally, B478 has all of her teeth back through the second molars present and her teeth are fairly well aligned and level in the lower arch. She has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. The mandibular dental midline is about 1 to 1.5 mm off towards the left side. She has a just a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by about 2 mm and fairly close to Class I on the left side. She has a cross bite tendency on the left side. She is Class III on the right by about 2 mm and on the left she is pretty close to being Class I, but has a posterior cross bite tendency on the left side. She has an end-on incisor relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy. She has moderately enlarged tonsils. Intranasally, B478 has enlarged turbinates and appear a little bit inflamed on the right side and congested on the left side. She has had previous septal surgery and it appears fairly straight. She probably has moderate nasal airway obstruction. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the TMJs and milder pain over the retromandibular area and masseter muscles. On opening, she has some crepitus in the right joint but no popping and opening, but on closing she has a definite pop at about 15 mm in the closing mode. The maximal incisal opening is 47 mm and excursion movement to the right 7 mm and to the left 6 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. The left condyle appears small in size. The right condyle appears larger than normal. The left condyle looks quite small anteroposteriorly compared to the right side.

Left TMJ sagittal views show a condyle that is quite smaller in size then the opposite condyle. There appears to be well balanced joint space.
Right TMJ sagittal view shows an elongated condylar head and neck. The joint space appears a little bit decreased. The articular eminence is moderately shallow.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly reduced mediolateral width. The joint space looks fairly well balanced.
Right TMJ coronal view shows a lateral osteophytic growth off the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 5 mm. There is a lateral extension of the condyle.

Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight. Turbinates are moderately enlarged and sinuses appear relatively clear.
In the axial view, the septum appears reasonably straight, but the turbinates are quite large and appear to block the majority of the airway. Sinuses look relatively clear.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B478 has a skeletal Class I jaw relationship. The inferior border of the mandible is down about 4 to 5 mm on the right side as compared to the left side.

Basic diagnoses for B478 would be as follows:
Right mandibular condylar osteochondroma.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations with reduction on the right side, but without reduction on the left side.
Mandibular asymmetry with the mandibular shifted off to the left side.
Maxillary asymmetry.
Hypertrophied turbinates (the patient is a predominant mouth breather).
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Slight Class III occlusion on the right side and end-on incisor relationship.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 to 3 mm.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm lower than the left side.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure and retract to help correct the tooth size discrepancy.
2.	Surgery. a.	Right mandibular low condylectomy to remove the abnormal growth process. b.	Bilateral articular disc repositioning and repair with Mitek anchors. c.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible back on the facial midline and level the occlusal plane transversely. d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to align the maxilla. e.	Partial inferior turbinectomies.
3	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
4.	Restorative dentistry if it is required to place veneers on the anterior teeth.

B478 MRI  
DOB:	 
DATE OF ACQUISITION: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. The disc appears to be medially displaced and perhaps somewhat anteriorly displaced. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm. There is decreased lateral joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is significantly larger than the left side and could be compatible with an osteochondroma. The disc appears that it may be laterally displaced. There is decreased superior joint space. There is an extension of the condyle out laterally.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking present. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced and sitting along the posterior slope of the articular eminence. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is restricted translation and the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is significantly elongated in the head and neck area. The disc is thin but appears to be in reasonable position, although not seen well medially. Out laterally, it does appear laterally displaced. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. There appears to be a little bit of fluid in the anterior and superior joint space. On opening, there is significantly limited translation of the condyle. There appears to be some discal tissue present, although it is quite thinned at this particular cut.

IMPRESSION: Right TMJ condylar enlargement compatible with an osteochondroma versus condylar hyperplasia.
Left TMJ articular disc dislocation without reduction and mild arthritis

