B479 
B479 is 15 years old, referred by Dr. XX. B479 is in good health with no major medical problems. She does have problems with asthma. She takes Advair and albuterol as needed.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Jaws do not function.
Cannot open correctly.
Pain.
B479 has been aware of having clicking and popping in her jaw joints beginning about three years ago of unknown etiology. Last year, her jaw locked closed and has been that way since then. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her ankles, knees, wrists, hips and shoulders. She has some hyperflexibility in a lot of her joints apparently. I need to rule out Ehlers Danlos syndrome. She rates her headaches that she gets about three times a week at about a level of 8 predominately in the temporal and posterior head area. She rates her daily TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 7, diet at 5, disability at 2.

In frontal view, B479 has good facial symmetry and balance. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm. Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline. In profile view, B479 has some fairly good facial balance vertically and anteroposteriorly. Slight obtuse nasal labial angle. Intraorally, B479 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch is present. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. A little bit of lingual inclination in the upper incisors. She is very close to being Class I cuspid although slight Class II end-on by may be 1 to 2 mm. She has bilateral posterior open bites as a result of the splint therapy. There is an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues appear healthy. The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars appear relatively normal. Tonsils are present and may be mildly enlarged. She does not report any difficulties breathing through her nose. To palpation, she has moderate pain over her shoulders and mild to moderate pain over her posterior neck and styloid areas. She does not have pain directly over the TMJs. Incisal opening is 43 mm. As she opens she deviates off to the left side about 4 mm. Excursive movement to the left is about 13 mm, right is 6 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the presence of impacted third molars in all four quadrants. The left sinus appears a little bit cloudy. Difficult to evaluate the joints. There is no other significant pathology noted.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. The bony nasal septum appears relatively straight. The turbinates appear moderate in size.
 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good morphology. There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology but is posteriorly and superiorly positioned within the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening there is some restricted translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B479 has a fairly good Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal. She has some retained adenoid tissue in the nasal pharynx.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction.
Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction. Relative mandibular hyperplasia.
Bilateral posterior apertognathia. TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Headaches.
Impacted third molars x4.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch. Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maximize occlusion.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Physical therapy is necessary to maximize jaw function.

B479  MRI  
DOB: 
DATE OF ACQUISITION: 
DATE OF INTERPRETATION:  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has arthritic changes associated with it. There is decreased vertical joint space. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. It appears that there is discal tissue lateral to the condyle and there is discal tissue anterior to the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is fairly flat across the top with decreased superior joint space. There appears to be a little hot area around the top of the condyle and medial side. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows some mild arthritis with some flattening on the anterior head and some anterior beaking present. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with some arthritis and flattening on the anterior head and some superior peaking. The disc is anteriorly displaced and appears to be sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc appears as though it may be salvageable yet. On the left side, there appears to be some fluid in the T2 imaging.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction, although the discs still may be salvageable.

