B480 
B480 is 27 years old. Primary concerns that B480 has include the following:
Migraine headaches that occur frequently.
Jaw pain.
Jaw joint clicking and popping and getting stuck.
Difficulties eating and chewing.

B480 believes that her jaw joint problems may have begun as early as the age of 10 years, but became more symptomatic and her jaw problems became more severe by the age of 26 when she had lost her orthodontic retainer and got extremely ill from a parasite that she contracted in Vietnam. B480 had orthodontics from 15 to 9 years ago with extraction of four first bicuspids. She has had lots of physical therapy including Feldenkrais techniques and Alexander techniques. 3 years ago, she underwent a 3 week program at Cleveland Clinic for migraine headaches. She has been in splint therapy since 2 years ago and this does seem to help her. This year, she had bilateral TMJ arthrocentesis by Dr. XX.

B480 rates her headaches at a level of 8 that occur almost daily in the frontal, posterior head and top of the head area. Sometimes her headaches are not quite that severe. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain can reach a level of 8. She rates her jaw function at 0, diet at 2, disability at 8 to 9. She has no problems with headaches, gets occasional tinnitus and frequent vertigo. She has no hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her neck, left knee, back, hips, and big toe. She has allergies to environmental factors as well as glutens and casien. She has difficulties wearing cheap earrings. Bobby pins, hair clips, etc., can set off her headaches. She is aware of clenching her teeth at night. Her mother does have TMJ problems also.

In frontal view, B480 has some just slight increased fullness on the right cheek by maybe 2 to 3 mm compared to the left side. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 4 mm on the left and 5 mm on the right. The maxillary midline may be just slightly to the left about 1 mm. The mandibular dental midline is a little bit closer to being on the facial midline and the chin may be just slightly to the left. In profile view, B480 has probably 4 to 5 mm of AP deficiency in the maxilla. Chin is retruded about 20 mm. Chin neckline and chin neck angle are not well defined. Intraorally, she appears to be missing the lower first bicuspids and maxillary first bicuspids. She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch and has thin but adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she also appears to be missing the first bicuspids. She has just a slight Class II cuspid relationship being about 2 to 3 mm Class II. She has about a 1 mm over jet. She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm. Transversely, the occlusal plane appears to be fairly level. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy. The transverse width of the fascial pillars may be mild to moderately constricted. B480 had a rhinoplasty 7 years ago. At that time, her turbinates were reduced. She does have a perforation in her nasal septum. The septum may be deviated a little bit off towards the left side at the anterior aspect. B480 has low severe pain over the temporalis muscles and then moderate pain through most of the head and neck area. The incisal opening is 43, excursion movement in both directions about 5 mm. B480 is on numerous medications for asthma, allergy, migraines and for acid reflux. She does have sort of a chronic problem with thrush.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. Sinuses appear relatively clear. The condyles appear arthritic.

Coronal view shows that she has enlarge turbinates, particularly in the middle and posterior part of the nose. The septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side. The sinuses appear relatively clear.

Axial view shows that the nasal septum has a little glitch in it. The sinuses appear clear. The turbinates appear enlarged and may cause some airway obstruction.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe resorption and there has also been severe resorption of the articular eminence. There is decreased superior and posterior joint space. There is evidence of a significant condylar resorption.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant resorption. The articular eminence also has undergone significant resorption. There is decreased vertical joint space. The condyle appears small in size.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite narrow in mediolateral width. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. There is decreased vertical joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is showing severe resorption with loss of vertical and mediolateral volume. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm and there is significantly decreased lateral joint space. The top of the condyle appears somewhat rough.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia, but anterior hyperplasia. The mandible is AP hypoplasia. The oropharyngeal airway is constricted with an airway dimension at the soft palate of 7 mm, but at the base of the tongue is about 4 mm. The occlusal plane is high.

Basic diagnoses for B480 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ reactive arthritis versus connective tissue autoimmune disease.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia with anterior vertical hypoplasia. Mandibular AP hypoplasia. Class II end-on occlusion. High occlusal plane angle. Decreased oropharyngeal airway. TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Hypertrophied turbinates.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Testing at Environmental Center to rule out hypersensitivities to materials in the total joint prostheses.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for a slight tooth size discrepancy as well as to decrease the over angulation.
3.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
4.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Bilateral mandibular coronoidotomies. e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. f.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy versus Medpor chin implant.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B480 MRI  
BIRTH DATE:  
DATE OF ACQUISITION: 
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant resorption and is quite arthritic. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 or 3 mm with a decreased lateral joint space. The condyle is narrow mediolaterally. Discal tissue is not readily seen, but may be anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is narrow in transverse width. There appears to be loss of condylar volume similar to the opposite side. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. The disc may be anteromedially displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that actually has fairly good anteroposterior width, but the condyle is very sclerotic. Vertical joint space is significantly decreased. The disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence and is severely deformed. The condyle is postured forward in the fossa with an increased posterior joint space. The articular eminence is moderately shallow. It appears the articular eminence has undergone some resorption. On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyle and it becomes almost beneath the articular eminence. The disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction and with severe deformation. On closed view, the disc is very short anteroposteriorly and degenerated.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little bit more narrow anteroposteriorly compared to the opposite side. The disc is anteriorly displaced. The articular eminence is shallow. The posterior joint space is increased. The condyle is quite arthritic. There appears to be some inflammatory tissue in the joint space. Right TMJ opening view shows a condyle that has moderately good translation with the condyle coming beneath the articular eminence. The articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. The articular disc is severely deformed and degenerated.

The findings on the MRI are compatible with a connective tissue autoimmune disease such as rheumatoid arthritis or juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.

