B481 
B481 is 54 years old and referred by XX.
Patient History

B481 has had previous illnesses including carpal tunnel, hypothyroidism, osteoporosis, destruction of a tear duct when she had some nasal polyps removed on the right side in the past, nasal polyps, cataracts, wet macular degeneration, and malocclusion. Previous surgeries include two laser surgeries for the left eye, nasal polyp removal, artificial tear duct installed, peritonitis surgery, and a dental implant to replaced tooth #30. She had a previous gum graft x 2.

She does have a heart murmur. She has relatively normal blood pressure now, but in the past she has had problems with low blood pressure. She runs sometimes 90/60. She has had some kidney problems in the past including kidney stones, and she has a congenital medullary sponge kidney.

B481's problems began  about 18 years ago when she was undergoing traction for a neck injury. It is believed that this may have initiated her jaw joint problems. However, it wasn't until 8 years ago that the real TMJ problems began to surface. During the years, she would have occasional clicking and popping in her joints but nothing consistent. From 7 to 2 years ago, she was under splint therapy with Dr. XX. Dr. XX redirected his practice 2 years ago and no longer dealt with TMJ patients. She has been to see a number of other doctors in reference to managing her nonsurgically. There was a change made in her splint, and she began developing significant pain problems. The pain tended to get worse until February she stopped wearing the splint, and this made her feel better just with the discontinuance. She now does wear a splint all the time mainly to keep from traumatizing some of her teeth. Without the splint in, she occludes only on #18 and #31, and #18 does have a crack through the tooth itself covered by a crown. She also has some right inferior alveolar nerve damage. 9 years ago, she had a tooth extracted. She currently takes the Neurotin and the nortriptyline for the nerve pain. She gets earaches on the left side, no tinnitus, and no vertigo. Other joints that bother her include the fact that she had a congenital fusion of cervical vertebrae, her thumbs bother her, and her left hip joint has osteoporosis but is not really painful for her. The osteoporosis was found on a bone scan.

She is allergic to pollen, cats, dust, sycamore, timothy, etc. She is not aware of having any type of an allergy to jewelry. She does have carpal tunnel with the left side being greater than the right side, although she has been told that it is a marginal condition, and she is not a candidate for surgery. She does have nocturnal clenching and bruxism. She is not aware of doing it during the day. She is not aware of any jewelry allergy except she did have a ring one time that turned her finger green. Otherwise she is not aware of having any problems particularly in wearing pierced earrings. She doesn't report having any trouble with headaches or pain directly associated with the jaw joint. She rates her overall pain on an average day at about a level of 6, although this is not there everyday, and it has improved since her last fabricated splint was removed. She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 5, and disability at 5.

Current Medications
Actonel 35 mg once a week
Synthroid 62.5 mcg
Neurontin 300 mg per day q.h.s. Nortriptyline 25 mg q.h.s. Allergies
DEMEROL makes her nauseated but not really allergic to it, and HYDROCODONE makes her nauseous although she is not allergic to it. Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B481 has fairly good balance in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is 25 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm. Maxillary midline is about 1.5 mm off to the left. Chin is about 2 to 3 mm off to the left.

In profile, she has fairly good fullness in the upper lip, cheeks, and nose areas and are in fairly good balance. Chin appears somewhat retruded by probably 8 to 10 mm. Chin-neckline is not well-defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her teeth. Also, there is a crown on the left second molar. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. In centric relation, she occludes on her second molars on the left side only. All of the rest of the teeth are out of occlusion all the way around including the second molar on the right side. Midlines line up in the centric relation position. She has a Class II end-on occlusion bilaterally being almost 4 mm Class II in the cuspid area. She has an overjet of probably 2 to 3 mm. Oropharynx is clear, and tissues look healthy. Maximal incisal opening is 57 mm. Excursive movements are approximately 14 mm in each direction. To palpation, she has some moderate discomfort over the left medial pterygoid muscle and a little bit milder tenderness over the left SCM.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of maxillary third molars and mandibular right third molar. Mandibular first molar is missing and replaced with an osseointegrated implant and a crown. She has crowns on the left first and second molars. All other teeth are present. Sinuses look relatively clear. Difficult to tell intranasally. Condyles look large. Styloid processes are of moderate size.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Nasal airway looks good. Asymmetry off to the left side of the maxilla and mandible was noted. She does have a history of nasal fracture while in high school.

Right TMJ closed tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology and good AP dimension. Seems to fit well in the fossa. Superior and posterior joint spaces are actually increased over normal. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit larger than the opposite side. Fills a greater amount of the fossa. May be decreased posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle looks almost too big for the size of the fossa.

On opening, there is good translation of both joints. On the open views, the left condyle looks significantly larger than the right condyle.
Cephalometrically, she has her head tipped upward. She has a skeletal Class II and slight occlusal Class II relationship. Oropharyngeal airway looks very good.

Comparison of tomograms taken 8 years ago and comparing those to the left tomogram that I took today I can see no appreciable change in the size of the left condyle indicating that whatever abnormal growth factors had previously occurred there have been arrested at least for the last eight years. That x-ray also predates splint therapy. Comparing the same x-rays for the right side, the right TMJ is in the fossa with what appears to be fairly balanced joint space around it. This is different than the current position where the condyle is postured forward significantly.

Basic Diagnoses
Left TMJ probably arrested condylar hyperplasia versus osteoma versus osteochondroma and articular disc dislocation in a medial direction
AP mandibular deficiency
AP microgenia
Occluding only on the maxillary and mandibular left second molars with all other teeth in an open bite situation
Myofascial pain
Left-sided earaches Nocturnal clenching and bruxism
Class II end-on occlusion
Overangulation of the lower incisors
Decreased angulation of upper incisors
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of approximately 2 to 3 mm
Maligned mandibular left third molar

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch. Open up about a millimeter of spacing around each upper lateral incisor tooth
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 1 mm to 1.5 mm of tooth structure by stripping the lower anteriors

Surgery
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward into a Class I position
Anterior mandibular horizontal ostectomy to advance the chin forward
Extract mandibular left third molar

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
Restorative dentistry to bond the maxillary lateral incisors
B481 MRI Evaluation 

Date of Acquisition: Date of Reading: 
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is quite wide mediolaterally. May extend just slightly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Some decreased joint space toward the lateral aspect of the fossa. Disc appears to be medially displaced. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly just a moderate amount, only about 2 mm. Cortex appears to be intact in both the fossa and on the condyles.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle postured forward in the fossa as the first cut in the joint shows no bone. Joint space looks good. Disc appears to cover the condyle and appears to be in position although it is postured forward on top of the condyle. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly just a moderate amount. Lateral pole of the condyle may extend beyond the rim of the fossa. Cortex appears to be intact on the condyle and in the fossa.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle and a little bit of anterior beaking. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Disc appears to be in position in the mid part of the condyle but laterally there is no discal tissue seen and appears to be decreased joint space indicative of perhaps medial displacement of the articular disc. No significant inflammatory process is seen.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc as well. Condyle actually looks large anteroposteriorly compared to the size of the fossa. In the open view, the condyle looks quite large, and over medially appears to be a large anterior beaking of the condyle perhaps suggestive of an osteochondroma/osteoma process. Condylar head and neck appear quite long.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has a much better shape to it anteroposteriorly. Some minimal anterior beaking but not much. Fairly steep articular eminence is present. Disc appears a little bit thickened but appears to be in position. Condyle is postured forward compared to the articular eminence with an increased superior and posterior joint space. There is some fluid in the superior joint space.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the articular disc. The condyle does look larger on the open view than in any of the closed views.

Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis or possible osteochondroma/osteoma but with the disc displaced medially
Right TMJ normal-looking condyle and disc but postured forward about 3 or 4 mm in the fossa with the disc in position in this abnormal jaw position

