B483 
B483 was referred by Dr. XX. B483 is 38 years old.
Patient History
She is in good health except she has had some joint problems and has had some previous orthopedic surgery on her left knee and both shoulders. She has had two previous left knee surgeries but only one surgery to each shoulder joint.

B483 has had clicking and popping in her jaw joints for as long as she can remember and of unknown etiology. When she was 21 years old, she got hit in the jaw with a baseball and fractured a tooth that eventually had to be extracted, but she didn't recognize any changes in her jaw joints at that time. For the past four or five months, she has developed fairly significant pain in her jaws. She has been in a splint for approximately five months now, and this does help her some.

She has had migraine headaches for as long as she can remember also. B483 rates the headaches that she gets in the right frontal and temporal area at about a level of 7. It then tends to go down into her jaw area on that side, and if she doesn't take medication will eventually go into her neck and shoulder area. She rates TMJ pain at 4, overall pain at 6, jaw function, diet, and disability at 4. Her husband told her that she does grind her teeth at night, although that is a little bit less of a problem now with the splint.

She has some allergies that she takes allergy shots for for basic environmental stuff such as dust, pollen, etc. She also is sensitive to food products particularly milk but still ingests them anyways. She has fairly significant reaction to LIDOCAINE. She cannot wear cheap earrings as this causes “infection.”

B483 has had previous orthodontics as a teenager.
Patient Concerns
Primary concerns that she has at this time include the following:
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Difficulties to eat and chew.
Earaches.

Current Medications
She currently takes the following medications:
Parafon Forte p.r.n.
Darvocet 100 p.r.n.
Celexa 20 mg at night for migraines.
She does use Imitrex injections also to help control her migraine headaches.

Clinical Evaluation
In frontal view, B483 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is 2 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are pretty much on the facial midline.

In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, lower lip, and chin area. Chin-neckline is a little bit full, and chin-neck angle is not well defined.

Intraorally, she is missing mandibular right first molar but has the rest of the teeth around to the second molar on the left side and third molar on the right side. In the upper arch, she is missing the left first, second, and third molars. She is in basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with about 1.5 mm anterior overbite relationship.

To palpation, she has some mild tenderness of the masseter muscles and moderate pain to palpation over the left styloid area and left TMJ area. Right TMJ is not particularly tender. On opening, she has very loud audible clicks in the left joint at about 35 mm and on the right side at 40 mm of opening, and on closing, probably about 20 mm on the right side, 15 mm on the left side. Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm but without much discomfort only 20 mm. Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the sinuses appear pretty good. Nasal airway looks reasonable. Examination here reveals that the left mandibular third molar and right first molar are missing, and the maxillary left first, second, and third molars and right third molar are missing. She has root canals in the mandibular right second and third molars. Condyles are significantly different in appearance from one side to the other with the right one looking quite large in anteroposterior dimension and the left one quite narrow.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa, but the joint space actually looks reasonably good showing that the disc is definitely out of position. This could be the result in part to the splint therapy.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is more narrow anteroposteriorly than the right side. The articular eminence on both sides is moderately steep. Slightly increased anterior joint space.

On opening, there is good translation of both TMJs. There is flattening on the anterior head of the left condyle and the right side on wide opening.
Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class I and Class I occlusal type relationship. Oropharyngeal airway is a little bit narrow.

Waters view shows a good nasal airway and that the sinuses are clear.
Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with late reductions with loud audible pops bilaterally.
Relative mandibular hyperplasia.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Earaches.

Recommended Treatment
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization.
Application of arch bars.

Restorative dentistry
I gave her a prescription today for hydrocodone 7.5 mg/650, disp. 40 tablets, 1 tablet q.4-6h. p.r.n. pain, refill x 2.
B483 MRI Evaluation 

Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with lateral rim of the fossa curled significant inferiorly. Fairly close contact between the lateral pole of the condyle and the lateral rim of the fossa. Over medially, there is also close contact to the medial wall of the fossa with the condyle. On some views, it appears that the articular disc may be laterally and anteriorly displaced. Cortical bone appears intact.

Right TMJ, coronal view, demonstrates a condyle that is very broad mediolaterally. Lateral rim of the fossa curls inferiorly fairly significantly. Lateral pole of the condyle is quite prominent in a lateral direction and actually extends a little bit beyond the width of the fossa. Appears that there may be some bone that comes down and covers over the lateral aspect of the condyle. Severely decreased lateral joint space is present with the lateral pole of the condyle actually touching against the lateral rim of the fossa. Disc is medially displaced.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has significant flattening on the anterior head. A little sclerosis and a little peaking of the condyle posteriorly. Anterior beaking is present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On the lateral aspect of the joint, the disc is anteriorly displaced and perhaps medially displaced as well. More medially, the disc appears to be in a little bit better position although still slightly anterior particularly with the vertical extension of the condyle just posterior to the disc. There is a large amount of fluid present in the anterior superior joint space.

On opening, the articular disc appears to be reduced over medially, but out laterally, it appears to be nonreducing.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that appears to be a little bit more sclerotic on the anterosuperior head. Out laterally, the condyle has really good anteroposterior width. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Some sclerosis in the eminence. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and has a significantly thickened posterior band particularly over medially. This disc is much further anteriorly displaced as compared to the opposite side. The disc is sitting beneath the articular eminence. A little anterior beaking present on the condyle. There is a moderate amount of fluid in the superior joint space beneath the articular eminence.

On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle, but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.
Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction.
Both discs appear that they are still salvageable.

Radiologist misread the MRI on the left side and did not identify the obvious anteriorly displaced disc.

