B488 
Age 40. B488 was referred by XX.

B488's problems began last year, when she was 39 years old and was involved in a bus accident. During the accident, apparently she was sitting in the back row with no seat directly in front of her essentially sitting in the middle seat. When the accident occurred, she was thrown forward and she grabbed onto a seat to keep from rolling down the aisle and struck her jaw. She apparently struck it on her right side. Initially, she had quite significant pain in the back of her neck, shoulders, down into her arms and it was even black and blue in these areas. The pain was quite intense and she was not aware of the jaw pain until the first month after the accident she was aware of having tightness and pain in her jaw areas. When she finally was referred to chiropractic treatment, she brought that up to his attention that she had pain in the shoulder, neck and jaw areas. When she went to the chiropractic treatment, she had about 20 sessions about 2 to 3 per week. This made her dizzy and made her very sleepy but did provide no improvement in her pain levels. She then was sent to a pain management doctor who did epidural injections into the lower cervical vertebrae. The injections did not help her. She had the epidural injections done twice, but this did not improve her pain. She then was recommended to have aquatic therapy. She started the aquatic therapy earlier this year and still continues that treatment. Early this year, she tried a splint but this did not help her and, in fact, increased her pain and made the pain more frequent. It caused muscle cramps in the jaws.

B488 rates her headaches at a level of 8 that occur predominantly on the right side in the frontal and temporal area, but they occur bilaterally in the posterior head area and she gets these about three times per week. She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 8, jaw at 8, diet at 6, disability at 9. She gets occasionally right sided earaches, moderate tinnitus and moderate vertigo. She is aware of clenching her teeth severely at nighttime and she also clenches during the day. Other joints that bother B488  include her right shoulder, right elbow, right wrist, right hip, right ankle, neck and back. She has some neuropathies somewhat are affecting her right arm, but since the epidural injections in the cervical vertebrae area, this problem has improved. She still has the pain, but she had numbness through arm and hand that has cleared.

In frontal view, B488 has good facial balance. In profile, she has good facial balance as well. Occlusally, she has a Class II end-on cuspid-molar relationship and an anterior deep bite of about 9 mm. She has a reversed curve of Spee in the upper arch and an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch. She has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. She has moderately enlarged tonsils with the right one being larger than the left one. To palpation, she has low severe pain over the TMJs, retromandibular area, right shoulder, high moderate pain over the masseter muscles, right medial pterygoid and right SCM and moderate pain over the left medial pterygoid, left SCM and left shoulder as well as right temporalis area. She has significant clicking and popping in both joints with an opening clicking at about 15 mm on the right and 20 on the left and closing clicks at about 15 mm on the left and 10 mm on the right. The maximal incisal opening is 47 mm, opening without pain only about 20 mm. The excursion movements in each direction are about 7 mm with pain.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. The turbinates appear moderately enlarged. Sinuses appear relatively clear. She could have a periapical lesion around the mandibular right second molar.

Coronal view shows that the turbinates appear moderately enlarged. The sinuses appear clear.
Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged and the sinuses appear clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking. Out laterally, the condyle appears narrow. The posterior head of the condyle appears somewhat flattened particularly towards the medial side of the joint. The joint space appears narrow vertically and posteriorly. The articular eminence has a more shallow inclination.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is flattened on the anterior aspect with some anterior beaking present. There is decreased vertical joint space. The articular eminence has moderate inclination. The vertical joint space appears narrow.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has an odd shape to it where the medial pole is significantly higher than the lateral pole. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves probably about 4 to 5 mm. There is decreased lateral joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little bit better morphology than the opposite side. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim curves inferiorly probably 4 to 5 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 8 mm at the base of the tongue and 5 mm at the soft palate level.

Basic diagnoses for B488 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Mandibular hyperplasia.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. Class II end-on occlusion with anterior deep bite of 7 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maximize the occlusal fit.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I will be referring her to Dr. XX. The other person to receive a letter is Mr. XX.

B488 MRI  
AGE: 40/F
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. The articular eminence is moderate steep. The joint space is narrow. It appears that the disc may be in position but very thin. At the lateral aspect of the joint, the disc might be anteriorly positioned, but very difficult to tell.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. The disc tissue appears extremely thin and hard to identify. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows it may have a laterally displaced articular disc. The condyle appears to have good width mediolaterally. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little bit more arthritic changes associated with it. The joint space is somewhat narrow particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. It is very difficult to tell where the discal tissue is.

Left TMJ opening shows good translation of the condyle and the disc is in a reduced position on opening. In another view, the disc looks as thought it is of adequate size.

Right TMJ shows that the articular disc is in good positioning on opening and appropriately positioned between the condyle and the articular eminence.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular discs that are quite thin and could be slightly medially displaced with possible disc displacements but with reduction on opening.

