B489 
B489 is 19 years old.  B489 is referred by Dr. X. B489's problems began at an unknown age, but at least 5 to 6 years ago of unknown etiology. This is when she first became of her jaws clicking and popping. She had orthodontics done from about the age of 10 to 13 years. She takes Advil for her back and knees. She gets frequent earaches, daily tinnitus, and frequent vertigo, but she does have a history of syncope. She may have some hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her knees and ankles, but believes this is in part due to running cross country and track. She is aware of clenching her teeth at night.

She gets headaches about one time per week at a level of 4 in the frontal and temple areas. She rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 1, jaw function at 2, diet at 1, and disability at 0.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B489 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry with a little bit more fullness in the right ramus area as compared to the left side by probably 2 to 3 mm. Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 4 mm. The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right side and the chin is 1 to 2 mm off to the right side. In profile view, B489 has a head postured forward neck position. Chin neckline is short and the chin neck angle is moderately well defined. Upper lip supralabrale is probably 3 to 4 mm posterior to subnasale. She is probably approximately 8 mm AP deficient in the maxilla and 18 to 20 mm deficient in the mandible. B489 does have about a 5 to 6 mm deficiency in the infraorbital area. Intraorally, B489 is missing mandibular right second bicuspid. She has the rest of the lower teeth back through the second molars. The lower arch maybe just slight asymmetric with the right cuspid being about 1 mm posterior to the left, but not too bad. In upper arch, B489 has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She is fairly close to be Class I cuspid on right side, but she is Class III on the left side by probably 4 to 5 mm. She has a 0.5 mm deep bite. The maxillary left cuspid appears to be about 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. She has a slight transverse cant in the maxillary occlusal plane with the right cuspid being about 1 mm to 1.5 mm lower than the left cuspid. However, the mandibular left cuspid appears to be about 1 mm higher than right. Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal. Intranasally, the septum appears to be shifted off towards the right side. The left turbinate is quite enlarged. The right one at least anteriorly appears to be relatively normal in size. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the TMJs with the right side being a little bit worse than the left side. On opening, she has a click in the right side at probably 35 to 40 mm and a closing click at about 35 mm. The left side seems to function reasonably smoothly. On excursion, there appears to be a glitch in the right TMJ. Maximal incisal opening is 52 mm. Excursion movements are 8 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars and the absence of mandibular right second bicuspid. The sinuses appear reasonably clear. Right turbinate appears excessively large. Joints appear a little bit arthritic. Axial view shows that the left turbinate is quite large and obstructive. The right side appears a little bit better in shape and size. The sinuses appear relatively clear. In the coronal view, the left turbinate is quite large and the right one is more normal in size. There may be a little mucocele on the left sinus area along the medial nasal wall. Right TMJ tomogram sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little flattened on top. It actually has better morphology than anticipated. There is decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Left TMJ tomogram sagittal view shows some flattening on the head of the condyle. Joint space might be slightly decreased. Condyle appears posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Right TMJ coronal view shows decreased joint space vertically between the condyle and fossa. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly only about 2 to 3 mm.

Left TMJ coronal view shows decreased vertical joint space. There appears to be a little bit more of a degenerative nature on the cortical bone in the fossa area as well as on the condyle. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 3 to 4 mm. There is definite decreased joint space at the superior aspect, but particularly at the lateral aspect.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that both maxilla and mandible are retruded. There is a moderate high occlusal plane angle. Vertical height of the mandible appears elongated. The oropharyngeal airway is constricted with an airway dimension of about 4 mm at the base of the tongue and 5 mm at the soft palate level. She has a little bit of adenoid tissue in the nasopharyngeal area.

Basic diagnoses for B489 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Anterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Anterior vertical mandibular hyperplasia. Class I occlusion on the left side, Class II on the right side.
Missing mandibular right second bicuspid, but with the spacing closed.
Lower arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. Upper arch asymmetry with the maxillary left cuspid being 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right maxillary cuspid being 1.5 mm lower than the left cuspid.
High occlusal plane angle of 15 degrees (normal 8 degrees).
Hypertrophied left nasal turbinate creating partial nasal obstruction. Impacted third molars x4.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 4 mm (normal is 11 mm).
Sleep apnea symptoms including snoring and daytime somnolence.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
MRI of left and right TMJs.
Removal of impacted third molars x4, or at least remove the mandibular right third molar to facilitate the posterior movement of the molar teeth on that side. With opening the bicuspid space, the cuspid and first bicuspid should move forward 1 to 2 mm, but the rest of the space development will require posterior movement of the molar teeth.
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. Open up spacing between the mandibular right first bicuspid and 1st molar to equal the size of a bicuspid tooth. Consider using a TAD (temporary anchoring device) on the right posterior mandible to help with the distalization of the molars.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction approximately 15 mm. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward in a counterclockwise direction and moving the incisor tips upward about 3 mm and advancing forward approximately 8 mm. Left nasal turbinectomy.
Anterior mandibular horizontal ostectomy. Surgical removal of maxillary third molars and mandibular left thirdmolar, if they were not removed ahead of time.
5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
6. Restorative dentistry. a. Placement of osteointegrated implant. b. Placement of crown in the right mandibular second bicuspid area.

B489  MRI  
AGE: DOB:  
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation:  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There appears to be decreased vertical and lateral joint space. There appears to be discal tissue displaced medially.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. There is decreased vertical joint space. Disc appears to medially and anteriorly displaced.

Sagittal view side 1 (sides are not labeled): The condyle appears to have reasonably good morphology, but there is some avascularity to the head of the condyle. The articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is foreshortened anteroposteriorly. The intermediate zone is significantly decreased in length. There is some anterior beaking present. On opening side 1, it appears that the disc might reduce, but difficult to tell. There is moderately good translation of the condyle and the disc. On the T2 films, it shows that the disc does not reduce and remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Sagittal view side 2 shows a condyle with fairly good morphology, but with little avascularity in the condylar head. The articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. Side 2 open view shows good translation of the condyle. Difficult to identify where the disc is, so it is difficult to tell if there is reduction or not. T2 film side 2 shows that the disc does reduce on opening.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated with reduction on one side and nonreducing on the other.

