B490 
B490 is 28 years old and is referred by Dr. XX. Her problems began when she was about 25 years old 7 years ago as a result of a motor vehicle accident. The only medication she currently takes is birth control pills. In addition, she takes Tylenol, ibuprofen and Naproxen. Treatment she has had to date includes chiropractic visits with TENS unit, massages and oral splint (Pivot.)

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Headaches.
Jaw pain.
Neck pain. Ear pain.
Difficulties sleeping.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Jaws popping and clicking as well as locking. Pain with eating, talking or laughing. Jaw pain increases with weather changes and when she has an upper respiratory infection.

In her accident 7 years ago, she hit the steering wheel with her lower jaw actually creating a perforation of her teeth through her lower lip. B490  gets occasional earaches but no tenderness, occasional vertigo but no hearing loss. Her wrists bothers her some but she has broken the right one twice and the left one once. She has an occasional problem with her left knee. She is aware of clenching and bruxism and nighttime and also during the day. The treatment she has had so far had been effective in managing the pain and headache problems. The oral splint that she received 4 years ago to present does help some.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
:
In frontal view, B490 has good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline and chin are all fairly well aligned with each other. B490 has multiple diastemas around her upper anterior teeth extending from the cuspid through cuspid in the upper arch. In profile view, B490 has good facial balance. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through her third molars present. She appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth although the roots are quite prominent labially and the crowns appear to be slightly lingually inclined. A little bit of spacing between some of the teeth. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the third molars present. She is basically a Class I cuspid relationship, and maybe just slightly a Class II on the left. She has an open bit and appears to occlude only on her third molars and all other teeth appear to be out of occlusion. She has about 1 mm vertical overlap with her anterior teeth. Open bite may be slightly worse on the left side as compared to the right side. The left side open bite may be a good 2 to 3 mm and on the right side it may be 1 to 2 mm. The oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. Intranasally, the septum is deviated off the left side anteriorly. The left turbinate is moderately enlarged. The right turbinate is fairly small at least anteriorly. Airway looks reasonably unobstructed. B490 does report some mild snoring and some mild daytime somnolence but no sleep apnea. She also reports a mild sleep disorder.  

To palpation, B490 has some mild to moderate tenderness over the TMJs and some mild tenderness over the masseters, medial pterygoids, styloid areas, SCMs, posterior neck and shoulder areas. On opening she has a click at about 10 mm and a closing click about 5 mm. The right side of the click is much more palpable and louder than the left side is. Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm but only about 29 without discomfort. Excursive movement to the right 7 mm, left 8 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the presence of all of her teeth. She has root canals on the maxillary lateral incisors and left central incisor as well as the mandibular central incisors. The sinuses look relatively clear. Difficult to evaluate the TMJs.

Waters view shows that the bony septum is very straight and the turbinates are moderate in size. There seems to be a little bite more obstruction on the right side than the left side at least towards the posterior aspect.

Tomogram of the left TMJ shows increased vertical joint space and posterior joint space probably related to the splint therapy. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The patient may not have been in centric relation when this x-ray was taken.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a better balanced joint space or slightly decreased joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she occludes only on the second molars and the rest of the teeth are all out of occlusion. She has a slight increased occlusal plane angle and the mandible. Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted particularly at the soft palate area where the AP dimension is only about 5 to 6 mm. At the base of the tongue the AP dimension is about 7 mm. The tongue, however, is held down from the roof of the mouth. B490 has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1.5 mm. However, hand articulating the models seem to indicate that the discrepancy is much larger.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocations with reduction. Mandibular hyperplasia. Occluding only on the third molars with all other teeth out of occlusion. Class I occlusion on the right side, slight Class II end-on occlusion on the left side. Bilateral posterior open bites including and extending from the second molars around to the incisors. TMJ pain.
Headaches. Myofascial pain.
 
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism. Multiple diastemas around the upper teeth. Tooth size discrepancy.
RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: Surgery.
Extraction of maxillary mandibular third molars x4. Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Maintain spacing around all anterior teeth and in fact increase spacing between the laterals and cuspids an additional ½ mm to correct for the tooth size discrepancy. Align and level mandibular arch. Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies with rigid fixation. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B490 MRI EVALUATION 
The left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears there is a little flattening of the condyle. The discal tissue is medially displaced and perhaps anteriorly displaced. The disc may be anteriorly and laterally displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears fairly wide and extends just slightly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Decreased vertical joint space. There appears to be some heterotopic bone developed in the lateral aspect of the condyle. It appears that the disc is anteriorly and laterally displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of anterior beaking present. The disc is not well seen medially and it is more prominent laterally. In the mid part of the condyle the disc appears to be in fairly good anteroposterior position. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint it may be slightly anteriorly displaced. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc is in a reduced position. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle particularly at the lateral aspect. Decreased superior joint space at the lateral aspect. The disc is anteriorly displaced and probably laterally displaced. More medially it is in a little bit better position but still slightly anteriorly displaced. More medially, it is in a little bit better position but is still slightly anteriorly displaced. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Towards the fair medial side, there is no discal tissue seen and the condyle appears more arthritic. There is fluid in the superior joint space particularly at the anterior aspect of the joint. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc is in a reduced position.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly and laterally displaced. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated anteriorly and laterally with reduction on opening.

