B496
B496  is 13 years old. She will be 14 years old in one month. She has had ear tubes x3 but otherwise is in good health. She does have seasonal allergy problems. She takes Claritin as needed. She currently has a headgear device that she wears that does cause her jaws to click and pop at times. B496 has had previous orthodontic treatment including a palatal expander when she was younger. She has had full appliances for almost two years. She does wear a headgear at night and has done that for about 8 months now. With the headgear she notices sometimes when she gets up the mornings her jaws click and pop.


B496 has no history of headaches, TMJ pain, or pain around the head and neck area. She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 0. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo and she has no hearing loss as well as no other joint problems. She is aware of clenching her teeth sometimes during the day. B496 has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face but some asymmetry in the lower third. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 8 mm on the right and around 7 mm on the left. Maxillary midline is about 2 mm to the left of the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline. Chin is about 6 mm to the left. B496 has some increased fullness on the right side in the face and cheek area of about 6 to 8 mm compared to the left side. Body of the mandible appears more bowed compared to the left side. Chin appears to be retruded by probably 10 to 12 mm. Chin-neckline is a little bit shorter although chin-neck angle is fairly well defined. She has a high mandibular plane angle facial morphology. Intraorally, B496 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Teeth appear to be nicely aligned and leveled. She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. As B496 closes up she does hit prematurely on the left side compared to the right side. She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the left side by probably a couple of mm. On the right side she is into a Class I position. She has about a 1 mm vertical overbite relationship. She has at least 8 mm of lip incompetence. B496 has a posterior yaw of about 3 to 4 in both the maxilla and the mandible. She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 3 mm lower than the left side in the cuspid area. Pupillary plane and ear plane are relatively parallel to the floor. Oropharyngeal area looks clear. The uvula and soft palate appear relatively normal. Faucial pillars appear mild to moderately constricted transversely. Intranasally, septum appears reasonably straight. Turbinates appear enlarged, probably moderate nasal airway obstruction. To palpation, B496 has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly. Incisal opening is about 50 mm. She has about 9 mm of excursion movement in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth including 4 impacted third molars. Sinuses look relatively clear. The teeth appear fairly well set up. There is a slight tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1.5 mm.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. There may be a mucocele in the left maxillary sinus. The septum has a little deviation to it in the bony area. Turbinates are moderate in size but with the left side appearing quite a bit larger.

Ethmoid and frontal sinuses appear clear. Vertical height of the mandible on the right side appears a little bit longer in length as compared to the left side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good shape and there appears to be reasonable joint space. There could be a slight decreased posterior joint space.

Left TMJ shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. There appears to be adequate joint space but with a slightly posterior decreased joint space. Articular eminences in both joints are moderate in inclination. On opening, there is good translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a skeletal Class I jaw and occlusal relationship. However, she has a high occlusal plane angle. Vertical height of the mandible appears elongated. She has anterior vertical maxillary excess. Oropharyngeal airway, however, looks relatively normal. Impacted third molars are noted to be in place and it appears that there are 4. Anterior vertical height of the mandible may be excessive.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Right mandibular condylar hyperplasia. Anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia.
Mandibular hyperplasia. Significant facial asymmetry with the posterior yaw off to the right side of 3 to 4 mm of the maxilla and mandible. Transverse facial asymmetry with the right side being 3 mm lower than the left side.
Significant lip incompetence of 8 mm. Hypertrophied turbinates.
Partial nasal airway obstruction.
Impacted third molars x4. Maxillary midline shifted off to the left 1 mm, mandibular dental midline shifted off to the left 2 mm, chin midline shifted off to the left 6 mm. AP asymmetry in both the maxillary and mandibular arch with the left cuspid being 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.
12. Tooth size discrepancy with Bolton's difference of 1.5 mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: of left and right TMJs. Presurgical orthodontics. Continue to align and level maxillary arch.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Consider slenderizing the lower anterior teeth removing about 1 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.


Surgery.
Right mandibular high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the incisors posteriorly, correct the posterior yaw by shifting the mandible to the left and correcting the transverse cant in the occlusion, and correcting the yaw.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly, correct the transverse occlusal cant, correct the yaw and maximize the occlusion. Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Partial turbinectomies.
Anterior mandibular horizontal ostectomy.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.


B496 MRI EVALUATION
AGE: 14/F
DOB:
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant resorption. There appears to be increased vertical joint space. Discal tissue appears to be anteriorly displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is larger than the left side. There appears to be a bony extension medial to the major part of the condyle. Joint space is decreased. The disc appears to be medially displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have undergone resorption with loss of vertical and anteroposterior dimension. There is some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is fairly long and fairly steep. Joint space is increased in thickness. The disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting along the inferior aspect of the articular eminence. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle and the disc may remain unreduced. The findings could be compatible with adolescent internal condylar resorption.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that may be slightly enlarged. There is some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc appears to be in position and translates fairly well with the condyle.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ resorptive arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated without reduction. The disc may still be salvageable but it has undergone some significant degenerative changes. Right TMJ osseous changes but with articular disc in proper position.

