B497
B497 is 14 years old. She was referred by Dr. XXXX. Dr. XXXX is B497's dentist. His office is in . Her orthodontist is Dr. XXXX in . B497 is currently 14 years old. It is unknown when her TMJ problems started or why they started, but at age 14 when she was placed on orthodontic elastics and at this time she became aware of having problems and difficulties with her joints. B497 actually began her orthodontic treatment 3 years and 4 months ago. She currently gets headaches about two times a week at about a level of 6 in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally. She rates her TMJ pain at approximately 6 and average daily pain at about 6. She rates her jaw function at 2, diet at 0, disability at 0. She has no problems with earaches or tinnitus, but does have vertigo. No other joints bother her. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time and also during the day particularly when she is stressed or upset.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
: In frontal view, B497 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm. The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much aligned with each other. She may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe about 3 to 4 mm. The chin may be about 5 mm AP deficient. Intraorally, Megan has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. Teeth appear to be nicely aligned. She seems to have adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has an end-on Class II cuspid relationship. She has about a 1 mm overjet and almost 2 mm of vertical overbite. She has about 2 mm of Class II bilaterally and may be due in part to small upper anterior teeth. Oropharyngeal tissues all look relatively normal. Nasal airway looks normal. To palpation, she has not tenderness around the head and neck area. On opening, she has clicking in her TMJ joints at about 15 mm of opening and about 10 mm of closing. She has no tenderness around the head and neck area to palpation. Incisal opening is 58 mm and she could open to about 30 to 35 comfortably. Excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction. She has a tooth size difference of about 2.3 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of four developing unerupted third molars. Sinuses look clear. Turbinates appear relatively normal in size. It is difficult to evaluate the condyles. Waters view shows that the septum is reasonably straight, and the turbinates appear relatively normal in size with maybe the right side being a little bit larger than the left side. Sinuses look clear. Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has reasonable morphology. Articular eminence is steep. There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space and increased anterior joint space. This may be indicative of vertical orientation of the articular disc. Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has reasonably good morphology. Articular eminence is fairly steep. There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space, but increased anterior joint space. The disc may be in a vertical orientation. On opening, there is good translation of the condyles with a little bit greater translation on the right side as compared to the left side. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some mild AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency. Oropharyngeal airway looks good.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc anterior dislocation with reduction. AP mandibular hypoplasia. AP maxillary hypoplasia. Class II end-on occlusion.
TMJ pain. Headaches. Impacted third molars x4. Tooth size discrepancy with a 's difference of 2.3 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
of left and right TMJs.
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Open about 1 mm of space between the upper lateral incisors and cuspids on each side. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1 mm to 1.5 mm of tooth structure and retract.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and establish a Class I cuspid relationship. Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry for bonding or placement of veneers on to the maxillary lateral incisors, if necessary.

B497  MRI 
AGE: 14/F
DOB: 
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. The joint space actually appears reasonably good, however, it appears that the disc is anteriorly displaced. Lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. Joint space appears decreased particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint. The lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm. Disc tissue appears to be anteriorly and laterally displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears small in vertical height and appears to have lost some vertical volume. Articular eminence is extremely steep and elongated. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present on the condyle. The disc is anteriorly displaced and ascending down the posterior aspect of the articular eminence. There may be some inflammatory process in the bilateral tissues. On opening, there is some restricted translation of the condyle. The disc, which is somewhat thickened and shortened anteroposteriorly remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to be undergoing some arthritic changes. The cortex appears thin on top. There is a little bit of peaking of the condyle and perhaps a little osteophyte extending upwards. Joint space appears fairly well balanced through most of the joint. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting down along the posterior aspect of the eminence. The articular eminence is quite steep compatible with the opposite side. There does not appear to be any significant inflammatory process present. On opening, there is restricted translation of the condyle, but the condyle appears to reduce onto the articular disc. Changes could be compatible with AICR.

IMPRESSION:
1.	Left TMJ arthritic changes and articular disc anteriorly dislocated without reduction.
2.	Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation anteriorly and laterally with reduction.
3.	Possible bilateral AICR.

