B500 
B500 is 19 years old. Her TMJ problems began to the best of her recollection at about the age of 16. She had orthodontics performed from the age of 11 to 16. She had upper probably second bicuspids extracted in her orthodontic treatment. Primary concerns that B500 has include the following:

TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Teeth do not fit together very well. Excessive exposure of gums when smiling.
Difficulties getting the lips together.
Increased eversion of the lower lip. When chewing, she has to shift the lower jaw forward to get the teeth to meet.

B500 rates her headaches that occur predominantly in the frontal and temple area at a level of 3. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 4, diet at 0, and disability at 1. She gets occasional earaches and tinnitus and she has mild vertigo. Her knees bother her, but she attributes this to dancing. She does have some slight hearing loss and the only other joints that really bother her are her knees. She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.

B500 has had some previous surgery including a chin implant as well as lengthening of the upper lip. The lip reverted back up to its original length. The chin implant was inserted 3 years ago.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B500 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 7.5 to 8 mm. She has a lip incompetence of 12 mm. In profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably 4 to 5 mm. The mandible is retruded anteroposteriorly about 15 to 18 mm. The chin neckline is short although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. Intraorally, B500 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some crowding in her lower anterior arch with the right lateral incisor trapped lingually to the cuspid and central incisor. She is lacking some attached gingiva right in the dental midline. In the upper arch, she is missing probably second bicuspids. She has a Class II end-on cuspid molar relationship being probably about 2 mm Class II. She has an anterior deep bite of about almost 3 mm. She has some slight lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being 1 mm to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. In the upper arch, there is a similar AP asymmetry in the cuspids with the left one being 1 to 1.5 mm posterior to the right cuspid. There is a little vertical orbital difference with the right one being about 2 mm higher than the left one. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.

B500 states that she has some mild snoring, but no daytime somnolence nor sleep apnea. She tosses and turns a lot at night when she sleeps. She feels she is predominantly a mouth breather at night and she breathes more through her nose during the day. She does have a head postured forward neck position. B500 has moderate tenderness over the SCMs, posterior neck, left masseter area, and milder tenderness over the shoulders, left SCM, left medial pterygoid area. The maximal incisal opening is 47 mm, opening without significant discomfort 32 mm. The excursion movements are about 6.5 mm in each direction.

Dental model analysis shows that she has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship. There is an overjet of about 2 to 3 mm. There is mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. The lower midline is shifted off to the right of the maxillary midline by about 1 to 2 mm. there is a total buccal cross bite of the maxillary left second molar.

Basic diagnoses for B500 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
Maxillary anterior vertical hyperplasia and AP hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion. Hypertrophied turbinates causing nasal airway obstruction,
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Impacted third molars x4.
Lip incompetence of 12 mm.
Silastic implant in the chin that is displaced off to the right side. TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. Maxillary and mandibular arch asymmetries with the right cuspids being 1 to 2 mm anterior to the left cuspids.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	MRI of left and right TMJs.
2.	Removal of four impacted third molars.
3.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Try to distalize the teeth on the right side about 1 to 2 mm if possible to establish anteroposterior symmetry of the mandible. May require TADS to distalize the right arches.
4.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly and advance it in a counterclockwise direction. d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. e.	Removal of Silastic chin implant. f.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the chin.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B500 MRI
DOB:
DATE OF ACQUISITION:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly reasonable morphology. Disc is medially and anteriorly displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Right TMJ shows a condyle that is slightly larger than the opposite side. The articular disc is medially and anteriorly displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has sclerosis on the top of it. There could be a small osteophyte sticking off the head. There is a little bit of anterior beaking but not too much. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting anterior to the condyle at about 9 o'clock. The articular eminence is quite steep and quite long in vertical length. There is fluid in the superior joint space and the depth of the fossa as well as beneath the articular eminence. On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle, but the articular eminence appears to remain anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking tendency and sclerosis on the head of the condyle. The articular eminence is fairly steep, but not quite as steep as the opposite side. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc appears to have lost some of the intermediate zone. There is significant inflammation and fluid in the superior joint space and some beneath the articular eminence area. Right TMJ open view shows that there is moderate translation of the condyle. Difficult to tell if the disc reduces or not. There may be a partial reduction of the disc. There is some limited translation in this joint.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs anteromedially displaced without reductions.

