B501
B501 is 29 years old. She was referred by XXXX, orthodontist.
B501 problems began about 4 years ago. She had a tooth extracted from the right side of her jaw. She then had surgery on her left side. She then began having clicking and popping in her jaw joint I believe on the left side. One year ago, she had an arthroscopy performed by Dr. XXXX. He wanted to do the right side, but B501 elected not to have it done at that time. Dr. XXXX had her on splints for awhile before the arthroscopy. After the arthroscopy, she did feel better for awhile, but when she wore the splints that made it worse so she discontinued wearing the splints.

B501's primary concerns are:
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints.
Locking on the left joint.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Wakes up with headaches and TMJ pain almost daily.
Headaches and TMJ pain problems having significant effect on her abilities to carry out normal life activities.

In the frontal view, B501 has good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. Dental midlines are fairly well aligned with each other. Nasal tip may be just a mm or 2 off to the right side.

In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose. There appears to be some slight AP deficiency. ______ is a little bit ______ compared to the position of the lower lip. Chin neck-line is relatively normal in length. Chin is in fairly good balance with the rest of the facial structures.

Intraorally, she is missing mandibular right first molar. A little bit drifting of her teeth in that area. Has accentuated curve of occlusion of the lower arch. Some crowding in the lower anterior arch. Lower left first bicuspid is suppressed below the rest of the teeth. Has good attached gingiva. Upper arch has reverse curve of occlusion. She has all of her teeth back to the second molars. She is very close to being Class I cuspid. She has anterior teeth bite of approximately 8 mm. She has a revision to anterior dental relationship. Maximal size opening is 48 mm and this includes the 8 mm overbite relationship. Excursion movement to the right is 3 mm and to the left 4 mm. She kind of opened up about 40 mm today without significant discomfort in that particular motion. Intranasally, she has a little septal spurring on each side of the nose towards the base of the septum. Turbinates are moderate in size. She has a reasonable airway.


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
: Panorex shows that she is missing four third molars and mandibular left first molar. She has a root canal in the mandibular right second bicuspid, mandibular left first molar, maxillary left central incisor and cuspid. She has what appears to be reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch and a centrally curve of occlusion in the lower arch. Sinuses look relatively clear. Left turbinate appears larger than right turbinate.

Left tomogram shows flattening at the anterior head of the condyle and some superior peaking of the condyle. Joint space actually looks increased vertically and anteriorly. Posterior joint space is slightly decreased.

Right TMJ tomogram shows condyle appears a little bit larger than the left one. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Decreased posterior joint space. A little bit of anterior beaking present on this side more so than the opposite side more so than the opposite side.

On opening, the right condyle seems to be larger than the left condyle. Both condyles seem to translate beneath the articular eminence. The right side may be just a little bit further forward movement than the left side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. The right turbinate is a little bit enlarged, but it appears that she may have good airway. Septal spurs are evident with the one on the right side being a little bit larger than the left side.

Cephalometrically, she has what appears to be a Class II division II facial type morphology. Oropharyngeal airway appeared to be within normal limits. Dental model analysis shows the patient has a significant accentuated occlusion in the lower arch with the lower incisors and cuspids being about 3 mm higher than the posterior teeth. The upper arch has reverse curve of occlusion with the incisors begin probably a couple of mm lower than the posterior teeth. She is missing mandibular left first molar with a little bit of ______ drift of the second molar. She has some crowding of the lower anterior arch. Contacts particularly between the bicuspids and cuspids are at a different level. The anterior deep bite is about 7 mm. There is crowding in the upper anterior arch and she has a Class II end-on division II mal occlusion. To level these bites orthodontically will require the use of an occlusal device to open up the bite. It may be able to be achieved by putting some acrylic vertical stops on the linguals of the upper centrals. May need to flatten out the upper centrals first before appliances can be placed on the lowers. Placing some acrylic steps on the linguals of the upper incisors, however, would allow opening of the bite enough to get appliances on the lower arch.

BASIS DIAGNOSES:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with significantly deformation and nonreducing.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion with division II incisor relationship.
Anterior deep bite of 7 mm. Missing mandibular right first molar and missing all four third molars.
Crowding of maxillary arch.
Crowding of mandibular anterior arch.
Accentuated curve of occlusion of lower arch.
Reverse curve of occlusion of upper arch. Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up about 1/2 mm to 1 mm space around each upper lateral incisor to help correct for the slight tooth size discrepancy. This will help decrease the accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.
Align and level the mandibular arch. This will help reduce the accentuated curve of occlusion in that lower arch.
May need to place acrylic bite turbos on the linguals of the maxillary incisors to open up the bite to allow access for placement of lower appliances.

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward in a clockwise direction.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to replace missing mandibular right first molar and to build up the maxillary lateral incisors if necessary to achieve the best bite relationship.

B501 MRI Evaluation
Age: 29-year-old female.
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is small mediolaterally compared to the opposite side but just moderately so. Joint space appears fairly good. Do not see evidence of discal tissue within the joint space itself. It appears that there may be discal tissue anterior to the condyle. Cortical bone appears to be intact although a little irregular at the lateral pole area at least on one view. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa of probably 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle has good mediolateral width. Some decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint and also superiorly particularly compared to the opposite side. Cortical bone appears to be intact. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa probably 2 to 3 mm. Discal tissue appears to be anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with a little bit of flattening on the anterior head and on one area it appears as though there may be some loss of bony continuity on the anterior aspect. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular disc was anteriorly dislocated and somewhat deformed. It was quite thick. It was short in anterior and posterior dimension. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space.

On opening, there is restricted translation and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. She apparently has a similar situation on the left side.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with some flattening of the anterior head of the condyle. There is an area where the bone cortical runs a little bit thin over the anterior head but appears to be intact. Moderate slope of the articular eminence. Condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Disc anteriorly displaced. Disc was in much better shape as compared to the opposite side and not nearly as thickened and deformed. A little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces.

On opening, there is reduction of the disc and moderately good translation.
IMPRESSION: Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with deformation and non-reducing. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.

