B502 
B502 is 15 years old and is referred by Dr. XXXX. She had mononucleosis last year. She had a birthmark removed 9 years ago and a frenectomy 8 years ago. She takes no medications and has no known allergies to medications. She is in good health.

B502 and her family have been aware of her having jaw alignment problems at least since the third grade. However, it was not until she was 14 years old that she began developing pain and headaches. She gets headaches on a daily basis at about a level of 7 in the frontal and temple areas on the left side. She rates her average daily TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 6, jaw function and diet at 2 and disability at 0. She has no problems with earaches. She gets tinnitus and occasional vertigo. The only other joint that bothers her is her SI. She cannot chew gum as this causes her pain and discomfort within a few minutes. She is aware that she does clench her teeth sometimes at night.

In frontal view, B502 has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. Perhaps just a slight increased fullness on the left side in the masseter area. Upper lip length is about 17 mm with a little filling out of the upper lip. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are pretty much on the facial midline. Nasal tip is a little bit off to the right side about 2 mm. Chin may be just slightly to the right side about a mm or 2. In profile view, she has a short upper lip. She has a C-shape curve as well. Some AP maxillary deficiency of about probably 4 to 5 mm. AP position of the chin actually looks reasonably good. Chin-neckline is pretty well defined and chin-neck length looks fairly good. Intraorally, B502 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. The lower incisors appear to be in lingual inclination. She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. The anterior arch is rather flat across the front. In the upper arch, B502 has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Upper lateral incisors are a little bit small in size. She is almost a full Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally. She is more end-on in the incisor likely due to the lingual inclination of the lower incisors. She has a tendency towards crossbite on the right side and has almost an end-on incisor relationship with a slight crossbite tendency. She has a 0 overbite relationship. She has a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1 mm lower than the right side. She has just a slight open bite tendency with the left cuspid whereas the right cuspid appears to be in occlusion. Oropharynx looks relatively normal including the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars. Intranasally, the turbinates appear relatively normal in size. She has a fairly significant septal spur off to the right side of the nose. This is towards the base of the septum. She has no history of snoring. She does have some moderate daytime somnolence but no sleep apnea. Daytime tiredness may be related to her schedule. To palpation, B502 has some moderate tenderness over the masseter muscles, shoulders, left styloid area and milder tenderness over the temporalis muscles, medial pterygoids and right styloid area. On opening, she has a faint click about 15 mm on the left joint and closing maybe 5. When she goes into excursive movement she has audible popping in both sides. Incisal opening maximal is 52 mm and about 36 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movement to the right is 6 mm, left 8 mm. Tooth size analysis reveals a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the presence of all 4 third molars and they are unerupted and impacted. There possibly could be a 4th molar on the maxillary left side. The sinuses look relatively clear. The bony septum looks relatively straight. Turbinates appear relatively normal in size. Condylar head and neck may be somewhat elongated. All her teeth appear to be present and accounted for.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B502 has a skeletal Class III occlusal relationship. The skeletal relationship is worse than the occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway is normal. The inferior turbinate extends posterior to the hard palate by probably a good 8 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: Bilateral TMJ condylar hyperplasia and articular disc dislocations with reduction on the left side and non-reducing on the right side. Mandibular prognathism.
AP maxillary hyperplasia.
Class III occlusion.
Anterior and right posterior crossbites and tendency towards cross bite on the left side. TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Impacted third molars x4 and an impacted supernumerary maxillary left fourth molar. High occlusal plane. Short upper lip of 17 mm (normal 20 mm.) Over-angulation of maxillary incisors. Nasal septal spur. Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level mandibular arch. Continue to monitor facial growth and development to evaluate for active condylar hyperplasia.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies (if condylar hyperplasia confirmed.)
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly and level transversely.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, and upright the incisors as well as correct for transverse discrepancies.

Surgical removal of 4 impacted third molars and impacted maxillary left fourth molar.
Post surgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 5.	Restorative dentistry to buildup the maxillary lateral incisors.

B502 MRI Evaluation
Age: 15/F
DOB:
Date of Acquisition: 
Date of Interpretation: 
Coronal views of the left and right TMJs unfortunately do not include the condyles enough to make any interpretation.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a significant amount of shape to it. A little bit of peaking at the top of the condyle and a little bit of anterior beaking present. The condyle in some views has sort of a hockey stick shape to it particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint. Articular eminence has sort of a long gradual slope to it. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting along the inferior aspect of the posterior slope of the articular eminence. The disc is a little bit distorted. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. A little fluid behind the condyle as well. On opening, the disc does reduce. Odd shape of the condyle and what appears to be a long condylar head and neck would tend to indicate a possible osteochondroma/osteoma or perhaps some condylar hyperplasia.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with the head appearing significantly smaller than the opposite side. The condyle has a little bit of beaking anteriorly and a little bit of flattening on the posterior head. Articular eminence is a little bit steeper on this side in some of the views at least and not quite as long in length. The condyle appears posteriorly displaced in some views. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is somewhat distorted. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space but not as significant as the opposite side. Condylar head and neck appear elongated. Neck appears a little bit more narrow than the opposite side. On opening, the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced and non-reducing although the translation of the condyle is reasonably good.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ condylar hyperplasia versus osteoma versus osteochondroma with articular disc dislocation with reduction. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and moderate deformation of the disc.

