B504
B504 is 49 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX.

B504 was not aware of having facial asymmetry when she was 15 years of age. At the age of 19, she developed Bell's palsy on the right side. That has never fully recovered. She said there may have been a little bit of asymmetry noticeable at that time. She feels as though the facial asymmetry has gotten progressively worse over the years. Although she feels the asymmetry has been getting progressively worse, she has not had any jaw problems until 11 months ago when she began noticing difficulties with her jaw including pain as well as limited function. She also began developing muscle spasms. Her problems began 11 months ago of unknown etiology. Since then she has had a number of treatments which include the following:

Novocain injections to the right TMJ x3 with only temporary relief.
Acupuncture. Chiropractic treatment. Splint therapy, but the splint broke secondary to clenching. Eight months ago, she was put in the hospital and under general anesthesia, her jaws were manipulated and then she had an arthrocentesis of the right TMJ, but this has not relieved her symptoms or improved her jaw function.

B504 gets headaches predominantly in the back of the head at about a level of 7, and she gets those headaches about 3 times per week. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 9, diet at 7, disability at 9. She gets occasional right-sided earaches and occasional vertigo. She does get tinnitus and the tinnitus is on the right side. She sometimes gets a squishy in her joints, particularly in the right side. She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth and jaws at nighttime and also during the day. However, she does have some moderate snoring, mild daytime somnolence, but she is not aware of any sleep apnea issues. She is predominantly a mouth breather at nighttime.

Primary concerns that B504 has at this time includes the following:
Limited mouth opening. Unable to get food in her mouth properly with utensils. Jaw aches when she chews.
Jaw is locked and out alignment. Teeth and jaw out of alignment. Difficulty speaking properly.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B504 has some facial asymmetry present. Upper lip length is about 17 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 6 mm. The maxillary midline seem to be pretty much on the facial midline. Nasal tip is almost 6 mm off towards the right side. The center of the upper lip is off to the right side about 7 mm. The mandibular dental midline and chin midline are probably about 8 mm off towards the right side. There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 3 mm lower than the right side. In profile view, she has prominence of the nasal dorsum. The maxilla appears to be AP deficient by probably a good 6 mm. Chin appears to be retruded by probably 15 mm. Chin neckline is short, although chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. Vertical height of the mandible on the left side may be just slightly longer than the right side by maybe 2-3 mm, but not too significant. The left angle of the mandible is more prominent than the right side by probably 5 mm. Intraorally, B504 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars and all of her upper teeth back through the second molars. She is missing an upper bicuspid on the left side. She has an anterior deep bite of about 6-7 mm. She is Class I cuspid on the left side and Class II cuspid on the right side. The upper arch is quite asymmetric with the left cuspid being probably 5-6 mm posterior to the right cuspid. The lower arch is more difficult to evaluate relative to asymmetry. She has a hyper-erupted mandibular left lateral incisor. Transversely, the lower arch is a little bit more symmetric, being only about 1 mm lower on the left side than the right side, whereas the upper cuspid is 3 mm lower on the left side compared to the right side. As best as can be evaluated with the extreme limited opening, the oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal. Incisal opening is about 12 mm counting her overbite. Excursion movement to the right 9 mm, to the left less than 2 mm. Curve of Wilson on the maxillary right side is somewhat increased and on the left side is somewhat decreased. She feels as though she gets significant muscle strain down through her neck and into her shoulder area. This may involve the platysmal muscle as well. To palpation, she mild to moderate pain through most of the head and neck area. She has some decreased sensation in the right cheek. She has limited function of the buccal and mandibular branches of the facial nerve on the right side.

Nineteen years ago, she had a horse accident and it may have broken her nose at that time. She apparently had a fracture along the base of the nose, at least on the right side. This may account for some of the nasal asymmetry. About 11 or 12 years ago, she was moving a TV and it fell and struck her on the nose and in the right infraorbital area and perhaps she had a fracture in that area as well. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly from a clinical impression, but she hears a clicking noise in her ear on the right side. When she swallows, she gets a clicking noise that is more obvious on her right side than her left side. Intranasally, she has a deviated septum off towards the left side, and the turbinates appear fairly significant in size.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the maxillary left first bicuspid. Left condyle appears enlarged compared to the right side, and the condylar neck appears elongated. Vertical height of the mandible may be just slightly increased on the left side compared to the right side. The turbinates appear enlarged. Axial view shows that sinuses are clear. Turbinates are quite large. The septum deviates off to the left side anteriorly, but seems more straight back in the bony septal area. Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear, but the turbinates are quite large and probable obstruct the nose significant. Left TMJ coronal view tomograms shows that the condyle is significantly larger than the opposite side in mediolateral dimension as well as vertical. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 2-3 mm. There is decreased lateral joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is much small in size. There is decreased superior joint space. The condyle is well confined within the fossa. Lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 3 mm. Width of the right condyle is about 13 mm at its greatest dimension and on the side is 16 mm in transverse dimension. Left TMJ sagittal tomograms shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. There is decreased posterior joint space and vertical joint space, particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint. The condylar head and neck are quite long. Left articular eminence is moderately shallow.
Right TMJ sagittal views shows decreased superior and posterior joint spaces. The condyle appears a little bit more arthritic on this side with some flattening on the anterior head at the lateral aspect of the joint. The articular eminence is relatively normal. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that maxilla and mandible are retruded anteroposteriorly. There is a short upper lip. There is an anterior maxillary excess. Oropharyngeal airway at AP dimension is only about 4 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue about 5 mm. She has an anterior deep bite and a skeletal Class II jaw relationship.

In reevaluation in the frontal view, I believe the upper incisors are probably 2 mm to the left of the facial midline and the mandibular dental midline is 6 mm to the right and chin probably 7-8 mm to the right.

Basic diagnoses for B504 would be as follows:
Left mandibular condylar osteoma with questionable active growth. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated with a closed lock situation. Maxillary AP hypoplasia and transverse asymmetry with the left side being 3 mm lower than the right side.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and asymmetry with the lower mandibular dental midline being shifted 6 mm off to the right and chin shifted 8 mm off to the right. There is a transverse cant where the left side is 1-2 mm lower than the right side. Class I cuspid relationship on the left side, Class II cuspid relatively on the right side. Hypertrophied turbinates with nasal airway obstruction. Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm (normal dimension 11 mm).
Maxillary arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being 5-6 mm posterior to the right cuspid.
Nasal asymmetry with the tip being shifted approximately 6 mm to the right.
TMJ pain. Myofascial pain. Headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Surgery Stage 1: Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. Presurgical orthodontics.
Extract maxillary right second bicuspid. Align and level maxillary arch closing the extraction site. Burn posterior anchorage and retract the first bicuspid-cuspid back against the molar. Shift maxillary midline to the right 2 mm. Open spaces between the laterals and cuspids if necessary to keep from over-retracting the upper incisors. Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure. Surgery Stage 2. Left TMJ high condylectomy if active growth is still occurring with TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back on the facial midline. Maxillary osteotomies to shift the maxilla towards the left and back onto the facial midline. Bilateral partial turbinectomies. Nasal osteotomies to shift the nose towards the left side about 6 mm.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B504 MRI
AGE: 49/F
DOB:
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite larger than the opposite side. There appears to be medial displacement of the articular disc and decreased vertical and lateral joint spaces. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm. There is a little bit of fluid in the joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is smaller than the opposite side. It appears to be a little sclerotic on top. Articular disc also appears to be somewhat medially displaced with decreased lateral joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears quite large with elongated condylar head and neck. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. There is decreased vertical posterior joint space. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. More medially, the disc appears to be in a little bit better position. On opening, the disc appears to reduce. In the left TMJ, there is moderate translation.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good volume. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. The disc on this side is anteriorly displaced as well. More medial, the disc appears to be in a little bit better position. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint space, but not much. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint, there is a little bit of anterior beaking present. The condyle appears to be posteriorly and superiorly positioned in the fossa. There is a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. There is a little bit of flattening on the head of the condyle as well. On opening, there is limited translation.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ enlarged condyles secondary to either condylar hyperplasia, osteochondroma, or osteoma with anteriorly and medially displaced articular discs. Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular discs anteriorly and medially displaced with significantly limited translation.

