B506
B506 is 26 years old. B506 was referred by Dr. XXXX.
Patient History
She takes Midrin and hydrocodone relative to pain medications. B506 is in good health with no major medical problems. Her problems began at the age of 16. The etiology may be postsurgery. She did have previous double-jaw surgery at the age of 16 by Dr. XXXX. The mandible was set backward, and the upper jaw was advanced some. She had deviate mandibular prognathism off to the left side and some AP maxillary deficiency. Besides having the maxillary and mandibular osteotomies, B506 also had bilateral cheek implants. She will occasionally get swelling if she lies on them. When it swells up, particularly on the left side if she pushes on it, it sends a sharp nerve pain down through her face up beginning at the infraorbital area. Apparently there are some screws stabilizing those implants in place, and Dr. XXXX talked to her that if they continue to cause her problems they could be removed.

Her headaches did start after the surgery but didn't get back until about five or six years ago. She started seeing Dr. XXXX. He has made splints for her. She has had steroid injections to her muscles x 2. She has had iontophoresis that did help for about a week or two. She has had physical therapy and massage therapy as well. At Dr. XXXX's office they did inject the left TMJ at one time, and this did reduce her pain but not really significantly. About a week-and-a-half ago, they injected both joints with what B506 thinks was probably a local anesthetic as well as a steroid, and this injection was done apparently directly into the joints. When she gets her severe headaches, she will be quite tired during the day for the next few days afterward. Her mother states that she does exhibit moderate snoring.

B506 gets some earaches and particularly pressure sensation in her ears. She has constant tinnitus, infrequent vertigo, but she feels she has some loss of hearing particularly involving low frequencies. Other joints that bother her include her back and her knees to a minor extent. She is allergic to PENICILLIN, DOGS, CATS, AND HORSES. She is not aware of having any allergic response to jewelry. She is aware of significant problems with clenching particularly at nighttime. She used to clench a lot during the day but is now aware of that and is able to consciously avoid that most of the time.

B506 rates her headaches that she gets daily at about a level of 8, and they occur all over her head beginning usually around the ear and the temporal areas and then spreading either forward, up over the top, or around the back. Left side may be a little bit more intense than the right side. She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 4, diet at 5, and disability at 7. She does have numbness in her lower left lip and chin area since the last surgery.

To palpation, she has rather severe pain over the styloid areas, high moderate to low severe over the TMJs, and moderate pain over the masseters and posterior neck area. On opening, she has significant audible pop in the left joint at about 30 to 35 mm of opening. The right side seems to function reasonably smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is about 51 mm and opening without significant discomfort 32 mm. Excursive movements are about 5 mm in each direction.

Intraorally, she does have a crossbite on the left side particularly in the molar area. Patient Concerns
Bilateral headaches
Pain that begins around the ears and goes up into the head
Tiredness of the jaws
TMJ pain
Brushing teeth can increase the pain levels
Feels like the ligaments are being ripped in her joints
Can't touch the face or jaws without creating significant pain for her Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B506 has good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm. Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline or maybe just about a millimeter to the left. Mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Is just about a millimeter to the right of the maxillary midline. Chin is about 3 mm to the left of the facial midline.

In profile view, B506 has fairly good facial symmetry and balance. Probably has a high mandibular plane and high occlusal plane angle. Maxilla might be just a little bit AP deficient by probably about 3 to 4 mm, and mandible is probably about 6 to 8 mm AP deficient.

B506 has had lower right first bicuspid extracted and mandibular dental midline shifted over toward that side, thus, the difference between the alignment of the dental midline and the alignment of the chin. She has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. She has adequate attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch. Has significant space between the right cuspid and right second bicuspid of probably about 2 to 3 mm. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side and Class II by about 3 mm. On the left side, she is basically Class I. She has an overjet of about a millimeter. She has about a 1-mm overbite relationship. She has just a very slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane; actually, it is fairly level, or the right side might be 0.5 mm lower than the left side. Oropharynx appears clear. Mandibular right cuspid is about 3 or 4 mm posterior to the left cuspid.

Intranasally, she has a spur at the base of the septum extending over to the left side and also has moderately large turbinates that could be contributory to decreased nasal airway flow.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex reveals B506 has bilateral bone plates back in the ramus area with four screws in each plate on both the left and right side. She has an X-plate anteriorly in the chin area. Missing all four third molars and the right first bicuspid in the mandible. In the upper jaw, she has bone plates x 4 with two screws above and two screws below the osteotomy site on each of the plates. She also has screws supporting the cheek implants in place. Sinuses look relatively clear. Left condyle appears smaller than the right condyle. She has a root canal on the maxillary right second molar and mandibular left second bicuspid.

Waters view shows the presence of the bone screws and plates in the mandible and maxilla. Also it shows two bones screws on each side supporting the cheek implants. Turbinates appear fairly large, and airway appears to be somewhat obstructed.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have some arthritic changes associated with it. Articular eminence is a little bit shallow. Could be some decreased superior and posterior joint space.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic and angled forward. Condyle appears narrow anteroposteriorly. May be some decreased vertical joint space.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of both joints.
Cephalometrically, she has a high occlusal plane angle. Also has a high mandibular plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted with an airway dimension of less than 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 5 mm at the base of the tongue.

Basic Diagnoses
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated anteriorly with late reduction
Right TMJ arthritis and medial displacement of the articular disc with early reduction
AP maxillary hypoplasia
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia
AP mandibular hypoplasia and asymmetry
Class II end-on occlusion on the right side
Missing mandibular right first bicuspid with residual spacing remaining of approximately 2.5 to 3 mm
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm (normal 11 mm)
Severe headaches
Severe TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Right mandibular alveolar hypoplasia
Bilateral cheek implants with recurrent infections and two bone screws stabilizing each implant
Maxillary bone plates x 4 and screws x 18
Mandibular bone plates x 2 and screws x 8
Nocturnal clenching
Snoring
Sleep apnea symptoms

Recommended Treatment
Medications
Klonopin 1 mg 1 tablet q.h.s. to try to diminish nocturnal clenching
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch Align and level mandibular arch. Open up spacing in the mandibular right first bicuspid area by shifting the mandibular anterior teeth to the left (they are about 3 mm to the right of the chin midline) and consider distalizing the right posterior teeth to create a space equal to about 6 to 7 mm or the width of the opposite first bicuspid tooth. This change will worsen the crossbite on the left side and could create an anterior end-on incisor relationship. Mandibular dental midline may shift off toward the left side of the maxillary midline which would be a desired movement

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it, downgraft the posterior aspect, and move the anterior aspect up slightly Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible and rotate it back onto the facial midline
Removal of maxillary bone plates x 4 and screws x 18
Removal of bilateral cheek implants and 4 screws
Removal of mandibular bone plates x 2 and screws x 8
Bone graft to left mandibular alveolus (harvest bone from the mandible stabilized with a bone screw)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
Osseointegrated implant into right mandibular first bicuspid area
Restorative dentistry to place a crown on the mandibular right first bicuspid osseointegrated implant

I did discuss with her and her mother that the weakest part of the surgery will likely be the left temporomandibular joint because of the significant amount of time the disc has been out of place on that side and the significant degenerative changes that have already occurred in this disc. However, I do believe that is the best treatment option for her at this time. They do understand that she could end up having to go onto a total joint prosthesis on that side if the disc and procedures do not hold up. In addition, there could be problems with the maxilla because of the cheek implants that are there. It is quite possible that a large portion of the anterior maxillary wall could be gone as a result of localized reaction to the cheek implants. In other words, the anterolateral walls of the maxilla may be eroded and nonexistent. They understand this as well.

B506  MRI Scan Evaluation
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Reading:
Age: 26 years
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears to have undergone arthritic changes. Top surface of the condyle appears a little bit rough on one view. Decreased joint space superiorly. Lateral pole of the condyle is significantly lower than the medial pole. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. Discal tissue appears to be anteriorly positioned.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has better size and appears to have a healthier image. However, there is a significantly decreased vertical joint space particularly at the medial and the lateral aspect of the condyle. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly a moderate amount and slightly more than the opposite side. Disc may be anteriorly displaced but difficult to tell. It is also possible that there could be some medial displacement.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is smaller in size than expected. Anterior beaking is present. Flattening of the posterior head is present. Condylar head looks a little sclerotic in some areas particularly toward the medial side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. Decreased posterior joint space. Perhaps a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space but not too significantly.

On opening, there appears to be fairly good translation of the condyle, but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. It is extremely foreshortened anteroposteriorly with significantly loss of the intermediate zone. Questionable salvageability of this disc.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is much broader in width than the opposite side. A little bit of anterior beaking present. Appears that the articular disc is probably anteriorly displaced. Articular eminence is moderately steep. No particular inflammatory process seen in the joint, although there may be just a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. It is quite possible that the disc may be in position.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle, and the articular disc is reduced in position on opening. There is some flattening on the superior head of the condyle.

Left TMJ, dynamic view, shows that there is arthritis associated with left condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Anterior beaking is present on the condyle and a little sclerosis on top. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and on opening is nonreducing. In the closed position, there is decreased superior and posterior joint space. There is significant anterior beaking present on this condyle and appears to be a significant loss of volume in the condylar head area.

Right TMJ, dynamic view, shows a condyle with some anterior beaking present. Appears to be some flattening on the head and loss of volume. Condyle appears a little bit larger than the opposite side. Articular disc, however, appears to be in fairly good position.

On opening, it remains reduced. There is fairly good translation of the disc in the condyle.
Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and significant deformation of the articular disc Right TMJ arthritis and medially displaced articular disc

B506 MRI Scan Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of Reading:
Evaluation with Dr. XXXX: He agrees that the left TMJ demonstrates significant arthritis with osteophyte formation particularly coming off anteriorly, and the articular disc is anteriorly displaced without reduction.

On the right side, the coronal views show that there is bone on bone contact at the lateral aspect of the joint and that the articular disc is medially displaced. There are some arthritic changes in this condyle as well. There is an increased signal in the posterior band of the articular disc.

Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
Right TMJ arthritis (less than the left side) and articular medial dislocation

