B508
B508 is 16 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX. B508 has had her wisdom teeth removed and had left second premolar and mandibular right second premolars extracted 4 months ago. She had her wisdom teeth removed 8 months ago. B508 is in good health with no major medical problems. She is 5 feet 5 inches tall and weighs 120 pounds.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Breathing difficulties.
Difficulty eating. Difficulty talking. Pain in the jaw joints. Headaches. Difficulties eating and chewing. Noises in the jaw joints.
Difficulty breathing through her nose.

Currently B508 takes no medications.
In frontal view, B508 has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. She has a little bit of increased fullness in the right cheek area. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 4 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the fascial midline. Mandibular dental midline is probably about 3 to 4 mm off to the left side and the chin is probably 5 mm off the left side. As B508 bites her teeth together, she tends to shift off towards to the right side a greater amount than her centric relation. In centric relation she is still off to the right about 3 mm. Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably about 2 mm. The maxilla is retruded by about 4 to 5 mm. Chin is AP deficient by approximately 15 mm. B508 has a head postured forward neck position, Intraorally, she is missing lower second bicuspids. She has some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch. There is a high attached labial frenulum but otherwise appears to have good attached gingiva. In the upper arch she appears to be missing first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. She has an anterior open bite of about 5 mm. On the right side she has a crossbite and a tendency towards a crossbite on the left side. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side about 2 mm and on the right side she is probably 4 to 5 mm Class II. Open bite in the cuspid area on the left side is greater than the right side by probably a couple of mm. Transversely the maxillary occlusal plane is fairly level. However, there is asymmetry in the lower arch with a transverse cant and the left side is 2 mm lower than the right side. Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly closely aligned to each other. She bites primarily on just the second molars bilaterally with the rest of the teeth essentially being out of occlusion. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal. The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear relatively normal. Intranasally, she has moderately enlarged turbinates and they may be larger posteriorly. The septum has some deviations to it with accepted norms. Moderate nasal airway obstruction. Columella is somewhat wide and nostrils are a little bit narrow. However, opening the nostrils with a scope did not appear to improve her ability to breathe through her nose.

She does report mild snoring and mild daytime somnolence but no sleep apnea syndrome problems. Maxillary incisal opening is about 49 mm, excursive moves are approximately 7 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars as well as mandibular second bicuspids and maxillary first bicuspids. Sinuses look relatively clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size. The bony septum appears relatively straight. Condyles appear arthritic particularly on the right side. She has a root canal in the mandibular right first molar.

Water view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. The bony septum at least appears relatively straight. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged with somewhat constricted airway.

Right TMJ tomogram is a little hard to interpret but it appears there are arthritic changes in the joints and moderately flat articular eminence. There maybe some decreased joint space present.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have some less arthritic changes compared to the opposite side. Joint space appears a little bit better balanced. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles coming down beneath the articular eminences.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B508 has a high occlusal plane angle, Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship and a significant anterior open bite of almost 7 mm. Oropharyngeal airway is constricted with a dimension from the soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall of about 5 mm and at the base of the tongue about 4 mm. She has lip incompetence of about 8 mm.

B508 believes her problems began perhaps when she was about 11 years of age. She may have had some clicking and popping in her jaw joints at that time of unknown etiology. Except for initiating the orthodontic treatment she has had no other treatment for her joint problems.

Dental model analysis reveals a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm. She has a significant accentuated curve of occlusion primarily related to the second molars being quite a bit higher than the rest of the teeth. The first molars are also slightly elevated. The lower arch has a slight accentuated curve of occlusion associated with it but not too significant. Dental model analysis also reveals transverse maxillary deficiency. B508 does require 10 to 11 hours of sleep a night in order to feel good. This is probably related to the constricture of the oropharyngeal airway. She also has the abnormal head and neck posture that helps open up her airway and does improve her breathing some. However, she is developing curvature in the shoulders and abnormal neck shape and posture.

B508
BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption and articular disc dislocations with the right side significantly worse than the left side.
AP mandibular deficiency. Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP maxillary deficiency. Transverse maxillary deficiency. Mandible deviated off to the right side approximately 3 to 4 mm. Class II end-on occlusion being worse on the right side than the left side.
Bilateral posterior crossbites being worse on the right side than the left side.
Transverse cant in the mandibular occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm lower than the right side. Occluding predominately only on the second molars bilaterally. Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction. Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway of 4 mm (normal 11 mm.) Snoring. Daytime somnolence. Speech deformity. Masticatory dysfunction. High occlusal plane angulation.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Open a little bit of spacing around the upper laterals and cuspids to equal about 0.5 to 1 mm to correct for the tooth size discrepancy. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level mandibular arch. Try to lose significant posterior anchorage so that the lower incisors do not retract at all. In fact they could benefit by being tipped forward slightly. Surgery stage I:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. Surgery stage II:
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand, advance and level the occlusal plane.
Partial turbinectomy. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B508 MRI Evaluation 
Age: 16/F
Date of Birth: 
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have reasonably good mediolateral width although there appears that there are some arthritic changes within the joint. Decreased lateral joint space. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa. There may be discal tissue over medial.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost some volume vertically. The condyle appears more deformed than the opposite side. The joint space actually looks very good. Cortical bone appears to be intact. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa. It appears there may be some discal tissue displaced laterally.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have some arthritic changes. There is a little bit of flattening on the head of the condyle. It is difficult to see the cortical bone over the top of the condyle. At the lateral aspect of the joint it appears that the disc is anteriorly displaced but towards the medial side the disc appears to be in better position although there may be degenerative changes associated with the disc. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, the disc appears to reduce and there appears to be moderate translation of the condyle and the disc.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking and flattening on the head of the condyle. There appears to be some loss of volume to the condyle. Articular eminence has a moderate inclination. Articular disc appears to anteriorly displaced and it is more visible at the lateral aspect of the joint than at the medial. A little bit of fluid present in the superior joint space. On opening there is restricted translation of the condyle and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. The disc appears fairly deformed and degenerated. There is questionable salvageability of this disc but it still may be salvageable.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly and medially displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction and severely deformed

