B510 
B510 is 23 years old. She is a self referral. Her TMJ problems began when she was about 13 years old of unknown etiology. She had orthodontics 11 years ago for 2 years. She had splint therapy 11 years ago for 3 months. Eight years ago, she underwent double jaw orthognathic surgery by XXXX. She continued to have problems. She has had craniosacral therapy. She has been back into splints 2 years ago to the present and she has had approximately 5 splints.

B510 gets headaches at about a level of 5 in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 1, diet at 2, disability at 3. She gets moderate occurrence of earaches, has continuous tinnitus and occasional vertigo. No other joints bother her. She believes that she probably clenches at night particularly with the current splint that she has. She also feels she is probably a mouth breather at night.

In frontal view, B510 has more prominence of the right mandible than the left by probably 4 to 5 mm. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper lip tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is about 1.5 mm off to the left. The chin is probably about 6 mm off to the left. In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 4 to 5 mm and the chin is retruded about probably 8 to 10 mm. Intraorally, B510 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some gingival retraction on the lower central incisors. In the upper arch, B510 has all of her teeth back to the second molars. B510 has a Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by about 3 to 4 mm and on the left side she is probably 2 mm Class III. She has about a 3 mm anterior open bite with an anterior and posterior cross bite and probably a tendency towards a cross bite on the right side. She has probably -4 mm over jet. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal. B510 has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 2 mm higher than the right side. She has a posterior yaw with both maxilla and mandible being shifted to the right in the second molar area about 3 to 4 mm. She has tenderness over the masseter muscles, TMJs, and shoulder areas. On opening, she has some crepitus on the left side but the right side seems reasonably smooth. The maximal incisal opening is 51 mm and opening without difficulty 32 mm. The excursion movement to the right is 8 mm, to the left 10 mm. The columella is moderately wide and the nostrils constricted.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
S. Panorex shows the presence of three bone screws in each side of the ramus and an interosseus wire in the superior ramus area also. In the maxilla, there is a bone plate anteriorly on each side and a stainless steel wire in the posterior maxillary area. The left condyle appears that it has undergone resorptive arthritis. The right joint condylar head and neck are much longer compared to the left side.

Coronal radiograph shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side. The turbinate appear fairly large causing some airway constricture. The sinuses appear clear.

Axial view shows that the septum is straight at this particular cut, but the turbinates are fairly enlarged and may encroach on the airway. Sinuses appear clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant condylar resorption with significant loss of condylar volume. There is anterior beaking present and decreased vertical joint space. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has better morphology than the opposite side. The vertical joint space appears narrowed. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit more narrow than the opposite side and there is decreased vertical joint space. There is some lateral beaking of the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a better mediolateral width and vertical height as compared to the opposite side. There is decreased vertical joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a Class III occlusal relationship with an anterior open bite. The maxilla and mandible appear somewhat retruded. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm at the soft palate level and about 5.5 at the base of the tongue. She has a moderate high occlusal plane angle in the mandible.

B510 has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of almost 2 mm. Dental model analysis fairly confirms that she has a transverse maxillary deficiency.

Basic diagnoses for B510 would be as follows:
Left TMJ severe resorptive arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction with significant deformation and degeneration.
Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with reduction.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia, vertical hyperplasia, and transverse asymmetry.
Class III end-on occlusion being slightly worse on the right side. Mandibular dental midline shifted to the left 1.5 mm and chin shifted to the left 5 to 6 mm.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plan with the left side being 2 mm shorter than the right side. Posterior yaw with maxilla and mandible being shifted off towards the right side approximately 4 mm. High occlusal plane angle.
Hypertrophied turbinates with nasal airway obstruction.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Periodontal evaluation and possible gingival graft to the lower anterior arch.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level the maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.
3.	Surgery. a.	Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor versus sternoclavicular disc graft. b.	Right TMJ articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchor. c.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible approximately 10 mm, correct the posterior yaw and level it transversely. d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction, expand, level transversely and correct the posterior yaw. e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B510 MRI
DOB:
DATE OF ACQUISITION:
DATE OF INTERPRETATION:
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology, but a little bit of anterior beaking is present. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced and sitting along the posterior aspect of the articular eminence. Although the disc is displaced, it could be in a pre-click position. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the articular disc and the articular disc is in a reduced position. The condyle comes out anterior to the articular eminence.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with significant arthritic changes and loss of vertical volume. The disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The articular eminence is moderately steep. The disc is deformed and short anteroposteriorly. There is a slight increased vertical joint space present. It appears there has been previous surgery on the ramus. There is fairly good translation with the condyle, although not quite as good as the opposite side. The articular disc remains anteriorly displaced and non-reducing with severe deformation.

Right TMJ coronal view shows that there is decreased vertical joint space. The condyle has good mediolateral width. The disc appears to be anteriorly and medial displaced. There is some fluid in the superior joint space.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe resorption with significant loss of vertical volume. The condyle is somewhat narrow compared to the opposite side. The joint space is actually reasonably good. The discal tissue appears to be anteriorly displaced.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ severe arthritis with significant loss of volume and a disc anteriorly displaced without reduction and severely deformed. Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with reduction.

