B512 
B512 is 20 years old, referred by Dr. XXXX. B512 is in good health with no major medical problems.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Teeth and jaws do not fit together.
Popping in the jaw joints that began about 1 to 2 years ago.
Pain in the jaw joints when the popping of the jaw occurs.

HISTORY OF PRESENT CONDITION
B512 apparently has always had a jaw alignment problem. During his growth spurt, his jaw alignment problems got much worse. He is not currently aware of any particular worsening of his jaw alignment. When he was in about the 4th grade, he did have a headgear or facemask apparatus placed to try to pull the upper jaw forward but this was ineffective in correcting his problems. In the past 1 to 2 years, he has become aware of popping it the jaw joints with the right side being worse than he left side. This can stimulate jaw joint pain and jaw pain. He currently takes no medications.

He has no problems with earaches, vertigo, hearing loss, but does get occasional tinnitus. His knees and ankles bother him sometimes as they get sore from fencing. His right 4th finger sometimes bothers him but this is a result of a previous fracture in that area. He is not aware of clenching or bruxing at night, but during the day while working as a chef, he is aware of clenching. He reports no problems with headaches. When his joints start to pop he will get some discomfort in the jaw joints which he rates as a level 5. On an average day, facial pain and headaches are about a 0. He rates his jaw function at 0, diet 6, disability 2.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B512 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 2 to 3 mm off to the right side. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much aligned with each other. Therefore, the chin is also off to the right side about 3 mm. In profile view, B512 has some AP maxillary deficiency probably about 4 to 6 mm. Mandible may be slightly strong but not too significant. Chin-neckline looks relatively normal length and chin-neck angle looks well defined. He does have some lip incompetence of probably about 6 mm. Intraorally, B512 has all of his lower teeth back through the third molars present. Lower posterior teeth are in significant lingual inclination. Mandibular right cuspid is completely blocked out of the arch. Lower incisors appear to be in lingual inclination. He has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. The first bicuspid on the left side may be a mm or 2 anterior to the right bicuspid. In the upper arch he has all of his teeth back through the second molars erupted and on the right side the third molars are erupted but not on the left side. Transversely the maxillary arch is narrow and has a V-shape to it. He has a small lateral incisor on the left side. On the right side he is missing his lateral incisor and the cuspid is in the lateral incisor position. He has a full

Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and a super Class III cuspid relationship on the left side. He has a 1 mm anterior open bite. He has a large anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites. Uvula, soft palpate and faucial pillars all appear normal and healthy. Intranasally, the turbinates are enlarged particularly on the right side. To palpation, B512 has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Left joint seems to function relatively smoothly. The joints open and click probably about 35 mm and close and click about 25 mm. Maximal incisal opening is 57 mm. Excursive movement to right 6 mm, to the left 7 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows that B512 is missing the maxillary right lateral incisor but all the rest of the teeth are present and all but the left maxillary third molar are erupted into position.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Bony septum appears relatively straight. Turbinates are moderately enlarged and particularly the right side is enlarged fairly significantly.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with head and neck appearing somewhat elongated. Joint space appears reasonable. Styloid process is seen and extends inferiorly a fair amount.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have a decreased joint space present. Styloid process is fairly prominent and extends down towards the inferior border of the mandible. Articular eminence is relatively flat. On opening, there is some restricted translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B512 has a Class III skeletal relationship. Angulation of the maxillary incisors. There may be crowding of lower anterior arch. Oropharyngeal airway space looks very good. Turbinates are quite prominent on the lateral cephalogram and extends just slightly beyond the hard palate. Tooth size analysis reveals a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.

DIAGNOSES
Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia. Right TMJ articular disc dislocation.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Prognathism.
Class III occlusion on the right side, super Class III occlusion on the left side.
Anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites. Severe crowding of lower anterior arch.
Lower right cuspid blocked out of the arch.
Significantly increased curve of Wilson of lower arch.
Mandibular arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being approximately 3 mm anterior to the left cuspid.
Maligned third molars including bilateral mandibular and maxillary right.

Impacted maxillary left third molar.
Hypertrophied turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction.
Predominant mouth breather.
Missing maxillary right lateral incisor.
Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.
Small maxillary left lateral incisor.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Extractions.
Extract all 4 third molars.
Extract maxillary left lateral incisor.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Try to move left posterior quadrant forward about 3 mm if possible. Try to close the extraction space in the left lateral incisor by moving the posterior teeth forward and be sure to tip the cuspid root tips mesially and bicuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomy.
Align and level mandibular arch. Distalize right posterior teeth and cuspid posteriorly approximately 3 mm.

Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchors if condylar hyperplasia is present. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward, expand it and close any residual space. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly. Anterior mandible horizontal osteotomy to decrease the vertical height of the mandible.
Bilateral inferior turbinectomies.

Postsurgical orthodontics.
Refine and retain occlusion.
Recontour maxillary cuspids to make them appear more like lateral incisors.
B512 MRI Evaluation

Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Both condyles appear to be about the same size. Significantly decreased vertical joint space. It is difficult to tell if discal tissue is in position. Minimal downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa. Cortical bone appears to be intact.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Decreased superior joint space. It hard to tell if there is any discal tissue in position. Relatively minimal downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. It appears there is discal tissue in position. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. There may be a little bit of anterior beaking developing. Disc is a more difficult to see medially. There is some fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is fairly good translation and the disc appears to be in reduced position on wide opening.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows that there appears to be a little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On some views it appears that the disc is in place. Bilaterally, it appears that the disc could possibly be anteriorly positioned. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. Posterior recess is fairly lengthy in a vertical dimension. On opening, the disc is in a reduced position.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ mild arthritic changes. Left articular disc probably in good position. Right-sided anterior disc displacement.

