B513 
B513 is 17 years old and referred by XXXX.
Patient History
She had a significant dog bite 7 years ago and then has had some reconstructive plastic surgery 6 and 7 years ago. She had double-jaw surgery done 2 years ago to move the upper jaw apparently superiorly and advance the lower jaw. She had additional reconstructive surgery to her lip in 6 months ago where she had fat injections done to the upper lip. She has some mild allergies but nothing else significant. She takes Wellbutrin XL.

B513 underwent double-jaw surgery 2 years ago to move the maxilla superiorly and advance the mandible. Five months later, she began developing clicking, popping, and discomfort in the jaw joints. Last year, she had arthrocentesis done just to the right TMJ. She also noticed that her bite began to open. MRI was taken which by report from B513 and her parents showed that she had displaced discs. She gets earaches sometimes, frequent tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss. The only other joints that are bothersome are her shoulders, but she played a lot of volleyball and feels this is probably related to that. She has some nighttime clenching that she is aware of. She has no significant problems with headaches. Rates her TMJ pain at 4, overall pain on an average day at 4, jaw function at 2, diet at 3, and disability at 2. B513 reports that she is predominantly a mouth breather, particularly when she sleeps. She has a sleep disorder and does not sleep well at night. She is not aware of having any snoring problems but does have some mild daytime tiredness.

Patient Concerns
TMJ pain
Open bite in the front
Teeth don't fit together properly
Significant ringing in the ears
Limited jaw opening
“Grindy” sounds in the jaw joints

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B513 has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face. In the lower third, there appears to be some asymmetry present. Upper lip length measures about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 5 on the right side and 4 mm on the left side. Maxillary midline may be just slightly off to the left about a millimeter. Mandibular dental midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline. Chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.

In profile, she has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip. Some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm but a little bit difficult to tell because of the fullness of the upper lip which hasn't completely settled out yet from the fat injections. Chin appears to be about 15 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is somewhat short. She has a neck postured forward head position. Lower third face appears a little bit elongated. She has some lip incompetence of about 5 mm. Lower third face appears somewhat elongated. Lower lip appears disproportionately small compared to the upper lip but again due to the fat graft injections in the upper lip.

Intraorally, B513 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. Teeth are nicely aligned and leveled in the lower arch. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Upper lateral incisors appear somewhat small. She has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm. She has a Class II end-on occlusion by about 3 mm on the right side and 2 mm on the left side. She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being almost 2 mm higher than the left side.

Intraorally, oropharynx appears clear. Uvula may be just slightly enlarged but not too significantly. Tonsils are present. Soft palate looks relatively normal. Might be a slight yaw in the occlusion with the maxilla and mandible being shifted toward the left 1 to 2 mm.

Intranasally, the right turbinate appears quite large today. The left one is a little bit enlarged but appears to have a little bit better airway at least anteriorly on that side as compared to the right side. She appears to occlude on her bicuspids and molars bilaterally. Anterior six teeth in both arches are out of occlusion

To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the masseters but no other tenderness around the head and neck area. Even directly over the TMJs, she has no specific tenderness today.

On opening, she has some fine crepitus in both joints. Maximum opening is 38 mm, opening without pain 28 mm, excursive movement to the right 3.5 mm and to the left 4 mm. Her jaws function as one would expect with a closed lock situation which she demonstrates and is experiencing.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows that the sinuses are clear. There is a T-bone plate on either side of the piriform rim area and then a short 3-hole plate in the zygomatic buttress area. In the mandible, there are three bone screws in each side in the ramus. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch and a 2 x 2 retainer in the upper arch. Condyles appear short in vertical height with the right side being shorter than the left side which probably accounts for the slight transverse asymmetry. Condyles appear to have undergone resorption.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit sclerotic, narrow anteroposteriorly, and it appears to have lost vertical dimension. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears also small anteroposteriorly and appears to have lost vertical dimension. Some anterior beaking present. Decreased superior joint space, although the posterior joint space looks a little bit better than the opposite side. Articular eminence is moderately steep and not quite as steep as the opposite side.

Open views show restriction of translation with the condyles approaching the articular eminence but not being able to get down to them. The amount of degenerative changes in the condylar heads is observed. Decreased joint space between the condyles and the articular eminences being a greater decrease of space on the right side as compared to the left side. Articular eminence again is noted to be much steeper on the left side as compared to the right side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. Nasal airway appears to be a little bit blocked up on the right side related to the hypertrophied turbinate there. Four bone plates in the maxilla are noted.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph was taken with the head tilted upward slightly. She has a Class II skeletal relationship and an anterior open bite and a slight end-on Class II occlusal relationship. She has some anterior vertical maxillary excess. Oropharyngeal airway is about 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue. Appears to be slight overangulation of the lower anterior teeth. B513 has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction (closed lock) probably secondary to idiopathic condylar resorption
Maxillary vertical hyperplasia
AP maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
High occlusal plane angulation
Anterior open bite of 2 mm
Class II end-on occlusion, 3 mm on the right, 2 mm on the left
Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
Slight reverse curve of occlusion, lower arch
Overangulation of lower incisors
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Masticatory dysfunction
Tinnitus

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Apply maxillary and mandibular appliances
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Multiple maxillary osteotomies with advance it, move the anterior aspect superiorly, decrease the accentuated curve of occlusion, and level the occlusal plane transversely and anteroposteriorly
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance it toward into occlusion and improve facial symmetry
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion to include stripping lower anterior teeth to help correct for the tooth-size discrepancy
B513 MRI Scan Evaluation

Date of Acquisition:
Date of Reading:
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears to be short in height with probable loss of vertical dimension. Decreased superior joint space is present. Condyle appears somewhat narrow mediolaterally. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa of probably 2 to 2.5 mm. Appears to be some discal tissue perhaps medially and anteriorly.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears to have undergone some arthritic changes and appears to have lost vertical dimension. Significantly decreased vertical joint space. Appears that there may be some discal tissue well anterior to the head of the condyle. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa of approximately 2 mm. Cortical bone appears to be intact in both joints.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that appears to have lost vertical dimension and demonstrates arthritic changes. Cortical bone is less defined toward the lateral aspect of the condyles compared to the medial. Very steep articular eminence is present. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. Appears somewhat foreshortened. It is better seen toward the medial side of the joint and not seen well at all out laterally indicating probable anteromedial displacement of the disc. Decreased superior joint space. Some significant anterior beaking toward the deeper portion of the joint. She disc is significantly foreshortened anteroposteriorly and is sitting beneath the articular eminence. There may be some mild inflammation in the bilaminar tissues around the joint.

On opening, there is restricted translation of the condyle and disc. The disc is nonreducing. Moderate translation with the condyle coming up toward the posterior aspect of the articular eminence.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that appears small in size with evidence of condylar resorption. The condyle is smaller toward the medial aspect of the joint as compared to lateral. Articular eminence is fairly steep similar to the other side but not quite as steep. The articular disc is sitting beneath the articular eminence. Decreased superior joint space. Could be a little bit of inflammation around the joint but not too significantly.

On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle where it approaches the articular eminence but remains behind it. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and is nonreducing. The disc is short anteroposteriorly and is undergoing degenerative changes.

Impression:
Left TMJ resorptive arthritis probably compatible with ICR but with the articular disc anteromedially displaced and nonreducing and with some deformation of the articular disc Right TMJ resorptive arthritis probably compatible with ICR but with the articular disc anteromedially displaced and nonreducing and with some deformation of the articular disc Probable bilateral idiopathic condylar resorption Articular discs appear that they still may be salvageable
Probable adhesions of the articular discs to the articular eminences

