B514 
B514 is 18 years old. She is referred by Dr. XXXX. She has had her gallbladder removed. She is having some problems with asthma. B514 takes the following medications:
Prilosec over-the-counter 1 in the morning and 1 in the afternoon.
Zyrtec D 12-hour tablets 1 in the morning and 1 at night. Accolate 20 mg 1 in the morning and 1 in the evening.
Detrol LA 4 mg in the morning. Metoclopramide 10 mg at bedtime.
Amitriptyline 10 mg at bedtime. Maxalt 5 mg p.r.n. severe headache.
Albuterol inhaler p.r.n.

B514 has no problems with earaches but does get tinnitus and occasional vertigo. She has no hearing loss. She has no other joints that bother her but she has been told that she has thoracic outlet syndrome. She does see a chiropractic health provider. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism at night or during the day time. She has allergy to pollen, dust and smoke but is not aware of medication or food allergies. She has no problems wearing jewelry. B514 has undergone orthodontic treatment from the age of 11 to 13 with apparently fairly good Class I occlusal result. She subsequently had all 4 third molars removed and the maxillary left second molar. Apparently there was some kind of cyst associated in the area and the oral surgeons felt it necessary to take out the second molars as well.

She is 5 feet 9 inches tall and weighs about 145 pounds. In frontal view, she has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. A little bit more prominence in the right masseter area. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Mandibular dental midline and chin are pretty much on the facial midline. Maxillary dental midline is probably 2 to 3 mm off to the left side. The chin also is pretty much on the facial midline. In profile view, she has some deficiency in the maxillary projection by probably 2 to 3 mm. Chin appears a little bit strong. Chin neckline appears just slightly elongated. She has a little nasal dorsal prominence. B514 has a C-shaped curve in the upper lip. Chin neckline and angle are fairly well defined. Intraorally, B514 has all of her teeth back through the second molars in the lower arch. The lower left first molar is significantly below the occlusal plane level and may be ankylosed. In the upper arch, she is missing the left second and third molars and on the right side she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a slight Class III occlusion on the right side by about 2 to 3 mm. On the left side, she has more of Class III by probably 5 to 6 mm. The lower arch is fairly symmetric. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch. In the upper arch the left cuspid is probably 3 to 4 mm posterior to the right cuspid. She has an anterior posterior crossbite tendency on the right side. This side is in a little bit better transverse alignment. She has a reverse deep bite of about 1 mm. The oral tissues and oral pharyngeal area appear healthy. The uvula may be mildly elongated. The soft palpate appears relatively normal. Faucial pillars may be mild to moderately constricted but not too significant. Intranasally, the left turbinate appears moderate in size. The right turbinate appears enlarged but not too significant. The septum appears relatively straight. No significant nasal airway obstruction.

The columella appears a little bit wide and the nostril appear slightly narrow but the luminal valves appear relatively normal. B514 states that she is always tired. She has no sleep apnea symptoms, however. She has some moderate tenderness over her shoulders but no other pain around the head and neck area. TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
: Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars as well as the maxillary left second molar. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch. Left mandibular first molar appears significantly hypoerupted. There may be ankylosis of this tooth. The condylar heads appear a fairly good size. The condylar necks are a little bit elongated but not real significant. Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B514 has a Class III skeletal relationship and Class III occlusion. She has an anterior crossbite and about 1 mm reverse overbite. Oropharyngeal airway has good dimensions and appears normal. Occlusal plane appears relatively low. The tongue seems to sit well inside the oral cavity. There is a little adenoid tissue left but not too much.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. There is some deviation of the bony nasal septum at the posterior aspect of the nose. The right turbinate is larger than the left turbinate. It does appear that there is airway available on both sides.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good morphology. Decreased vertical joint space is present. Articular eminence is mildly shallow.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little flattened on top with maybe some slight anterior beaking present. Superior joint space looks fairly good although the posterior joint space may be slightly decreased. The articular eminence is moderately shallow. On opening, there is some restriction of translation although the condyles come down fairly close to the inferior aspect of the joint. Tooth size analysis shows a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Mandibular prognathism.
AP maxillary deficiency and asymmetry. Class III end-on occlusion being worse on the left side than right side. Anterior cross bite and right posterior crossbite tendency. Headaches.
Thoracic outlet syndrome.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm. Ankylosed mandibular left first molar.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy. Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition the mandible.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla to correct the transverse problems and maximize occlusal interrelationship.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B514 MRI Evaluation
Date of Birth:
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of an unusual shape. It appears to have fairly good mediolateral decreased superior joint space. Minimal downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa probably about 2 to 3 mm as compared to the opposite side. Difficult to identify discal tissue. The condyle shows up better in the T2 films. Difficult to identify discal tissue. Possibly could be some discal tissue medially displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good morphology and diameter. The cortex appears to be intact. The joint space appears narrow. Decreased lateral joint space. There may be some discal tissue displaced medially. T2 films with medial displacement of the disc. Joint space is extremely narrow.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is moderately steep and fairly long in length. Superior joint space appears narrow. It appears that there may be discal tissue anteriorly displaced. There does not appear to be any significant inflammation within the joint. In the T2 films there is a possibility that there could be posterior displacement of the disc. On opening, there is significant limitation of translation. The disc may remain anteriorly displaced without reduction. The disc is quite thin.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows there is some anterior beaking of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc may be posteriorly displaced as there is an increased joint space posteriorly and decreased density of tissue there. No particular inflammatory response seen. Translation is quite constricted on opening.

IMPRESSION
Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation anteriorly and possibly non-reducing.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation posteriorly.

B514 MRI Evaluation
Date of Birth:
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have some roughness on the superior surface. Significantly decreased joint space vertically. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly a moderate amount. There appears to be some protrusion of the lateral pole of the condyle. There appears to be significant decreased joint space between the condyle and the lateral rim. The fossa appears to be intact.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with significant difficulty being able to differentiate between the superior aspect of the condyle and the fossa. Essentially no vertical space evident. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly a moderate amount. Difficult to tell where the disc is. It is possible it could be medial.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. There appears to be decreased joint space vertically in some areas particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint but more medial there appears to be better joint space. The disc may be anteriorly displaced. There is some dark tissue posterior to the condylar head as well. No particular inflammatory process seen around this joint. On opening in the closed view, the disc is hard to see but in the mid opening, the disc becomes apparent and in wide opening, the disc is in position. There is moderate translation of the condyle and articular disc. The fossa itself is moderately shallow. It is possible the disc could be medially displaced in the closed view then reduces on opening. Even in the coronal views, it appears the discs may be medially displaced.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a little bit of anterior beaking on the condyle in one view. There appears to be decreased joint space vertically. The disc may be in position. There is some darker tissue posterior to the condylar head. No particular inflammatory process seen in this joint. In the opening sequence in one view, the disc is very hard to see in the closed position but there appears to be some discal tissue perhaps more medial. On opening, the disc appears to be in a reduced position and there is moderate translation of the condyle and the articular disc. The articular eminence is moderately shallow. It is probable that this disc may be medially displaced.

IMPRESSION
Left TMJ medial displacement of the articular disc with reduction on opening. Right TMJ osteoarthritic changes and probable medial displacement of the articular disc with reduction on opening.

