B518
B518 is 37 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX and by Dr. XXXX.

Patient History
B518's problems began 2 years ago. She began orthodontic treatment 4 years ago and then had orthognathic surgery two years ago. This involved a mandibular advancement with sagittal split osteotomies and a chin procedure done by Dr. XXXX. Two years ago is when she first became aware of having joint problems. She has had some fairly extensive physical therapy performed. She has a soft splint that she wears at night to help keep her from clenching. She takes no medications. No earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her involve just her knees. Her pain is worse in the morning when she wakes up. She probably has some nocturnal clenching. She says she can put a jaw bra with heat on her right side and it makes things feel better. She says if she shifts her lower jaw toward the left, she has a lot of noises on the right side, and if she shifts her mandible toward the right side, she has pain on the left side. B518 states that she has no problems with headaches. She rates her TMJ pain at 3, overall pain on an average day at 2, jaw function, diet, and disability at 3. She has a little bit of residual decreased sensation in the lower lip and chin area bilaterally. At night, she wears plastic full coverage retainers, and then she also wears a splint over the retainers that is soft and possibly postures her mandible forward a little bit.

She has been to see Dr. XXXX, Dr. XXXX suggested doing a fat graft to the right TMJ and wiring the jaws together for six months in order to heal the process. He feels that she has the following: (1) Avascular necrosis of the right TMJ; (2) Chronic regional pain syndrome (RSD); (3) Osteoarthritis; and (4) Degenerative joint disease.

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, she has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Maxillary incisors are shifted off to the left probably 1 to 2 mm. Mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Chin is fairly symmetrical although it could be just a touch off toward the left side 1 to 2 mm.

In profile view, she has fairly good AP facial balance. Chin-neckline is a little bit short, although chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. Has a slight C-shaped curve to the upper lip. Maxilla may be just slightly AP deficient as is the mandible of probably maybe 4 mm or so.

Intraorally, she has had lower first bicuspids extracted. She has the rest of the lower anterior teeth. Has a decreased curve of Wilson in the lower arch. Transverse width of the lower arch is quite narrow. In the upper arch, she also is missing upper first bicuspids. Transverse width of the upper arch is also somewhat narrow. Has a nice Class I cuspid-molar relationship. The four first bicuspids were extracted when she was in her younger teen years. B518 also is missing her four third molars. She doesn't remember those being extracted and may have never developed.

To palpation, she doesn't really have any discomfort around the head and neck area. On opening, she has some crepitus in the right joint but occasionally will get a significant pop in the right joint that is audible, and it is created when she puts her tongue up against the roof of her mouth as she opens. Without doing that, the joint doesn't pop. To me it appears that the disc is reducing with that particular maneuver. On the left side, I could palpate a screw protruding from the left ramus area and the screw is probably out in the masseter muscle.

B518's maximal opening is about 43 mm, and she can open about 18 mm with reasonable comfort. She has excursive movements of about 7 mm in each direction. Left joint seems to function relatively smoothly. On the right side, she does have that loud pop at about 35 mm of opening, and the left side seems to function relatively smoothly. At times she has crepitus in that right joint. To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area including over her joints.

Patient Concerns
B518 has three basic concerns:
Pain predominantly in the right TMJ area
She would like the hardware particularly on the left side where apparently one of the screws has come loose and has become extruded removed as well as the chin plate
B518 feels that she has worsening aesthetic facial balance now as compared to presurgery related to loss of fullness on the right side of the face compared to the left side, and the chin appears more masculine now as compared to before surgery as it appears wider than presurgery

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear as best as can be seen on these radiographs. Missing maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids. Two bone screws in each side of the ramus and an interosseous wire present. She has a bone plate in her chin area. Appears to have arthritis in both TMJs. Cannot evaluate the airway.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has severe arthritis with significant loss of the anteroposterior dimension. Appears to be a lytic lesion on the anterior head of the condyle. Significantly decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Appears to be bone-on-bone contact.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa with some significant arthritic changes but not as severe as the opposite side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Appears to be some degenerative changes in the fossa.

On opening, there is fairly good translation bilaterally. The significant arthritic changes on the condyles can be better appreciated. A pseudocyst is seen in the left mandibular condyle. May be some degenerative changes in both fossas.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Septum appears relatively straight. Turbinates are fairly large and appear to block the airway for the most part.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows basically a Class I occlusal and skeletal relationship. Occlusal plane appears fairly flat. Chin appears AP deficient, and pogonion appears to be significantly posterior to the incisal tips.

Basic Diagnoses
Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation but with occasional late reduction. Articular disc is significantly deformed but may still be salvageable Right TMJ pain AP microgenia secondary to previous surgery Lower lip ptosis secondary to mal-position of the mentalis muscles Exophitic bone growth inferior border of the mandible in the symphysis area
Transverse deficiency of the right mandibular ramus secondary to previous surgery
Extrusion, bone screw, left mandibular ramus, impinging on masseter muscle Previously placed bone plate in mandibular symphysis area Maxillary dental midline shifted slightly to the left side 1 mm
Missing all four first bicuspids extracted for previous orthodontics as a teenager Headaches
Myofascial pain
Masticatory dysfunction

Recommended Treatment
Surgery
Right TMJ arthroplasty and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Right mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy with bone screw stabilization
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy with bone screw stabilization to advance the chin
Resuspension of mentalis muscle
Removal of bone screw, left mandibular ramus
Removal of bone plate from chin

B518 MRI Evaluation
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Reading:
Left TMJ, sagittal views, show a condyle that out laterally looks quite arthritic with some resorption of the posterior head of the condyle. More medially, there is an osteophyte sticking up in the midportion of the condylar head. More medially, there is significant flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present particularly more medially. Out laterally, the condyle has sort of a hockey stick shape to it. Articular eminence is moderately steep and fairly long in length vertically. Appears to be decreased joint space vertically particularly toward the medial side. Disc appears to be anteriorly dislocated, although the disc is somewhat difficult to identify in some of the views. On some views it appears that it is sitting beneath the articular eminence.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle. On some of the view, the cortical bone seems to lack some integrity across the top of the condyle. On some of the views, it appears that the disc may be reduced in the open view. There is fairly good translation of the condyle.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that is extremely flattened posteriorly toward the lateral aspect of the joint. There may be an osteophyte sticking up off the posterior head of the condyle. Significantly decreased joint space particularly toward the lateral aspect of the joint with very minimal joint space present. The condyle is narrow anteroposteriorly toward the medial aspect of the joint. Some anterior beaking present on the medial side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and appears somewhat deformed.

On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyle but not quite as good as the opposite side. Articular disc appears to remain anteriorly displaced without reduction. In the open view, the condyle appears to almost be worse in its osseous changes as compared to the closed views. Out laterally, there appears to be a significant osteophyte sticking up off the posterior head of the condyle.

Impression:
Left TMJ significant arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction
Right TMJ significant arthritis being worse than the left side and articular disc dislocation without reduction

B518 MRI Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Reading:
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears to have some osteoarthritic changes. In one view, the condyle actually has fairly good morphology although a little bit narrow mediolaterally. Significant downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa coming down probably 4 or 5 mm. Appears to be some discal tissue out laterally but difficult to see where it is superiorly.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with a huge osteophyte sticking up from the condylar head. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly but not quite as significant as the opposite side, although it does come down probably 3 to 4 mm. Appears to be increased joint space. Disc appears to be anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has some osteoarthritic changes. There is significant flattening posteriorly. There is a little osteophyte sticking up superiorly off the condylar head. Condyle is postured far forward in the fossa suggestive of probably some long-term splint therapy. Significantly increased posterior joint space. Articular disc appears that it may be in position with the condyle postured forward, but if the condyle were in a proper position, the disc would probably be anteriorly dislocated. There is probably an early reduction on this side. Out laterally, however, the disc may be further anteriorly displaced as compared to medially.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle, and the disc appears to be in position.
Appears to be significant inflammation in the bilaminar tissues.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has fairly severe osteoarthritis associated with it with a huge osteophyte sticking up from the condylar head. Condyle is postured further forward in the fossa compared to normal similar to the other side, and the patient has probably been on some long-term splint therapy. The condyle looks more arthritic in this MRI as compared to a previous one. Some loss of integrity of the cortical bone on the anterior part of the condyle. The condyle appears narrow anteroposteriorly. Significant hockey stick shape formation to this condylar head and neck area. Disc is anteriorly displaced.

On opening, there is some restricted translation, and the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.
Appears to be significant inflammatory response in the bilaminar tissues.

Impression:
Left TMJ significant arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated, however, with the mandible postured forward. As it is, the disc appears to be in a reduced position
Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
Probable long-term splint therapy

B518 MRI Scan Evaluation 06-14-04
Date of Acquisition: Date of Reading: 06/14/04
Left TMJ, coronal view, Vertical joint is significantly decreased. Disc appears to be anteriorly displaced. Cortex appears to be intact, although there are some small spots of sclerosis present.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that is narrow mediolaterally. Appears to be loss of vertical height of this condyle. Medial peaking of the condyle but maybe due more to loss of vertical height of the condyle. Decreased joint space. Minimal downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. Difficult to identify discal tissue.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has some significant arthritic changes. There is some peaking of the condyle superiorly and flattening of the anterior head of the condyle with some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Out laterally, the articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. Over medially, it is more difficult to identify discal tissue which could indicate some lateral displacement of the articular disc. Out laterally, the disc appears to have identifiable morphology. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space but does not appear to be too much inflammation,

No static open views are available.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle has undergone significant arthritic changes. Appears to be loss of cortex in the midpart of the condyle. Decreased superior joint space. Significant arthritis in the right TMJ. Anterior beaking is present in one area and appears to be loss of cortex on the anterosuperior head in the mid part of the condyle. Appears to be significant loss of volume in the condylar head. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Discal tissue is hard to identify, but out laterally it appears to be anteriorly displaced and is more difficult to identify toward the medial aspect of the joint. Appears to be a significant amount of degeneration associated with this disc. Does not appear to be any significant fluid in the joint space, but the condyle itself appears to light up quite a bit, more so than the opposite side.

Left TMJ, dynamic view, shows good translation of the condyle. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced and does not appear to reduce on opening. Condyle does, however, translate out beneath and slightly beyond the articular eminence. Appears to be a significant hockey stick shape curvature to the condyle. Appears to be some significant arthritic changes on the anterior aspect of the condylar head.

Right TMJ, dynamic view, shows a condyle that is quite small in size and quite arthritic in appearance. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced. On opening, there is some restriction of the condylar movement as it is not quite as good as the opposite side. Articular disc appears to remain anteriorly displaced without reduction. In a closed position, the right condyle appears large or at least on one of the cuts indicating at least in one area the condyle has fairly good bulk. However, significant degenerative changes are still present throughout the condyle.

Impression:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated anteriorly and possibly laterally
Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with significant degenerative changes

