B519
B519 is 13 years old, referred by Dr. XXXX. B519 has been diagnosed as having gastroesophageal reflux disorder, migraines, sinus infections. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime. She wakes up in the mornings sometimes with headaches or frequently gets them within about an hour after she wakes up. She currently takes Epival 750 mg per day. This is an anti-seizure medication.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Jaw pain.
Headaches.
Teeth do not fit together very well.
Mouth breathing particularly at night.
B519's problems relative to her TMJ symptoms began about 2 years ago when she first became aware of clicking and popping in her joints of unknown etiology. Treatment to date has included neurology where they are treating her with the anti-seizure medication Epival. She had orthodontic treatment for 1 year about 2 years ago. She has a long history of gastroesophageal reflux disease going back to 1999 and the mother has provided me with an outline of her treatments to the present time. She has had headaches since about 4 years ago, but this could also be in part due to her gastroesophageal reflux disease that took awhile to be diagnosed. Her headaches became more of a problem it appears about 2 years ago. She rates her headaches that she gets between 1 and 7 times a week on the average of a level of 5 and this occurs predominately in the frontal, temporal and sometimes on the top of the head. The pain can get to a level of 7. Average daily TMJ pain is at 3, average daily pain and headaches at 4, jaw function at 2, diet at 3, disability at 6.

In frontal view, B519 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 5 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are shifted probably about 2.5 mm off to the right side. She has lip incompetence of about 9 mm. In profile view, she has elongated vertical facial height. Upper lip is retruded about 2 to 3 mm. Mandible at the chin point is retruded about 10 mm. Chin-neckline is a little bit deficient in length. The chin-neck angle is well defined. Intraorally, B519 has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars in place. She has thin attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth but may be adequate. The roots are fairly prominent. The crowns appear to be lingually tipped and roots labially tipped. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by about 5 mm and on the left side by probably 1 mm. There is about a 2 to 3 mm overjet relationship and about a 1.5 mm of vertical overbite. She has a slight tendency towards the buccal crossbite on the left side in centric relation. The uvula is enlarged. Soft palate appears a little bit long because the posterior faucial pillars are posteriorly positioned in the soft palate. It appears that there may be decreased AP airway. Right turbinate appears moderately enlarged and there maybe some decreased airway on that side. The left side appears a little bit smaller at least towards the anterior aspect of the nose. Septum appears fairly straight. There is some mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction but not too significant. The columella and nostril appears relatively normal as do the luminal valves.

B519 and her mother are not aware of any problems with snoring or sleep apnea type of symptoms. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness around the masseter muscles but no other tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. Maximal incisal opening is about 46 mm. Excursive movement to the right 6 mm, to the left 4 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars. Sinuses look clear. Nasal airway looks reasonably good.
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is fairly steep and somewhat long in length. Anterior joint space is slightly increased. The probability exists that the discs are vertically oriented within the joint space.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is fairly steep. There appears to be increased joint space. Discs could be vertically oriented in the fossa. On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Waters view shows that the septum is fairly straight except there is some bony deviation off to the left of the posterior aspect of the vomer. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Right turbinate is a little bit larger than the left one but there may be adequate airway.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows anterior vertical maxillary access and skeletal Class II relationship. There is a high occlusal plane angulation. Oropharyngeal airway appears moderately decreased. She does have some adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx area.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with very early reduction (pre-click.)
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP mandibular deficiency and asymmetry.
Class II occlusion on the right side, there appears to be a Class I on the left. Mandibular midline and chin shifted off to the right side approximately 2.5 mm.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Moderately hypertrophied turbinates.
Partial nasal airway obstruction.
Predominately a mouth breather.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Be sure that maxillary lateral incisor roots are tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies if necessary.
Align and level mandibular arch.

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly and correct occlusal discrepancies as well as level the occlusal plan.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
Partial reduction turbinectomies.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion and retain.
I gave her a prescription for Klonopin 0.5 mg, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s. and she is to take it 1 hour before bedtime. I did discuss with B519 and her mother that if the Klonopin significantly decreases her pain and discomfort, it would make it easier to wait until next summer to do the joints and everything could be at that time or it could even wait until the following year. But, it would depend on how the joints progress and they understand.

B519 MRI Evaluation
Age: 13 years old
Date of acquisition:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is fairly wide in width and in fact extends just slightly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Minimal downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa. Significantly decreased joint space vertically between the condyle and roof of the fossa. Cortical bone appears for the most part to be intact. Discal tissue appears to be anteriorly positioned.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width though it may not be quite as wide as the opposite side but fairly close. Minimal downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa. Decreased superior joint space. Cortical bone appears to be intact. Discal tissue appears to be anteriorly positioned.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a fairly good shape to it. However, medially it appears to be narrow anteroposteriorly and in fact significantly narrowed. Significant decreased joint space towards the medial aspect of the joint as well as the lateral aspect of the joint. Articular eminence is fairly steep. The articular disc is in a vertical orientation and anteriorly displaced. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is reduction of the disc and good translation of both the disc and the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has reasonable conformation particularly at the lateral aspect but medially the condyle is narrow and has more of a hockey stick shape to it. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced in a vertical orientation. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, the disc reduces and there is good translation of both the condyle and the disc.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
The patient is a candidate for bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.

B519 MRI Evaluation 
Age: 14 Date of Birth:
Date of MRI:
Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening and a little bit of a depression in the superior aspect towards the lateral portion of the condyle. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa. There appears to be decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. There could be some typ of discal or compressed tissue within the fossa area. There may be some discal tissue anteriorly positioned.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. Decreased superior joint space. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa. There appears to be some discal tissue anteriorly positioned to the condyle. Cortical bone appears to be intact.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. Some slight anterior beaking. On one view there appears that there are some degenerative changes on the anterior head of the condyle. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Out laterally the articular disc is anteriorly positioned to the condyle. As we approach the medial aspect of the joint, the disc is in a better vertical and anteroposterior position. A little bit of fluid in the inferior joint space and slight a bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is early reduction and good translation of the condyle and the articular disc with the disc being in good position. In sequence, there were no views taken in centric relation.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening in the anterior head but not as significant as the opposite side. Articular eminence is fairly steep and in fact almost to the right angle to the horizontal plane which is a little bit greater than the opposite side. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced in a vertical orientation within the fossa. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is early reduction with good translation of the condyle and the articular disc. The closed views, however, are actually taken in an open position but labeled as being closed.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction.

Compared to the evaluation to MRI take last year, the discs appear to be in a greater degree of displacement this year as compared to last year.

