B520
B520 is 17 years old. B520 was referred by Dr. XXXX. B520's TMJ issues began when she was about 13 years old. That is when she first started to notice that her chin was becoming somewhat retruded and she developed pain. Etiology is unknown. B520 had orthodontic treatment the first time at age 8 and then from about the age of 12 to 13. She wore elastics and apparently her bite was reasonably well corrected. She had splint therapy for the past 2 years to present time. Splints have been made by Dr. XXXX. B520 has had lots of adjustments on the splints, and she can tell that it is ineffective at the present time. She also has had physical therapy last year that included dry needling and exercises. She has also been treated with medications and is currently on Daypro 600 mg two times per day and birth control pills. She has been prescribed Enbrel but has not started taking that medication yet.

B520 rates her TMJ pain at a level of 8 and her daily pain levels reach a level of 8 to 9. She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 5, disability at 6. She has no problems with headaches. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus nor vertigo. She has no hearing loss. She has problems with her right hip. She has stiff hands and fingers in the mornings. B520 has had reactions to penicillin, cephalosporins, naproxen, and more recently she has had a reaction to adhesives and tape. She is not aware of any kind of reaction to wearing jewelry. She is aware of clenching her teeth at nighttime. B520 currently wears her splint only at night. She did wear it during the day, but it did not seem to help her situation so she discontinued daytime wear. She does not snore when she sleeps. She has some mild daytime somnolence, but no sleep apnea. She has a moderate sleep disorder where she tosses and turns a lot at night. She does breathe through her mouth at night, but not so much during the day. She sleeps on her sides and stomach.

In frontal view, B520 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 3.5 mm. The maxillary midline looks as though it is on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is 1 mm to the right and chin is about 3 mm to the right. In profile, B520 has a head postured forward neck position. In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is about 3 mm posterior to subnasale. The maxilla is retruded about 6 to 7 mm. The chin is retruded about 22 mm. The chin neckline is short, although the chin neckline is reasonably well defined. She has a lip incompetence of about 5 to 6 mm. Intraorally, B520 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch. She has some lack of attached gingiva around the lower incisors. She already has a little bit of gingival stripping present. In the upper arch, she is missing first bicuspids that were extracted for orthodontic reasons. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being a little bit greater on the right side than the left side. She has a zero over bite relationship. She has an over jet of about 2 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy. There is a significant cant in the transverse occlusal plane with the right maxillary cuspid being at least 3 mm higher than the left side. The mandible is elevated on the right side about 1.5 to 2 mm at the most. The vertical discrepancy is greater in the maxilla with the right cuspid being at least 3 mm higher than left side. She does have some constricture of the luminal valves. The maximal incisal opening is 44 mm, opening without pain 18 mm. The excursion movements are 9 mm in each direction. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the masseters, retromandibular area, and TMJ area with the right TMJ being worse than the left.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. It appears as though she may be missing her maxillary second bicuspids or could be the first bicuspids. The sinuses appear relatively clear. The septum appears reasonably straight and turbinates appear moderately enlarged. She has severely resorbed condyles.

Coronal view shows that she has enlarged turbinates. The septum appears reasonably straight. Sinuses appear clear.
Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight. Turbinates are moderately enlarged and appear to block the airway. Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms shows a severely resorbed condyle with loss of vertical as well as anteroposterior bone structure. The articular eminence appears to have some uneven areas, although it has a moderate inclination. The joint space actually appears somewhat increased vertically.

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms shows a severely resorbed condyle with loss of vertical as well as anteroposterior bone structure. The articular eminence appears to have some uneven areas, although it has a moderate inclination. The joint space actually appears somewhat increased vertically.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that shows evidence of major condylar resorption. There is some medial beaking of the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves downward about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone greater resorption than the left side with extremely narrow mediolateral dimension of the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. Both condyles are severely resorbed and deformed.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a retruded maxilla but anterior vertical maxillary excess and posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia. The mandible is severely retruded. She has a high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures 4 mm and at the base of tongue measures 4 mm. She has adenoid tissue in the nasopharyngeal area and she has an airway dimension of about 4 mm between the adenoid tissue and the turbinates and between the adenoid tissue and the soft palate. She was not in centric relation and she has almost an end-on incisor relationship.

Basic diagnoses for B520 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasopharyngeal hyperplastic adenoid tissue.
AP microgenia.
End-on Class II occlusion.
Anterior open bite.
High occlusal plane angle of 25 degrees (normal angle is 8 degrees).

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure and retract to decrease the over angulation.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
3.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance in a counterclockwise direction. c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies. e.	Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy. f.	Bilateral partial nasal turbinectomies. g.	Medpor implant to mandible.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B520 MRI
BIRTH DATE:
DATE OF ACQUISITION:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost significant volume. There may be some discal tissue present, but there appears to be a reactive pannus surrounding the disc. The disc could be a little bit medially displaced. The condyle is severely arthritic and narrow mediolaterally as well as a loss of vertical volume.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant condylar resorption. There may be some discal tissue present within the joint, although it appears to be a reactive pannus surrounding the articular disc. There is significant destruction of the condyle with loss of mediolateral and vertical height.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has lost significant vertical height and some anteroposterior dimension as well. There is some anterior beaking of the condyle. The articular disc actually appears to be anteriorly positioned underneath the articular eminence and there is some sort of dense tissue between the condyle and the fossa. There is some inflammation around the articular disc and in the joint space. There is increased vertical joint space between the condyle and fossa. The articular eminence had a moderate inclination. In the T2 images, it shows significant inflammation within the joint surrounding the anteriorly displaced disc as well within the joint space between the condyle and fossa. On opening, there is restricted translation of the condyle and the deformed degenerated disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is extremely small in size with loss of vertical and AP volume. The disc is hard to identify but may be anteriorly displaced. There is dense tissue within the fossa again. There is increased vertical joint space between the condyle and fossa. The articular eminence had a moderate inclination. On the T2 imaging, there is significant inflammation in the joint space. The disc is difficult to identify. On opening, there is significant restricted translation and difficult to identify any remnant of the disc.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with significant condylar resorption being worse on the right side than the left side with articular disc anteriorly displaced, degenerated and with reactive pannus filling a majority of the superior joint space area. Findings are compatible with connective tissue autoimmune type of process.

