B522
B522 is 56 years old and is referred by Dr. XXXX. She has had 2 previous C-sections, 1 tubal ligation, 1 total hysterectomy, she had her jaw broken and reset, and her tonsils removed.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Levoxyl.
Lexapro.
Posture-D (calcium.)
Boniva.
She has had an adverse reaction to Septra, tetracycline and maybe penicillin.
PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Unable to chew without pain and discomfort.
Bite is off.
Stress on neck and shoulders.

She has problems with depression or arthritis.
She has had previous orthodontics in around 50 years ago and then again 24 years ago. She has worn splints at night for 1 year until now. She has had physical therapy on the neck and shoulders. However, this did not help and this was performed between 1 to 2 years ago. Her jaw was broken 23 years ago. Her problems appear to be primarily in the left TMJ area. She feels as though it sounds like tissue and cartilage rubbing. She has pain on the left side. Her pain began about 2 years ago. Some of her teeth started to loosen from grinding her teeth. She has had previous TMJ surgery in each joint x1. She does get occasional headaches. She does have neck, shoulder and back pain with moderate intensity. She is aware of clenching and grinding her teeth at night and this is a severe problem for her. She has some left-sided earaches and some ringing in her ears. She does suffer from depression and does take medication for that. Other joints that bother her include arthritis in her upper and lower back areas. She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 5 when she is not chewing, but when she eats it goes to a level of 8. She rates her headache at a level of 1, average daily pain in the head and neck area of 6. She rates her joint function at 8, diet at 8, disability about 6.

She does state she has some mild snoring and she breathes through her mouth at night. She does it some during the day as well. She has moderate difficulty sleeping at night and she does toss and turn severely. She gets some jerking of her arms and legs.

CLINICAL EVALUATION: In frontal view, B522 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0. Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much along the facial midline. In profile view, she has fairly good facial balance vertically and anteriorly and posteriorly. Chin-neck angle is not real well defined.

Intraorally, B522 is missing mandibular first bicuspids as well as maxillary first bicuspids from previous orthodontics. She has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship. She has about a 2 to 3 mm deep bite relationship. She has a fair amount of ware on her teeth. There is a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1.5 mm lower than the right side. Difficult to evaluate the oropharynx. The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are in pretty good position. It is a little difficult for B522 to try and relax her tongue. Turbinates are moderate in size. Nasal septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side at the anterior aspect. The nasal airway is probably reasonably good. She may have a little bit of snoring but nothing real significant. No sleep apnea symptoms. To palpation, she has some high moderate discomfort over the left TMJ, left masseter area, moderate tenderness over the right masseter and milder tenderness over the temporalis, styloids, SCMs and shoulders. On jaw function she has significant crepitation in the left TMJ but the right side functions relatively smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is 28 mm but only about 15 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movement to the right 8 mm, left 9 mm. She has significant crepitations in the left joint on jaw function. After surgery she had numbness on the left side of her jaw. It took quite a few years but she feels that the numbness has finally dissipated.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars and all 4 first bicuspids. The rest of the teeth are present. Sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear enlarged. The bony septum actually appears relatively straight. She has some arthritic changes in the left TMJ with some sclerosis present. The right joint is a little bit more healthy.

Waters view shows that the nasal airway looks fairly well blocked particularly on the left side. It is possible that there could be some fullness in the left sinus area but difficult to say for sure. It does appear a little bit more opacified than the right side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that there is significant arthritis present in the TMJ with sclerosis at the head of the condyle, anterior beaking and significantly reduced joint space particularly vertically. There is a wire at the inferior border of the mandible where the previous vertical oblique osteotomy was performed.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that there may be decreased joint space. The condyle is a little bit healthier than the opposite side. On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B522 has a skeletal Class I jaw position. Oropharyngeal airway looks normal. She appears to have a skeletal and occlusal Class I jaw relationship.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: Left TMJ severe arthritis. Left TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Chronic clenching and bruxism.
B522 does wake up with pain in her jaws and left jaw joint. This is most likely from the clenching and bruxism at night.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications.
Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s.
Presurgical orthodontics (if patient elects to have orthodontic treatment.)
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
CT scans of jaw and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Left TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Fat graft to left TMJ (harvest from the abdomen.)
Application of archwires (if patient elects not to have orthodontics performed.)
Postsurgical orthodontics (if patient elects to have orthodontic treatment.)

B522 MRI Evaluation
Date of Birth:
Age: 56/F
Date of MRI:
Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology and a little bit of sclerosis on the head and a small bump towards the medial aspect of the joint. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. Joint space may be decreased. Difficult to identify discal tissue within the joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite wide mediolaterally and seems to extend slightly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Condyle is much wider than the opposite side. Condyle has sort of an abnormal shape to it. There appears to be significantly decreased joint space throughout the joint. Relatively minimal downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa. The condyle appears to extend beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Discal tissue appears to be anterior and laterally displaced.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to be somewhat sclerotic. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint it is quite narrow anteroposteriorly. It has a hockey stick shape to it in that area. More medial, the condyle has a significantly greater anterior width. A little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. A little bit of anterior beaking is present. A little sclerosis on the medial side extending down through the condylar head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence and along the posterior slope of the eminence. Decreased superior and posterior joint spaces. The disc appears somewhat degenerated and deformed but the disc may still be salvageable. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is some restricted translation but the disc does appear to reduce and the condyle and discs come down towards the posterior and inferior aspect of the articular eminence.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to be wider at the lateral aspect of the joint than medial. A little bit of anterior beaking. Articular eminence is relatively normal and perhaps even slightly flat. Hard to identify specifically where the articular disc is but it appears that it may be in position or posteriorly displaced. On opening, the disc appears to be in position and appears to translate moderately well.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc that may be posteriorly displaced but reduces on opening and possible lateral displacement. Both discs appear salvageable.

B522 CT SCAN
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite wide mediolaterally. There are some irregularities on the superior surface. There is significantly decreased joint space vertically in the mid part of the condyle and also at the lateral rim of the fossa. The lateral aspect of the condyle appears to extend slightly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. There could be a little osteophyte between the lateral rim and the head of the condyle.

Left TMJ axial view shows a condyle that appears to have good mediolateral width. It is difficult to determine joint spaces.
Right TMJ axial view shows a condyle that appears quite wide mediolateral width. Likewise cannot evaluate the joint spaces.

There is no left TMJ sagittal view.
IMPRESSION: Right TMJ arthritis.
Left TMJ cannot be evaluated because of lacking appropriate images.

