B523
B523 is 31 years old. Referred by Dr. XXXX.

B523 reports that the onset of her TMJ problems began when she was about 10 years old of unknown etiology. Sixteen years ago, she had surgery of bilateral intraoral vertical oblique osteotomies. She had orthodontics prior to that surgery. She was in splint therapy from about 18 years ago through the present. Six years ago, she und bilateral TMJ disc repositioning and stabilization with Mitek anchors. She had Botox injections and PRP injections last month. She has had previous physical therapy that was performed after each of her surgical procedures.

B523 gets headaches at about a level of 7 in the right side in the frontotemporal area. She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 4, diet at 6, disability at 10. She gets right-sided earaches 6 to 10 times a day that are described as stabbing pains. She gets tinnitus left side worse than the right side. She has no vertigo or hearing problems. Her knees bother her occasionally. She is allergic to erythromycin. She has no known allergies to jewelry. She clenches and bruxes her teeth at night and clenches during the day.

In frontal view, B523 has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1.5 mm. The maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are fairly well aligned on the facial midline. In profile view, she may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 mm and the chin is probably retruded about 8 to 10 mm. Chin neckline is short and the submental area is full. Intraorally, B523 has all of her lower teeth and upper teeth back through the second molars. She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship and about a 0.5 mm vertical overbite. Centric relation and mandibular dental midline is shifted about 1 mm to the left. She is slight Class II end-on on the left side, Class I on the right. She has a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 2 mm higher than the right side. To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the TMJ areas and moderate pain over the right masseter, right retromandibular area. Joints function smoothly, although she could hear a little bit of crackling nose in the left TMJ area. The maximum incisal opening is 40 mm, excursion movement to the right 8 mm and to the left 5 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of Mitek anchors in the condyles. There is evidence of previous surgery in the ramus area with vertical oblique osteotomies. She has a large pseudocyst in her right maxillary sinus. She is missing her four wisdom teeth, but the rest of the teeth are present.

Coronal view shows the presence of a mucous retention cyst in the right sinus. The left sinus is clear and the rest of the right sinus is clear as well. The septum is deviated a little bit towards the right side and appears to block off that airway significantly. Turbinates are moderate in size.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that there appears to be reasonable joint space. There is a little anterior beaking in the condyle and a little sclerosis associated with the anterior aspect of the condyle. The Mitek anchor is present in the condyle. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination, but joint space appears good.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking and a little sclerosis on the top of the condyle. Mitek anchor is present. Joint space actually looks fairly good. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. There is decreased lateral joint space and there could be almost bone-on-bone contact. This is at the most lateral aspect of the fossa. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with a Mitek anchor. There is good vertical joint space. There is decreased joint space at the lateral aspect. The lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 4 to 5 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a skeletal Class I cuspid-molar relationship. The oropharyngeal airway actually looks fairly good.

Basic diagnoses:
Bilateral TMJ reactive arthritis.
TMJ pain.
Right-sided headaches.
Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Medications: Doxycycline 100 mg tablets, dispensing 90 tablets, 1 tablet big for month and one tablet q.d., refill x2.
2.	If doxycycline and other medications do not resolve the TMJ issues and headaches, then obtain CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Apply appliances to maxillary and mandibular arch.
4.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B523 MRI
DOB:
DATE OF ACQUISITION:
DATE OF INTERPRETATION:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There appears to be a Mitek anchor in the head of the condyle. There is discal tissue present within the joint. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. It appears that there is discal tissue in the joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with very good mediolateral width. The joint space looks reasonably good. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. There appears to be a Mitek anchor within the condyle. It appears that there is discal tissue in the joint space.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. The disc appears to be in position. There is some tissue surrounding the disc. The joint space looks fairly well balanced. Left joint on opening shows moderate translation of the condyle and the disc appears to be in good position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have a Mitek anchor in it. There appears to be discal tissue over the top of the condyle. The articular eminence is moderately steep. There appears to be inflammation within the condyle around the anchor. Right TMJ open view shows a condyle that does not translate quite well as the opposite side, but the discal tissue appears to be in position. The disc does not appear to move very well and may be adhesed to the articular eminence.

IMPRESSION: Previous bilateral articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Disc appears to be in position.
Inflammatory process in the right joint particularly involving the condylar head.

