B524
B524 is 52 years old. Referred by XXXX.
B524 was involved in an auto accident 25 years ago, but she actually tripped and fell into the window which hit her on the underside of the right side of the lower jaw creating a subcondylar fracture on the right side. It was identified that it was broken until the next day. Shortly after the injury, her jaws were wired together for 3 months. She was unwired and the lower jaw shifted back and so they rewired her again for an additional 3 months so she was wired together for a total of about 6 months. They did try to apparently do some surgery on it, but whatever was done did not reduce the fracture. About 22 years ago, she saw Dr. XXXX who did equilibration on the right side reducing the vertical heights of the teeth and orthodontics were initiated on the left side to try to extrude the teeth into occlusion. About 15 years ago, she began seeing Dr. XXXX who made multiple different splints for her. She has had physical therapy throughout the years, but this often increased her pain. She has had chiropractic therapy and TENS therapy as well without success with any of these modalities for controlling or reducing her pain. She currently takes Vicodin 5 mg tablets, hydrocodone 5 mg tablets, and Advil as needed for pain. She takes Valium periodically.

B524 rates her daily headaches at a level of 8 that occur predominantly in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area. She wakes up with headaches in the morning and then they tend to subside, but then she gets them again later in the day. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 9, diet at 8, disability at 8. She has some problems with earaches and at times her ears feel plugged up. She has no tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her hips and her right knee. She is aware of clenching during the day, but is not sure if she does it at night, but waking up with headaches in the morning most likely would indicate that she is clenching at night. She has some mild snoring. She occasionally will have some daytime somnolence. She is not aware of having sleep apnea per se. She does believe that she is predominantly a nasal breather.

In frontal view, B524 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 1 mm. The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the left. The chin may be just slightly to the left a couple of millimeters. In profile view, she may have just a slight AP maxillary deficiency. The mandible is deficient by 15 to 18 mm. The chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not defined. Intraorally, B524 has her lower teeth through the first molar on the right side missing the second and third molars. On the left side, she is missing probably the third molar. She has moderate crowding of the lower arch. In the upper arch, she is missing the right second and third molars and probably third molar on the left side. She has a slight division 2 inclination of the maxillary incisors. She is basically a Class I cuspid on the right side but full Class II cuspid on the left side. She has a significant asymmetry in the lower arch with the mandibular right cuspid being probably almost 4 mm anterior to the left cuspid. In the upper arch, she has fairly good anteroposterior symmetry of the cuspids. She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 to 5 mm. Transversely, her occlusal plane is reasonably level with the right side being up just 1 mm compared to the left side. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy. Uvula may be just slightly elongated and soft palate may be just slightly elongated as well. Intranasally, the septum is deviated off to the right side. The right turbinate is moderate in size. There appears to be decreased airway. On the left side, the turbinate is larger, but it appears there may be a little bit better airway on that side. B524 believes that she is a nasal breather and does not breathe through her mouth. The maximal incisal opening is about 28 mm, but opening without pain 21 mm. The excursion movements are only about 2 mm in each direction. To palpation, she has low severe pain over the masseter muscles and the TMJs. She has moderate tenderness over the temporalis, medial pterygoids, posterior neck, shoulders, and right styloid area. The right mandibular angle is about 3 or 4 mm more lateral compared to the left side. Also, the right side is up about 5 mm at the angle vertically compared to the left side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular right second and third molars and mandibular left second and third molars. She has a root canal in the maxillary left central incisor as well as the maxillary left second molar. She has crowns on all the molars and the maxillary bicuspids on the left side and second bicuspid and mandibular left side as well as the left central incisor. Sinuses look reasonably healthy. The subcondylar fractured mandible is seen on the right side where the condyle is functioning anterior to the articular eminence completely out of the fossa.

Coronal view shows that there is significant deviation of the nasal septum off towards the right side. The turbinates appear quite large and appear to block a good portion of the airway. She does have a little bit of fluid or inflammation of the sinus membrane on the floor of the maxillary sinus.

Axial view shows that the turbinates are quite large and that there seems to be restricted nasal airway.
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is arthritic with a little extension of the lateral pole of the condyle. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim is fairly flat curving inferiorly only about 2 mm at the most.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a deformed condyle that is quite flat across the top with some medial peaking. There is decreased joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa is extremely flat.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has anterior beaking and decreased vertical joint space. The articular eminence appears moderately shallow. The condyle is superiorly and posteriorly positioned. Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is functioning anterior to the articular eminence. There is decreased joint space vertically. The articular eminence is moderately shallow, but the condyle is functioning around the anterior aspect of the articular eminence.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B524 has a retruded mandible and chin. Her oropharyngeal airway measures only 6 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue only about 5 mm.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Right TMJ subcondylar fracture with malunion and anterior dislocation of the condyle.
Left TMJ arthritis with articular disc dislocation without reduction and a severe degeneration.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia. Maxillary posterior vertical hypoplasia. AP microgenia.
High occlusal plane angle. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Missing right maxillary and mandibular second and third molars and left-sided third molars. Mandibular arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 4 mm anterior to the left cuspid. Moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch.
Mild crowding of the upper anterior arch.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches. Myofascial pain. Slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane.
Transverse facial asymmetry with maxilla and mandible shifted off to the right side about 3 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Align and level maxillary arch. b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Consider using mandibular TADs on the right side and retract the mandibular right teeth 3 to 4 mm to improve the lower arch symmetry.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
3.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft it posteriorly and advance it slightly. d.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
5.	Restorative dentistry.

B524 MRI
DOB:
DATE OF ACQUISITION:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology, although perhaps a little uneven on the condylar head. There appears to be decreased vertical joint space. The articular disc appears to be anteriorly and medially displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is positioned anterior to the fossa and articular eminence. There is some discal tissue there that appears to be perhaps medially displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is somewhat arthritic with some sclerosis on the head and anterior beaking. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting along the posterior inferior aspect of the articular eminence. The disc is quite short anteroposteriorly. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. Left TMJ on opening shows some restriction of the translation. The articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. The disc is significantly degenerated.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is totally displaced anterior to the articular eminence. The articular disc however is positioned between the condyle and the articular eminence. It is a little bit more prominent medially indicative of perhaps some medial displacement. There are some arthritic changes in the head of the condyle. There is some fluid in the depth of the fossa. On the right side, there is some translation of the condyle further forward, although the disc appears to be adhesed to the articular eminence and does not translate.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated without reduction with significant degenerative changes. Right TMJ previous subcondylar fracture with a malunion and the condyle functioning anterior to the articular eminence, but with the disc in a reasonable position between the articular eminence and the condyle.

