B526
AGE: 49/F
DOB:
B526 was referred by Dr. XXXX. B526 has had several previous surgical procedures. Twenty-three years ago, she had cheek implants, rhinoplasty, and a genioplasty performed. Three years ago, she had eyelid surgery as well as a chemical peel and another chin procedure. In addition, she had a face lift and a reduction in the nasal tip. Two years ago, she had maxillary and mandibular osteotomies, another chin procedure done, and cheek implants placed. The last two procedures were performed by Dr. XXXX. Last year, he performed additional surgery on her removing bone plates from the maxilla and recontouring some of the bone in that area. Her orthodontics have been performed by Dr. XXXX. She has recently transferred to Dr. XXXX. She also has been evaluated by Dr. XXXX.

Primary concerns that B526 has at this time includes the following:
Popping of left and right TMJs. Teeth do not fit together well.
The back teeth do not fit.
Difficulties eating and chewing. Roof of the mouth has changed.
She feels she does not have much space in the oral cavity.
Overbite. Upper lip is shorter in length than it used to be. Cheek bones are too big.
Lips curve downward at the side of the mouth.

She also does get tension in her neck and shoulder area. B526 has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her right elbow, she has bulging discs in her back, and her knees, fingers, and right hip bother her. She has problems with allergy and asthma and has postnasal drainage. She has had carpal tunnel surgery on both wrists and continues to have tension down her right arm. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime and also clenching during the day. She has no problems with headaches and claims on TMJ pain on a daily basis. B526 rates his TMJ pain at 0, average daily pain at 4, jaw function, diet, and disability all at 6.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B526 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Cheeks are fairly prominent. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 2 mm. The maxillary midline is maybe 0.5 mm off to the left side. The mandibular dental midline, chin, and the teeth are all fairly well aligned with each other. The right eye might be slightly down a couple of millimeters compared to the left eye. In profile, the cheeks appear a little bit prominent. Subnasale is a little bit deficient by probably a couple of millimeters. Upper lip projection is actually fairly good, although it looks like it is prominent because of the recession in the subnasale area, but it appears the subnasale is the main factor that is affecting the upper lip area. The chin appears retruded by about 5 to 6 mm. The chin neckline is somewhat short in length. Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids, but has the spaces reopened to accept those. In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids. She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship. She has a Class II molar relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal. To palpation, B526 has no significant pain around the head and neck area. On opening, however, she has a significant popping in her jaw joints at about 25 mm of opening and closing pops at about 15 mm. The popping is audible particularly from the left side, although the condition is present on both sides. Maximal incisal opening is 48 mm. Excursion movements to the right 9 mm, to the left 10 mm. As she will go into excursion movement, she would have some popping in her jaw joints. Both joints would pop in the excursion movements. B526 currently takes the following medications:
Maxair.
Advair. Xanax.
Mucinex.
Claritin.
Nasonex nasal spray.
Vivelle patch (hormone replacement).
Synthroid.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of the double bone plates on each side of the mandible with four screws in each plate in the sagittal split area. There is bilateral posterior bone plates in the maxilla and apparently the anterior bone plates have previously been removed. There are two screws in each cheekbone apparently to hold the cheek implants in place. There is a screw in the symphysis apparently used to stabilize the bony genioplasty procedure. The condyles appear large anteroposteriorly and a little bit short vertically. The nasal airway looks okay. The sinuses appear relatively clear. Waters view shows that there appears to be good nasal airway. The sinuses appear relatively clear. Cheek implants could be seen stabilized with two bone screws in each side. The septum is reasonably straight. Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is superiorly and posteriorly positioned in the fossa. There appears to be an increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There is a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is superiorly and posteriorly displaced with an increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a slight increased occlusal plane angulation. She has significantly increased soft tissue thickness in the chin area and extreme thinness in the upper lip. Upper lip thickness in the incisor area measures about 8 mm at the most. In the chin area, the soft tissue thickness is 15-16 mm. Upper lip thickness appears to be about 9 mm. Oropharyngeal airway appears fairly adequate with an airway dimension of about 8 mm at the soft palate level and 10 mm at the base of the tongue. There may be just a slight increased occlusal plane angle. There is a slight vertical difference in the angles of the mandible with one side being about 6 mm higher than the opposite side. Basic diagnoses for B526 would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Class I end-on cuspid relationship, super Class II molar relationship.
High occlusal plane angle.
Missing maxillary first bicuspids extracted previously for orthodontic treatment. Spaces in the lower first bicuspid area created to replace the missing lower first bicuspids. Excessively large cheek implants.
Tooth size discrepancy created by the wide labiolingual dimensions of the anterior six teeth.

Recommended treatment would include the following:
Presurgical orthodontics. Continue to align and level the maxillary arch. Recontour the incisors by removing the marginal ridges and thin the incisal edges slightly.
Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure and retract. Hold lower first bicuspid spacing. Surgery. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward about 2 mm, down graft the posterior aspect approximately 4 to 5 mm to decrease occlusal plane angle and upright the incisors. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Consider recontouring cheek implants to reduce prominence. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry
Placement of osteointegrated implants in the lower first bicuspid areas bilaterally. Placement of crowns on the dental implants.

B526 MRI
AGE: 49/F
DOB: 
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. There appears to be decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. There appears to be discal tissue medially displaced and covering probably just the medial third of the condyle. Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with a dominant coverage of bone of about 1 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width, but the medial pole is significantly lower than the lateral pole of the condyle. There is decreased superior joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The disc appears to be medially displaced and covers only the medial half of the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with a dominant coverage of about 1mm or so.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology with a little bit of flattening anteriorly and just some slight anterior beaking, but not too significant. Articular eminence is fairly steep. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced. There is some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle and a little superior beaking towards the medial side of the joint. More medially, the disc is in little bit better position in the joint, thus, the appearance that the disc was medially displaced. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle with what appears to be an intermediate reduction of the disc, but the disc is in position on full opening.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology, but has some significant flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of anterior beaking towards the medial aspect of the joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Laterally, the disc is absolutely anteriorly displaced, but towards the medial aspect the disc is in a better AP position. There is very minimal fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there appears to be an early reduction on this side as compared to the opposite side, and there is reasonably good translation of both the condyle and the articular disc.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with reduction. Right TMJ moderate arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with early reduction.

