B527 
DOB:
AGE:	15 years 6 months
Referred by Dr. XXXX. B527 was born with Pierre Robin sequence with a cleft soft palate. The soft palate was repaired at the age of 6 months by Dr. XXXX. She had a pharyngeal flap performed by Dr. XXXX at the age of 7 to 8. Since the pharyngeal flap, she has had difficulties breathing through her nose. At age of 7, she started her first stage of orthodontics. At age 12 to 15, she was placed in full braces and this included extraction of the maxillary first bicuspids and mandibular second bicuspids.

Her TMJ problems began of unknown etiology and the onset is unknown, but she became aware of having problems about 2 to 3 years ago. Her parents have noted that her lower jaw has become slowly more retruded. Basic concerns B527 has at this time are as follows:

Difficulty breathing the nose.
Jaw joints are shrinking.
Jaw popping.
Bite is off.
B527 gets headaches about twice a week at a level of 2 in her temporal area. She rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 2, diet at 0, disability at 0. To palpation, she has some minimal tenderness over her shoulders, but nowhere else. The incisal opening is 40 mm, but only 35 mm without pain. The excursion movements are 7 mm in each direction. Joints function smoothly. She has a slight Class II occlusal relationship and a 1 mm vertical overbite relationship. She has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is not aware of clenching or bruxing. She takes the following medications:

Zyrtec.
Flonase.
Clinical examination shows she has an upper lip length of 20 mm and tooth lip relationship of 3 mm. The left side of her face is 2 to 3 mm more prominent transversely than the right side. There is posterior yaw in the maxilla and mandible of about 2 mm towards the left. She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 3 mm shorter vertically than the left side. The dental midlines are coincident with the facial midline, but the chin is 3 mm off to the right side. In profile view, the maxilla is retruded 3 to 4 mm, and the chin is retruded 15 to 18 mm. Intraorally, she does have a narrow pharyngeal flap, but the posterior fascial pillar on the left side is posteriorly positioned and appears to act as a valve shutting off the airway for the most part in the left oronasal portal while the right side appears more open. Tonsils appear normal. Turbinates and septum all appear normal and at least clinically there does not appear to be nasal airway obstruction. She has no snoring, has mild daytime somnolence, no sleep apnea. She is predominantly a mouth breather at nighttime and daytime. She has a head postured forward neck position.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary first bicuspids, mandibular second bicuspids, but the presence of all four third molars that are developing and unerupted. The turbinates appear moderate in size. The sinuses appear relatively clear. The condyles appear somewhat arthritic and the right side appears vertically shorter than the left side.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone resorption with some loss of vertical height as well as anteroposterior dimension. There appears to be an osteophytic projection superiorly and on the condyle. The condyle is positioned posteriorly and superiorly in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant condylar resorption and loss of vertical height as well as anteroposterior dimension. The articular eminence is much more flat on this side compared to the opposite side. The condyle is posteriorly and superiorly positioned.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There is decreased vertical joint space. There are areas of breakdown in the subcondylar bone. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with slight downward curvature of 1 to 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows that has lost significant vertical height and is a little bit more narrow compared to the opposite side. There is decreased vertical joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that has a retruded maxilla and mandible with a high occlusal plane angle. There is vertical facial asymmetry with the right side being shorter vertically than the left side. The oropharyngeal airway is significantly constricted with an AP dimension of only about 2 mm at the base of the tongue. There is a hint of a pharyngeal flap present attaching the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall. There is essentially no chin neckline or chin neck angle.

Basic diagnoses for B527 would be as follows:
Pierre Robin Sequence.
Repaired cleft palate.
Pharyngeal flap.
Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR) and articular disc dislocation and non-reducing.
Mandible hypoplasia.
Maxillary hypoplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with a dimension of 2 mm (normal dimension is 11 mm).
Impacted third molars x4.
Class II end-on occlusion. Missing mandibular second bicuspids and maxillary first bicuspids. TMJ pain.
Headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
1.	Presurgical orthodontics. a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch. On the left side, tip the lateral incisor root mesially and cuspid root distally to create a little more room for interdental osteotomies. The right side is fine. b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	Surgery. a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and down graft the posterior aspect. d.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy. e.	Lengthen pharyngeal flap. f.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B527 MRI
DOB:
AGE:	15/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. The articular disc is medially displaced. There is decreased superior joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is small in size mediolaterally and appears to have lost vertical height. The disc appears to be laterally and anteriorly displaced. The left condyle is significantly larger than the right condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with just about 1 or 2 mm of downward curvature.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat narrow anteroposteriorly particularly towards the medial side of the joint. Towards the lateral side, there is a little bit more normal width. There is decreased superior joint space. There is some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. Medially, there is a little sclerosis on the condyle. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced as well as medication. Out lateral there is not much discal tissue seen. The articular eminence is moderately steep. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space and also a little bit of fluid in the posterior superior joint space. On opening, there appears to be restricted translation of the condyle and the disc appears to be anteriorly displaced without reduction. On opening, it appears that the discs are non-reducing.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is small in size and appears to have lost vertical volume. There is decreased superior and posterior joint space. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced, but somewhat hidden by an artifact. The articular eminence appears a little bit more shallow on this side. The disc may be laterally displaced as well. On opening, it appears that the discs are non-reducing.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ enlarged condyle with anterior and medially articular discs without reduction.
Right TMJ arthritic condyle with loss of vertical volume with an anteriorly displaced disc without reduction.
Discs appear salvageable.

