B529
B529 is 18 years old. She was referred by Dr. XXXX. She has about a 3-mm anterior overbite relationship. She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 3 to 4 mm higher than the right side. In both the upper and lower arch, she has AP dental asymmetry with the left cuspids being 2 mm posterior to the right cuspids. Oropharyngeal tissues looks normal and healthy. B529 became aware of having jaw problems when she was about the 5th to 6th grade. She began orthodontic treatment at about the age of 11 and finished at the age of 13. When she was 12, she became aware of her jaw beginning to shift and difficulties with getting her teeth aligned. Her orthodontist also noted that there was change. Although she has had several consultations, B529 had no further treatment for her jaw condition.

She gets headaches occasionally at about a level of 2 in the left temple area. she has pain in the left TMJ at about a level of 2, average daily pain at 1, jaw function at 2, diet at 1, and disability at 1. She takes no medications. She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is aware of clenching during the day.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B529 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. She does have asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 3 mm on the left and 3.5 on the right. B529's right eye is about 2 mm higher than the left one. The maxillary dental midline may be shifted off towards the left side probably about 2 mm. The mandibular dental midline is probably 3-4 mm off towards the left side. The chin is about almost 12 mm off towards the left side. In profile, she has fairly good facial balance. She does have a slight AP deficiency at point A. The chin may be just slightly AP deficient by maybe 4 mm. Chin neckline may be just slightly short, but chin neck angle is well defined. B529 has a fairly good Class I cuspid relationship, although just slightly Class II on the right side. She has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has lingual inclination of the mandibular left side and a little buccal tipping of the right side. She has moderate lingual tori. Intranasally, her turbinates are moderate size. Septum appears reasonably straight. Columella is slightly wide and nostrils are slightly narrow. She gives no history of snoring, but has some moderate daytime somnolence, but not aware of any sleep apnea issues. B529 does state that she wakes up a lot at night when she is sleeping. Her parents do not believe that she has any mouth breathing problems at night when she sleep. She tends just slightly towards a buccal crossbite on the right side, but the left side appears to just have maybe a slight tendency towards a crossbite, particularly compared to the right side. To palpation, B529 has no tenderness around the head and neck area. On opening, she has a soft click in the right joint at about 20 mm of opening and a closing one at about 10 mm. The left side seems to function relatively smoothly. However, her MRI taken two weeks ago, demonstrates that she has an anteriorly displaced disc in the left side without reduction. On the right side, she has an anteriorly displaced disc that does reduce. There may be a slight yaw in the maxilla with it being shifted towards the right side about 2 mm. If B529 shifts her mandible about 6 mm to the right at the occlusal area, it does significantly improve her facial symmetry. Chin is still slightly off to the left, but is much improved. The mandible dental midline and chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other, although the teeth themselves are tipped significantly. In the lower arch, the crowns are shifted significantly towards the right side and the roots are shifted towards the left side. In the upper arch, there is a little bit of shift of the incisor crowns towards the left side and just towards to the right side, but not as accentuated as the lower arch.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Right condyle and condylar head appear much larger than the left condyle. The left condyle appears a little bit arthritic. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged. The septum appears relatively straight. Coronal view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side back in the bony area. Inferior turbinates are quite large and appear to block a lot of the airway. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Axial view shows that the inferior turbinates are quite large and may be somewhat obstructive to the airway. The sinuses are clear. Left TMJ coronal view shows condyle that appears to have undergone some bony changes. There is decreased vertical joint space and some mild arthritic changes associated with the condyle. Right mandibular condyle coronal tomograms shows that there is significantly decreased lateral joint space, but the medial and superior joint space appear a little bit better balanced. The condyle appears significantly larger than the opposite side. Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it. There is decreased vertical joint space. A little bit of anterior beaking is present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condylar head and neck that is quite elongated compared to the opposite side. The condyle appears a little flat across the top. Joint space seems a little bit better balanced on this side as compared to the opposite. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she is fairly close to being a Class I skeletal type relationship. There may be a mild increased occlusal plane angulation. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 8 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue. Upper incisors appear just slightly over angulated as to the lower incisors.

Basic diagnoses for B529 would be as follows:
Right mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Right TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction. Mandibular deviated prognathism with transverse and vertical asymmetry.
Maxillary right side vertical hyperplasia.
Maxillary and mandibular arch asymmetries with the left cuspids being 2 mm posterior to the right cuspids.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 3-4 mm lower than the left side.
TMJ pain. Occasional headaches. Lingual inclination of the mandibular left posterior teeth. Hypertrophied turbinates. Partial nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip central and lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Pay particular attention on the right side as the lateral incisor and cuspid roots are in close approximation and need to be diverged. Align and level mandibular arch. Surgery. Right TMJ high condylectomy to eliminate growth. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back to the right side of the facial midline and level it transversely. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to transversely level the maxilla, correct the slight posterior yaw, and correct any transverse discrepancies that may develop with the presurgical orthodontics. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B529 MRI
AGE: DOB:
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows an arthritic condyle. The articular disc is anteriorly and medially displaced. There is some unevenness on the head of the condyle. Joint space is decreased vertically. Lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite large. The articular disc is anteromedially displaced. There is decreased lateral joint space.
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic with some anterior beaking and a little flattening on the anterior head. There is some decreased vertical joint space in the posterior joint space. Articular eminence is fairly long and moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. There is some compressed tissue aspect of the articular eminence between the eminence and the condyle. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, it appears that there is good translation of the condyle, but it appears that the disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction and with significant degenerative changes. The disc looks short anteroposteriorly, but still may be salvageable.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears large, and there appears to be elongated condylar head and neck. The thickness of the condylar neck is greater than the opposite side. The disc is anteriorly displaced particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. On opening, the disc does reduce and there is fairly good translation of the condyle and the disc.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction on opening and with significant deformation and degeneration, but still may be salvageable. Right TMJ enlargement compatible with condylar hyperplasia versus osteochondroma/osteoma with articular disc anteromedially displaced with reduction on opening.

