B530
B530 is 20 years old.
Patient Concerns
She has a significant “underbite” problem
When she talks or even laughs, she gets pain in her jaws
Difficult to eat and chew
Some speech difficulties
Predominantly a mouth breather which could indicate some nasal airway obstruction

Patient History
B530's jaw problem began sometime around the age of 12. At that age, her lower jaw was just a little bit in front of the upper jaw but not really significantly apparently. Then the jaw started to grow, and it is at its present level. She does not feel that the jaw relationship has gotten any worse in the last 1-1/2 to 2 years. It has been in about the past four years that she has developed pain and discomfort around the jaw area. She has no trouble with earaches but does get tinnitus and vertigo. Is not aware of any other joint problems. No allergies, and no problems with jewelry. She gets headaches about once every two weeks currently that she terms sinus headaches that occur in the frontal area and rated at about a level of 8. They used to be more often, and she used to get them two times a week when she lived in Tennessee. She rates her TMJ pain at 4 and overall pain at 8, and this is predominantly in the masseter areas and retromandibular areas. She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 1, and disability at 6. Disability is primarily related to speech factors and the fact that she develops pain when she talks. She is a youth minister by occupation.

The only medication she takes now is Copaxone injectable 20 mg per day. This is to treat multiple sclerosis with which she was diagnosed in 11 months ago. It began as numbness in the left side of her face that lasted about a month. It did eventually clear up. She also had a second episode where she had numbness from about the waist downward that lasted about a month. Apparently the diagnosis has been confirmed with an MRI.

B530 had orthodontic appliances when she was 13 to 15, and they just straightened her teeth, they didn't really try to correct her bite at that time. She currently has appliances on now, and they have been there for the last year.

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B530 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm if the lip is held forward. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline. Tip of the nose may be just about a millimeter toward the right but not too significantly.

In profile view, B530's upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably about 3 mm. She has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip with an obtuse nasolabial angle. Maxilla is probably close to 8 mm AP deficient. Chin actually has fairly good AP projection. Chin-neckline appears reasonably good, although the chin-neck angle has a soft angulation to it. The distance from chin point to chin-neck angle measures pretty close to 50 mm at pogonion. She has a slight nasal dorsal hump. As B530 smiles in profile, the upper lip disappears behind the cheeks. As B530 smiles, she has a fairly good relationship between the upper lip and gingival area in the frontal view.

Intraorally, B530 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Has fairly good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch although it is somewhat thin around the centrals. Roots are fairly prominent in the lower anterior arch. Teeth, however, are nicely aligned and leveled, and she has full appliances on both arches. In the upper arch, she is missing first bicuspids that have been extracted for orthodontic reasons. She has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars present. B530 has a super Class III cuspid relationship being probably 9 to 10 mm Class III. She has an anterior reverse overbite of probably 9 to 10 mm. She has a 0 vertical overbite relationship and, in fact, actually has probably about a 1-mm open bite anteriorly. She is in an anterior crossbite and has crossbites that go up to about the first molar bilaterally, and actually the second bicuspids are out of crossbite. This probably means that there is probably some transverse maxillary excess if the jaws were properly aligned. Intraorally, the oropharynx is clear. Tonsils are present but no evidence of inflammation.

Intransally, she has moderately enlarged turbinates that may be creating some airway obstruction. Also importantly she has a wide columella base creating narrow nostrils. Holding the nostrils open with a speculum significantly improved her abilities to breathe through her nose.

Maximal incisal opening is 54 mm but without significant discomfort 44 mm, excursive movement to the right 6 mm and to the left 7 mm. B530 did have a click in the right TMJ on opening at about 40 mm and probably a closing reciprocal click at probably about 30. Left joint seemed to function reasonably smoothly.

There is a slight cant in then occlusion with the right side being about 1 mm to 1.5 mm lower than the left side.
Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates are moderately large. All four third molars are missing, and maxillary first bicuspids are missing or it could be the second bicuspids. Condylar heads and necks appear somewhat elongated. No other pathology noted.

Waters view shows that the turbinates are fairly large constricting the functional nasal airway. Sinuses appear clear. Could be some slight asymmetry in the mandible with the right side being a little bit lower than the left side, but it could be due to head tilt creating that illusion.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good form. Fossa looks relatively normal, and the articular eminence is moderately shallow. Slightly decrease posterior joint space and an increased anterior joint space.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. Except for the anterior beaking, the condyle has reasonably good shape. Appear to be some slightly decreased posterior joint space and anterior joint space between the beaking of the condyle and the articular eminence. Condylar head and neck may be somewhat elongated. On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles, and they come out to beneath the articular eminence.

Cephalometric evaluation shows that B530 has some AP maxillary deficiency. She has some slightly overangulated lower incisors, but this may in part be due to a moderately high occlusal plane angulation, and this could be exaggerating the Class III occlusal problem. Oropharyngeal airway looks very good, and the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates do not extend significantly posterior to the hard palate.

Tooth-size analysis reveals a Bolton's difference of 1 mm. Dental model analysis also reveals that there is an accentuated curve of Wilson in the upper arch as well as in the lower arch. Lower first molars are actually tipped lingually compared to the second bicuspids and second molars. In the upper arch, the curve of Wilson is significantly increased with the buccal cusps being probably a good 3 mm above the lingual cusps.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ medially displaced articular discs
AP maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary excess
Mandibular prognathism
Rule out active condylar hyperplasia
Super Class III occlusion
Anterior open bite
Anterior reverse crossbite of approximately 9 mm
Increased curve of Wilson, maxillary arch
Increased curve of Wilson, mandibular arch
Missing maxillary first bicuspids and all four third molars
Hypertrophied turbinates Wide columella creating narrow nostrils
Nasal airway obstruction

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Keep maxillary lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to provide room for interdental osteotomies
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 1 mm of tooth structure to compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy. Consider hooking into the second molars to better align the first molars. Consider using some cross arch elastics from the buccal of the upper molars to the lingual of the lower first molar to help correct the accentuated curve of Wilson in both arches. This may place Caci into bilateral posterior crossbites but would probably overall improve the stability of the orthodontic and surgical result. Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors (possible high condylectomy if condylar hyperplasia verified)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it approximately 8 mm and correct any transverse discrepancy
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible backward and counterclockwise rotated
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies
Reconstruction of nasal columella

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
I gave B530 a couple orthodontists' names, Dr. XXXX, and Dr. XXXX. We also discussed the possibility of using Dr. XXXX.

Further assessment of her records shows that she probably does not have active condylar hyperplasia at this time. It appears that she has been basically a Class III at least for the last couple of years and has not significantly worsened. The increased reverse overjet is related to orthodontic treatment that has flared the lower incisors further forward at least another couple of millimeters from where they were before the last orthodontics was initiated.

B530 MRI Evaluation
Date of Acquisition: Date of Reading:
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears slightly enlarged mediolaterally. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. Articular disc may be medially displaced on these views. Significantly decreased lateral joint space. Cortical bone appears to be intact in both the condyle and fossa.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears somewhat large and appears actually slightly more than the opposite side. Decreased joint space vertically and particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. Difficult to identify the articular disc but may be anteromedial.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows there appears to be a little bit of beaking anteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. Out laterally, it is difficult to identify any discal tissue, but more medially there does appear to be some disc tissue present. This could be indicative of some medial displacement of the condyle. It is difficult to tell if the cortical bone on top of the condyle is intact, but it appears that it is. Appears to be decreased vertical joint space particularly toward the lateral aspect of the joint. No particular inflammatory process seen around the joint.

On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle. The anterior beaking is more evident in the mid and maximal opening view as compared to the closed position. Deeper into the joint, it appears that on opening the disc does reduce into position, and the condyle seems to have a better morphology toward the medial aspect of the joint as compared to more laterally.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, out laterally the condyle is a little harder to discern, but it appears that there is decreased vertical joint space. Toward the medial aspect, there is discal tissue present, and although thin, it appears to cover the head adequately. There is some anterior beaking and what appears to be a little bit of flattening of the anterior head. Toward the lateral aspect of the joint, there seems to be some anterior beaking present and less evidence of discal tissue. This may indicate medial displacement of the articular disc. There is some fluid in the superior joint space.

Out laterally, on opening there is hardly any discal tissue identifiable. A little more medially on opening the disc appears to be in position, and translation is moderately good.

Impression:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc medial dislocation

