B531
B531 is 24 years old, referred by Dr. XXXX. B531 has been diagnosed as having Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type III (hypermobility syndrome.) She began having problems with her joints when she was a young girl beginning with shoulder problems. She began having headaches at about the age of 14. The onset of her jaw joint problems as the best as she can recall is around the age of 17 to 18 when she had difficulties opening her jaws. She has had significant treatment including physical therapy, splints, removable orthodontic appliances craniosacral therapy, jaw traction, chiropractic treatment. She currently takes the following medications and these are predominately for GI problems:

Glutamine, vitamin E, acidophilus.
Broad spectrum enzyme.
Magnesium malate.
Multiple vitamins and minerals.
Slippery elm.
She really does not take anything for pain.

PRIMARY CONCERNS: Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Muscle pain.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Difficulties sleeping at night.
Daytime tiredness and fatigue.
She does have problems with earaches, occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her neck and back but it is difficult to differentiate whether that is muscular or bony. She does have problems with the shoulders, occasional problems with the wrists and fingers. She has problems with her hips, knees and occasionally the ankles, feet and toes. She has congenitally fused C6-C7. B531 states that her pain is worse in the mornings when she gets up and then in the evenings. She is not aware of clenching and bruxism although that may be a suspicious factor. She gets headaches that are continuous and on an average reach a level of 8 in the frontal, temple and posterior head area. She has pain in her joints at a level of 7 and this is with wearing the splint. Her overall facial pain and headaches is worse on right side than the left side but the average pain level is 8. She rates her jaw function and diet at 5, disability at 6. B531 has had an MRI on her back and they have identified some degenerative changes in one disc.

In frontal view, B531 has good facial symmetry and balance. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 10 mm. Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline. In profile view, B531 has fairly good projection of the upper lip. Lower jaw appears somewhat retruded. She has a little bit of a high mandibular pain angle and facial morphology. Her chin may be retruded by about 10 to 12 mm. Chin-neckline is somewhat short but the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.

As she closes, she does hit prematurely on the left side. In the lower arch, B531 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. In the upper arch she has all of teeth back through the second molars. She has a class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally. She occludes on the left side but has an open bite on the right side of probably about at least 2 mm. She has a vertical overbite of about 1 mm. It appears that she occludes only on the left second molars with the teeth being close but not in occlusion. To palpation, she has moderate to low severe pain to palpation over the TMJs, styloid areas, SCMs, posterior neck and shoulders. She has moderate to high-moderate pain over the medial pterygoids, masseters and temporalis muscles. Maximal incisal opening voluntarily was 35 mm, by 25 mm without significant pain. Excursion movement to the right was 4 mm, to the left 7 mm. Joints didn't function relatively smoothly bilaterally but she does shift off towards the left side about 4 to 5 if she opens.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
:
Panorex shows the presence of 4 third molars that are impacted. The right condyle appears there is a little flattening and a little anterior beaking present. Left condyle appears small in size anteroposteriorly as well as vertically. Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Waters view shows the sinuses are clear. Turbinates appear enlarged. The bony septum may be a little bit deviated off to the left side. She probably has some nasal airway obstruction.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is postured forward in the fossa somewhat. It may not have been taken in centric relation or may hypertrophy of the bilaminar tissues secondary to splint wear. In any event, the condyle is postured forward on the posterior slope of the articular eminence and there is a little bit of flattening on the superior aspect.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle postured forward in the fossa. Decreased space between the condyle and the articular eminence. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Increased posterior joint space. The mandibular is postured forward and was taken in centric relation. On opening, there appears to be fairly good translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she may be postured forward some. Significant difference in the vertical height of the occlusal plane and inferior border of the mandible with the left side being significantly higher than the right side.

B531 does state that she does get a stabbing pain at times in her neck particularly on the right side. I cannot make out the styloid processes on these images.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
Left TMJ with significant arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and significant deformation of the disc.
Right TMJ arthritis and medial displacement of the articular disc.
AP mandibular deficiency.

Class II end-on occlusion.
Occludes only on the mandibular left first and second molar area and all of the other teeth are out occlusion.
Right side open bite of at least 2 mm.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x4.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Open space around the upper lateral incisors of about 1 mm on each side by using coil springs.
Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing.

Surgery. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
B531 MRI Evaluation
Age: 22, female
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation:

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat deformed. There is some sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Some unevenness on the head of the condyle. It appears at the lateral pole area there is an extension out laterally that may be occluding or touching onto the lateral rim of the fossa. The lateral rim of the fossa has a moderate downward curvature. The fossa appears to be intact. Difficult to find any discal tissue in the cuts provided. Joint space between the main part of the condylar head and fossa appears to be okay. It is just at the lateral aspect it appears to be significant decrease.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a much better shape. Lateral rim of the fossa has moderate downward curvature and perhaps just slightly greater than the opposite side. There appears to be some type of discal tissue in the joint space. It appears it is just a small blob. The disc is difficult to identify. The joint space looks good. Perhaps a slight decreased in the joint space out laterally but not too significant.

Left TMJ coronal view in the open position shows a condyle that appears to be significantly deformed. Decreased joint space vertically. Difficult to identify any discal tissue.

Right TMJ open coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Disc is in place over top of the condyle and beneath the fossa. There appears to be adequate joint space.

Left TMJ sagittal view, closed position, shows a condyle that appears a little bit deformed. It seems smaller in size vertically and anteroposteriorly than the opposite side. There is anterior beaking present. The fossa has a relatively gentle slope to it and not too steep but it is long. There appears to be a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced and significantly foreshortened anteroposteriorly. There appears to be some compressed tissue in the fossa area. The condyle appears narrow mediolaterally. Cortical bone for the most part appears to be intact across the top of the head of the condyle. With the bite plate in position, the mandibular condyle is positioned downward and forward in the fossa fairly significantly. It is about halfway down the posterior slope of the articular eminence. Disc remains anteriorly displaced although in a little bit better position relative to the condylar head. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle as it approaches the inferior aspect of the articular eminence. Disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

T2 films in a closed position show that there is a significant amount of fluid and inflammation around the condyle. The left condyle appears a little bit more sclerotic than the right condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears quite large particularly compared to the opposite side. It appears the largest one would see is in a condylar hyperplasia, osteochondroma, osteoma. Articular eminence is moderately steep and a little bit steeper than the opposite side. Articular disc appears to be in a vertical orientation within the joint space. This is harder to identify in the medial direction. With the bite plate in position, the condyle is postured downward and forward in the fossa and the disc is in good position. In some views, the posterior aspect of the disc appears to be significantly thickened. In the opening view, there is fairly good translation of the condyle and the articular disc. The disc is in position. The condyle shows some flattening on the anterior aspect. There may be a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space but not too significant. There could be some unevenness in some areas.

IMPRESSION:
Left TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and with significant deformation of the disc. (Disc is probably still salvageable.) Right TMJ mild osseous changes but with articular disc in normal position (need to rule out condylar hyperplasia, osteochondroma, osteoma.)
Evaluate the patient for facial asymmetry.

MRI was also taken and findings are similar to the more recent one.
Cervical neck film, lateral shows what appears to be decreased joint space between C6-7.

B531 MRI Evaluation
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Interpretation
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good width. There appears to be a T2 image. There appears to be increased joint space vertically. The disc appears to be medially displaced but there appears to be some reactive tissue around the disc. It is difficult to identify discal tissue. Significant downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa. There may be some fluid in the joint spaces.

Left side sagittal view shows a disc that is quite thick and quite short anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. There is some type of dense tissue up in the fossa area. There is fluid in the superior joint space. The condyle has some anterior beaking and a little sclerosis in the head. Towards the lateral aspect there appears to be some loss of the lateral pole of the condyle. There could be some degenerative changes along the descending slope of the articular eminence. On opening, some anterior beaking is quite prominent. There is significant restricted translation. The articular disc remains anteriorly displaced and significantly deformed. There does appear to be more degenerative changes along the posterior slope of the articular eminence. This may likely be significant adhesions within the joint.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has much better morphology than the opposite side. It is basically T2 images. There is calcification or cartilage up in the joint space. On some views it appears that there is no discal tissue in the joint space. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa. There appears to be significant degenerative changes in the joint. Disc appears to be in position at least in some of the views but may be medially displaced. It appears that there may be soft tissue shadow around the disc although the disc appears to be in reasonable position. On opening, the disc and condyle translate reasonably well and the disc is in position with the condyle. Translation is better than the opposite side, although there does appear to be some restriction. There is some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. On the open view the soft tissue pannus around the condyle as well is evident.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ significant arthritis of the condylar head and articular eminence area and articular disc dislocation without reduction and with major degeneration changes. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc medially displaced but reduces on opening.

