B532
B532 is 38 years old and referred by Dr. XXXX and also Dr. XXXX.

Patient History
Three years ago, B532 was severely beaten around the head and body areas and sustained significant damage.For the past two years, she has had significant problems with earaches, headaches, and jaw pain. Previous surgeries included gallbladder surgery three years ago, a hysterectomy and appendectomy 19 years ago, cystectomy 19 years ago, a cystectomy 21 years ago, she had a tonsillectomy 23 years ago, and she had some kidney surgery 33 years ago. She had the ureters dilated at that time. From her injury in the beating she had around the body, it caused her heart to enlarge, so she has an enlarged heart secondary to the physical trauma she endured. B532 smokes a half pack of cigarettes per day and has done this for about 26 years. Her blood pressure can fluctuate from a low blood pressure to a high blood pressure. The high blood pressure is related to stress. She has sinus problems associated with allergies. She gets a worry rash on the right side of her upper leg when she is worrying or under stress. She apparently had perhaps a pneumothorax at the time of her injuries. She states she has lost some of the function of her left lung. She has had a history in the past of anemia. She has had previous kidney surgery to dilate the ureters. Three years ago, she was caught in a physical altercation and was hit around the face, jaws, and body areas. She developed a headache almost immediately after the injury. However, it wasn't until about a year later that the TMJs were identified as contributing symptom-wise to her condition. She has had an appliance that has been made, but that made her pain problems worse.

She does get earaches but no tinnitus, and she gets occasional vertigo. No hearing loss that she is aware of. Other joints that bother her include her shoulders. She has allergies to CODEINE AND XANAX but is not aware of any other environmental or food allergies. She cannot wear any kind of earrings as she reacts to all the metals. She does have a history of scoliosis. She currently cannot sleep on a bed and has to sleep on a couch, propping her head up.

If B532 tries to close her mouth and keep it closed, she gets a lot of facial pain and pain down through her neck as well.
Current Medications
Estratest q.d. Lortab 7.5, 2 tabs q.d.
Flexeril 1 tab q.d. Xanax 0.5 mg q.h.s.

Patient Concerns
Severe headaches Severe TMJ pain
Muscle pain
Difficult to chew
Severe earaches
Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B532 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline. In profile, B532 has fairly good facial symmetry and balance.

Intraorally, she has a lower partial and a full upper denture. A partial replaces the mandibular left and right centrals and right lateral incisor as well as I believe the second bicuspid and first molar on the right side, and on the left side the first bicuspid and first molar. Upper arch has a full denture. Intranasally, the airway appears fairly good. Oropharynx appears fairly clear. Intranasally, the turbinates are of moderate size. She basically has a Class I cuspid relationship with the denture and lower natural teeth and lower partial denture.

To palpation, she has high moderate to severe pain in the temporalis and masseters and high moderate in the TMJs, styloid areas, and medial pterygoid areas, and mild tenderness in the SCMs, posterior neck, and shoulder areas. On jaw function, she feels she hears some glitching kind of noises in her jaw joints. Maximum incisal opening is 43 mm. Excursive movements in each direction are 6 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows that the sinuses appear clear. Nasal airway appears fairly good. No teeth left in the upper arch. In the lower arch, there is a little partial replacing the mandibular centrals, right lateral, right first molar, left first bicuspid, and first molar. The third molars are absent. Has some arthritis in the joints being worse on the left side as compared to the right side. She has a root canal on the posterior molars in the lower arch bilaterally.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. A little sclerosis on the head of the condyle. A little bit of flattening superiorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space looks relatively reasonable.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some arthritis associated with it. A little difficult to identify the entire condylar head. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Could be a bone on bone situation in this joint.

Opening views show better translation of the right joint than the left joint.
Waters view shows that the sinuses are all clear. The septum has a slight deviation and appeared part of the airway appeared somewhat obstructed.

She has basically a skeletal Class I jaw relation. Has a decreased oropharyngeal airway and at the soft palate level measures about 4 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 5 mm. She does snore. The dimension of the base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall is decreased. The tongue is also posteriorly positioned in the mouth as well.

Other Systems
B532 has shoulder problems but no other significant joint problems. When she was younger, she had frequent urinary tract infections particularly prior to her hysterectomy. Since her hysterectomy, which was done at about the age of 20, she has only had a couple of urinary tract infections since then. Prior, however, they were quite frequent. When she had her periods, she had excessive pain. She had a total hysterectomy 19 years ago at the age of 20. She has had ovarian cysts, and this occurred multiple times. This also led to the reason for the hysterectomy. She has some female hormonal imbalance. She has had a few vaginal yeast infections. She has been diagnosed with gingivitis before. She gets occasional itching probably due to allergies. She smokes a half a pack of cigarettes per day and has done this since about the age of 9. She gets earaches. She has had bronchitis x 3 but no pneumonia. Gets occasional abdominal pain. Does have fatigue problems. She has been around birds. From the age of 24 to 35, she was around a lot of chickens, geese, turkeys and ducks. She had about 50 chickens, 8 geese, 1 turkey, and 9 ducks. A friend of hers had these, and Donna always was hanging out at her house. She has had cats all of her life, and some ate birds. She has had dogs all off her life, and some of them ate birds. She has been around a bunch of hoofed animals including horses x 5, cows x 200, pigs x 10 to 15, sheep x 15, and goats x 1. She has had no implants that she is aware of.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation Severe headaches TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Earaches Masticatory dysfunction
Recommended Treatment

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Restorative dentistry to reline or remake upper denture to fit new occlusal relationship

B532 MRI Evaluation
Date of Acquisition:
Date of Reading:
Age: 38-year-old female
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa of about 3 mm. Decreased lateral joint space is present. Disc appears to be in proper position but may be medially displaced.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Bone actually looks a little bit better in this joint than the opposite side on some views. Decreased lateral joint space. Disc appears to be medially displaced. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior articulating surface. A little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle appears to be postured forward in the fossa. Disc appears to be in position over medially, but out laterally the disc is not seen indicative of medial displacement. No particular inflammation is seen in the joint except a little bit on the left side in the bilaminar tissue area. Minimal fluid in the superior inferior joint spaces.

Left TMJ, open view, shows good translation of the condyle and disc, and the disc is in a reduced position.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with a little bit of flattening on the head. A little sclerosis on the superior and posterior aspect of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is not seen so well out laterally, but over medially it appears to be in reasonable position. This is indicative of probably medial displacement of the articular disc. Slight fluid in the superoinferior joint space but no particular inflammatory process seen.

Left TMJ, open view, shows that the condyle does translate forward very nicely beyond the articular eminence, and the disc is well reduced on opening.

Impression:
Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and medial displacement of the articular discs
B532 MRI Evaluation 
Date of Acquisition: Date of Reading:

MEETING WITH DR. XXXX:
She has some osteoarthritic changes in her joints. She has bilateral medial displacement of the articular discs. In the left joint, she has an osteophyte that sticks up off of the anterior superior aspect of the condyle in what appears to be the midportion of the condyle.

Impression:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis with medial displacement of the articular discs and osteophyte sticking up off the left condyle
Discs are salvageable

