CHRIS HILL									06/02/2011

Chris is 35 years old, birth date 02/29/1976.  He was referred by Dr. Gary P. Miller, DDS, 3131 Harvard, Suite 102, Dallas, TX 75205, phone #214-521-9313.

On April 24, 2011, Chris was in a motor vehicle accident and was knocked unconscious and apparently broke his mandible.  He was treated by Dr. Philip Hawner, a plastic surgeon in Longview, TX.  He apparently put a bone plate on a symphysis fracture and used arch bars for a closed reduction of other fractures.  Chris’ primary concerns are:

His teeth do not fit together properly. 
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Some mild TMJ pain.  

Chris has no problems with headaches, rates his TMJ pain at 2, average daily pain at 0, jaw function at 2, diet at 8, and disability at 5.  He has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  He has a little bit of a problem with his right knee that he had before the accident and this is somewhat worse currently.  He is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day which he did not do prior to the injury.  The only medication he takes is Paxil 20 mg q.d.  

Intraorally, Chris has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has got a little bit of an open bite in the left mid buccal area including the bicuspids and first molar.  On the left side, he is slightly open there as well, but not as significant.  The mandibular dental midline is about 2 to 3 mm off towards the left side.  It appears that he has transverse narrow maxilla and mandible.  He can get his bite into fairly good occlusion by manipulating it.  As he opens, he does shift off towards the right side probably about 3 to 4 mm.  When he comes together, he hits prematurely probably on the right molars and then shifts the mandible forward into a better bite position.  He is hitting significantly prematurely on the right side compared to the left side.  The maximum opening is about 33 mm and with that opening he gets pain in the right masseter ramus area.  The excursion movement to the right is 10 mm, to the left only about 1 mm.  He has about a 1 mm overbite.  His occlusion is Class II end-on on the left side but probably a good 5 mm and Class II on the right side when he bites into his best occlusal fit.  He is a little bit Class II on the right side in more centric relation position but he shifts forward.  To palpation, he has not tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints function relatively smoothly.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of arch bars on his teeth.  He has got a bone plate in the anterior mandible extending over the fracture area.  He may have some space between his cuspid lateral incisor area.  He has an impacted third molar on the left side.  He has a subcondylar fracture in the left ramus area, but it appears to show minimal displacement.  However, on the right side, he has a subcondylar fracture with the displaced condyle with it being position down and forward.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear in this view and the right turbinate is moderately enlarged. 

Axial view shows that there is a little mucocele on the right maxillary sinus, but otherwise the sinuses appear clear.  There is a little deviation of the nasal septum anteriorly.  The right turbinate is a little bit enlarged.  The right condyle is postured forward compared to the left condyle.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is postured down and forward in the fossa.  There is increased superior and posterior joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination, but there is a decreased anterior joint space present.   Out laterally, there is some flattening on the head of the condyle.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is displaced out of the fossa and sitting beneath the articular eminence.  There is total displacement of this condyle.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The superior joint space is increased.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a fractured displaced condyle.  There is overlapping of approximately 1 cm with the neck of the condylar component being displaced lateral to the rest of the mandibular area.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has got a basic skeletal occlusal Class I relationship.  There is some decreased oropharyngeal airway, but he does not have any sleep apnea symptoms reported.

Basic diagnoses for Chris would be:

Left mandibular subcondylar fracture with mild to moderate displacement.
Right mandibular subcondylar fracture with major displacement with overlapping of the segments and condyle displaced completely out of the fossa.  
Displaced mandibular symphysis fracture. 
Malocclusion.

Recommended treatment would be bilateral mandibular open reduction of displaced subcondylar fractures with application of bone plates and reduction of symphysis fracture with bone plates.  