LARRY RODNEY HILSABECK						01/28/2011

Rod is 49 years old and referred by Dr. Oakley.  Dr. Oakley is an oral surgeon in Overland Park, Kansas.  Rod’s problems began in his 20s in the 1980s.  Etiology for his TMJ problems is unknown.  Basic concerns that he has at this time include the following:

Pain particularly in the right jaw area. 
Popping and grinding in the right jaw.
He must deviate his jaw to the right for chewing to have less popping and grinding. 
Increased fullness in the right side of the face and decreased jaw structure on the left side.
Frequent headaches. 
TMJ pain.

Rod feels that his facial asymmetry is getting progressively worse.  He gets headaches at a level of 4 predominantly in the right temporal area and posterior head area.  Currently, his TMJ pain is at a level of 2, but when he has his flare-ups about once every month it will go up to a level of 7.  Average daily pain is similar with a fluctuation of 2 currently to 7 with the flare-ups.  He rates his jaw function at 4, diet at 2, and disability at 2 currently, but it is 6 with his flare-ups.  The only treatment Rod has had so far is a night guard.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing his jaws.  He takes the following medications:

Lamictal 50 mg q.d.
Flexeril p.r.n. 

In frontal view, Rod has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  He has some asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -1.  The maxillary midline is about 1 mm to the left, and mandibular dental midline is 2 mm to the left.  The chin midline is about 7 mm to left.  In profile view, Rod has AP maxillary deficiency.  Upper lip supralabrale is probably about 3 mm posterior to subnasale.  In profile, the maxilla is probably about 6 mm AP deficient and chin is about 18 mm AP deficient.  The chin neckline is short, but chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Rod has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  There is some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch, but has good attached gingiva.  There is a little bit of stripping around the cuspids particularly on the right side as well as the right first bicuspid.  In the upper arch, Ron has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has basically a Class I cuspid relationship.  He has an anterior deep bite of about 5 mm.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being at least 3 mm higher than the right side.  He has slight AP asymmetry with the maxillary cuspid being posterior 1 mm on the left and the left mandibular cuspid being back about 2 mm.  To palpation, Rod currently has no pain around the head and neck area, but with his flare-ups he will have pain.  The incisal opening is 52 mm and excursion movements are 9 mm in each direction.  On opening, he does have some crepitus noises in the right TMJ, but the left side seems to function reasonably smoothly.  Oropharyngeal tissues look perfectly normal, and, in fact, the oropharyngeal width is quite wide.  Nasal airway except for some inflammation present looks fairly reasonable.  Septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side, but at least anteriorly there appears to be good nasal airway passage.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the third molars.  He has large crowns on the mandibular first molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints, but the left condyle appears small in size compared to the right side.  He has a significantly accentuated gonial notch on the left side compared to the right side.  Vertical height of the body on the right side is greater than the left side.  The septum looks reasonably straight and turbinates appear normal in size.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that is small in size.  There is some anterior beaking.  It appears as though there has been some loss of condylar volume.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  The articular eminence is moderately inclined and there is some slight increased anterior joint space.  

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that has advanced osteoarthritic changes in it.  There is a pseudocyst in the condylar head.  There is anterior beaking.  The condyle is significantly larger than the opposite side.  There is decreased  superior and posterior joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Left TMJ coronal tomograms shows a condyle that is narrow mediolaterally.  The lateral joint space is significantly decreased and the vertical joint space is moderately decreased.  The condyle appears as though it has undergone resorption.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm and it appears that there is almost bone-on-bone contact in that area. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is severely arthritic with pseudocysts in the head of the condyle.  There is significantly decreased vertical joint space with probably bone-on-bone contact.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 or 4 mm.  

Coronal cephalogram shows that the sinuses are clear.  The turbinates are small in size and it appears there has already been a previous reduction turbinectomy.  Nasal septum is deviated slightly off towards the right side.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the septum appears reasonably straight at this particular cut and the turbinates are essentially absent.  

Lateral cephalometric radiographic shows vertical imbalance between the left and right side of the face with the left side being shorter vertically than the right side.  Both maxilla and mandible are retruded.  He has an oropharyngeal airway of only 5 mm at the base of the tongue and about 6 to 7 mm at the soft palate level.  

Basic diagnoses for Rod would be as follows:

Right TMJ osteochondroma and articular disc dislocation without reduction and severe deformation.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and severe deformation. 
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia as well as vertical and transverse asymmetry.  
Mandibular AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia as well as vertical and transverse asymmetry.
Transverse cant in the occlusion with the left maxillary and mandibular arch being 2 mm higher than the right side. 
Posterior yaw with the maxilla and mandible shifted 3 mm to the right.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
High occlusal plane angle. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	CT scan of jaws and joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen or buttock).
	c.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
	d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the maxilla and level the 			occlusal plane transversely and anteroposteriorly.
	e.	Mandibular horizontal ostectomy at the angle of the mandible to reduce 			the vertical height of the angle. 
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  