DAVID HILTON									11-19-02

David is 45 years old and referred by Dr. Al Bishop, 3001 Brown Trail Street, Ste. 101, Bedford, TX  76021.

Patient History

He has had problems in the past with sinus infections. He has had a hernia repair. He has problems with snoring, and he wakes up at night. Even when he inhales in the upright position, he can sometimes feel the tissues in the back of his throat rattle. When he lies down, he has a lot of problems with rattling type sounds, and when he goes to sleep, snoring sounds. He had a left-sided hernia repair done in 1994. He has had no problems associated with that. He has some mild mitral valve prolapse. He takes no medications currently.

David did have some kind of treatment done when he was in first and second grade. At that time, his lower teeth came out anterior to his upper front teeth. He had some kind of appliance placed that either pushed his upper teeth forward, or his lower teeth backwards, or a combination of the two, to get the bite to where it is currently. 

Some of the problems David has include the following:
Snoring
Daytime somnolence
Wakes up at night
Doesn’t feel rested or energetic in the mornings or during the day
Wife reports that he doesn’t seem to be breathing well at night when he sleeps

His problems began about two to four years ago. He currently has no trouble with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus but no vertigo and no hearing loss. He is aware of clenching his teeth at nighttime and also at times during the day. He gets headaches about once every couple of weeks that he rates at about a level of 5 that occur in the temple area, either one side or the other. No specific TMJ pain. He rates his jaw function at 5, diet at 2, and disability at 3. 

Today David has had no specific treatment for his bite problems, TMJ problems, or sleep apnea problems. He has had a workup for sinus problems by Dr. Railsback, who simply recommended perhaps seeing an allergist to help manage some congestion. He uses occasional Sudafed or Afrin nasal spray to help with his allergy and sinus factors.

Other joints that affect David include right shoulder, his elbows, and his wrists (he has had previous fractures in both wrists).

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, David has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about –2. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline may be off towards the right side a couple of millimeters. Chin is pretty much on the facial midline, so lower dental midline is shifted off to the right side slightly.

In profile view, David appears to have fairly good projection of the upper lip and cheeks. May be just slightly AP deficient in upper lip projection by maybe 2 to 3 mm. Mandible appears retruded 10 to 12 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short, and chin-neck angle is not well defined. As David postures his mandible forward, it does improve his profile, although the chin-neckline is still not too well defined, but overall facial shape is improved.

Intraorally, David has all of his teeth back through the second molars presents. Has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch with the lower anterior teeth probably about 
3 mm higher than the posterior teeth. Some chipping of the lower incisal edges. Crown on the mandibular left lateral incisor which appears larger than the right lateral incisor. 

In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars present. Upper teeth are in a division II inclination. He is fairly close to being Class I cuspid relationship on the right side but has a full Class II cuspid relationship on the right side. He has some buccal crossbite tendencies bilaterally. 

In the lower arch, the right cuspid may be a millimeter posterior to the left cuspid. In the upper arch, the left cuspid is probably 2 to 3 mm posterior to the right cuspid. He does have a little bit of bonding on the upper cuspid teeth. He has an overbite of about 9 mm. In chewing, David can either chew on the left side by shifting his lower jaw a little bit to the left to get a reasonable bite there, or he can shift it to the right side and get those teeth to fit together reasonably well but in a Class II position. He cannot occlude both sides of his teeth at the same time. Oropharynx appears relatively clear. Transverse width of the posterior faucial pillars is somewhat constricted, and it appears that the insert into the posterior aspect of the pharynx has not much anteroposterior space. Uvula itself is not significantly enlarged. There is a big distance between the anterior and posterior faucial pillars. 

Intranasally, the nasal septum is deviated off towards the left side. Both turbinates are hyperplastic, and on the left side, the turbinate appears to almost touch against the septum. On the right side, the turbinate is much larger and appears a little bit more inflamed than the left side. The potential airway appears to be a little bit greater on the right side probably mainly due to the deviation of the septum off towards the left side. However, right turbinate is much larger than the left turbinate. 

To palpation, David had some mild tenderness over his TMJs but nowhere else. 

On opening, he had some clicks in his joints at probably about 15 mm of opening and about 10 mm of closing. Maximal incisal opening is 52 mm counting the 9-mm overbite relationship, and excursive movements are about 11 mm in each direction.

Approximately two years ago, David developed a discomfort in his left mandibular first molar. He had a cavity there. He went in and had a restoration placed in it. After that, he developed a periapical abscess and had to have a root canal done on that tooth, and subsequently a crown placed on it. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses are clear. Left turbinate appears large, and the septum appears to be deviated towards the left side with a little bone spur coming off of it. All four third molars are missing. Root canal is present on the mandible left first molar. Crown on the left first molar, left lateral incisor. Left condyle appears smaller than the right condyle. The right one has flattening on the anterior head. Left has a little bit of anterior beaking present. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some flattening of the anterior head and anterior beaking present. Decreased posterior joint space. Anterior joint space, however, appears enlarged. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The styloid process is quite thick and elongated. May be some anterior beaking on the condylar head.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyles bilaterally. Right joint is not as easy to see as the left side. Cuts on the left side may be a little bit deeper than the right side. 

Waters view shows the sinuses appear relatively clear. Unusual bony structure appears to be present on the nasal septum. Septum is deviated. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class II relationship with a severe anterior deep-bite. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 to 7 mm; however, there is a double density in the posterior pharyngeal wall area measuring at the more anterior one there is only about 1 to 2 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Vertical maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary excess
AP mandibular deficiency
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation 
Class I cuspid relationship on the left side, Class III cuspid relationship on the right side
Anterior deep-bite of 9 mm
Reverse curve of occlusion, upper arch
Bilateral posterior buccal crossbites
Severe lingual inclination of the maxillary incisors
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of about 2 mm
Slightly accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Hypertrophied turbinates
Deviated nasal septum
Nasal airway obstruction
Hyperplasia of the soft palate and uvula with constricture of the posterior faucial pillars
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Sleep apnea symptoms 
Headaches 
TMJ pain and discomfort
Daytime somnolence
Severe snoring
Not well rested in the mornings and lacks energy

Recommended Treatment

Reshape maxillary cuspids to a normal size (have been previously bonded) and reshape lower left lateral incisor crown to make it a little bit smaller and help correct the tooth-size discrepancy 

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Retract cuspids against first bicuspids, tipping the cuspid roots distally and keeping lateral incisor roots mesially inclined. Tip upper incisors forward even if it opens up space between the laterals and the cuspids as the space can be removed at the time of surgery. This will help get the upper incisors in better position over basal bone. Could open up 2 mm of space between the cuspids and lateral incisors on each side.
Align and level mandibular arch. Try to get the lower mandibular dental midline shifted a little bit to the left by at least a millimeter from where it is right now. Try to expand mandibular arch slightly particularly in the right bicuspid area.

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it slightly and downgraft it posteriorly.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance it forward.
Partial inferior turbinectomies.
Nasoseptoplasty.
Modified uvulopalatopharyngoplasty with lateral inversion flap technique.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

Restorative dentistry to correct any tooth-size discrepancy or deformities that remain