CARLYN HINOJOSA								01/28/2010

Carlyn is 14 years old and referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich, 3105 Legacy Drive, Suite A
Plano, TX 75023.  Carlyn became aware of having a tip in her bite plane when she was about 13 years old.  She began orthodontics on January 6, 2010.  She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability all at zero.  She takes Allegra and that is the only medication.  She has no problems with earaches, rarely gets tinnitus, but has no vertigo or hearing loss.  She does have multiple joints that are hypermobile and particularly her left shoulder sometimes gets dislocated.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Carlyn has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  There is some asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1.5 mm.  The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is just slightly to the right side.  The chin is probably about 2-3 mm to the right side.  Intraorally, Carlyn has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  Her teeth actually appear fairly well aligned and level.  In the maxillary arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars as well.  She is slight Class II on the left side by about 2 mm and fairly close to being Class I on the left side.  She has a little bit of a buccal cross bite on the left side.  In profile, her lip is retruded about 2- 3 mm and chin is retruded about 6-8 mm.  She does have a cant in the occlusal plan with the left cuspid being 2 to 2.5 mm lower than the right cuspid in the both maxillary and mandibular arches.  Carlyn has a transverse yaw with maxillary and mandibular posterior teeth and jaws being rotated about 3 mm to the left.  The left side of the face is about 5-6 mm longer vertically at the angle of the mandible on the left side compared to the right side.  Nasal airway looks relatively normal and turbinates may be just mildly enlarged.  To palpation, Carlyn has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  The maximal incisal opening is 30 mm, excursion movements to the right 5 mm and to the left 7 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of developing and unerupted third molars.  The rest of the teeth are present.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Cannot evaluate the joint situation.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that is enlarged including the condylar neck.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  The joint space appears fairly well balanced.  The condyle appears a little bit large for the fossa.  

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The condyle is postured just slightly forward in the fossa.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  The joint space appears to be relatively well balanced.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears elongated vertically.  Trabecular pattern appears to have some changes in it.  The joint space appears reasonably well balanced.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3-4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has more normal architecture and is smaller in size than the opposite condyle.  The joint space appears fairly well balanced.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly at least 4 mm.

Coronal view shows that the inferior turbinates are fairly large in size.  The sinuses appear clear.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The turbinates appears fairly good size and appear to fill a good portion of the normal nasal airway.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows she has perhaps a slight Class II skeletal relationship.  Occlusal plan may be slightly high.  There is a vertical difference in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 4 mm lower than the right side back in the molar area.  In the inferior border of the mandible, there is about a 6 mm vertical difference with the left side being longer vertically than the right side.  Oropharyngeal airway shows that the airway is about 7 mm at the soft palate level and probably about 8-9 mm at the base of the tongue.  She does have some adenoid tissue in the nasopharyngeal airway yet.  The lower incisors look slightly over angulated.  

Basic diagnoses for Carlyn would be as follows:

Left mandibular condylar osteochondroma.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and transverse asymmetry.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia, posterior vertical hypoplasia, and transverse asymmetry.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2-3 mm lower than the right side.
Impacted third molars x4.
Posterior yaw with the maxilla and mandible rotated about 3 mm towards the left.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider slenderizing the lower anterior teeth 
                        to keep from flaring them too far forward and to retract them a little bit better over 	            basal bone removing no more than 2 mm.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	left mandibular low condylectomy to remove the osteochondroma tumor.
	b.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies to transversely level the mandible, correct the 				posterior yaw, and advance forward about 6-8 mm.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to transversely level the arch, advance it forward, 			and correct the posterior yaw.  
	d.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
