LINDSEY HISLOP									07/10/2008

Lindsey is 39 years old.  Referred by Dr. Mark Piper and also Dr. Jim Tyree, who is a dentist in Austin.  To Lindsey's knowledge, her TMJ problems began about a year ago.  She noted her bite began to change and has continued to worsen.  She has developed some speech associated problems since then including a lisp.  Her bite continues to shift.  Initially, when her joint problems began, she had clicking and popping in the left TMJ, but not the right side.  This clicking and popping has since gone away.  At this time, she feels her joints function relatively smoothly.  She rates headaches that she gets about 2 times a week at about a level of 2 in the frontal area.  She rates her TMJ pain at about 1, average daily pain at 1,  jaw function and diet at 2, disability at 1.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime.  The only treatment she has had so far was a night guard made in December 2007 that she wears at night.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Lindsey has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle third face.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship appears to be about 2.5 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline.  Chin is off the right side probably about 3 mm.  In profile view, Lindsey has fairly good projection of the upper lip and maxilla.  The mandible appears retruded and chin neckline appears short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Chin appears to be retruded by 10 to 12 mm.  Intraorally, Lindsey has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch, she likewise has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  In centric relation, the lower dental midline is 1 mm off to the right side and chin is 3 to 4 mm off to the right side.  She hits on the right side in the second molar area perhaps distal to the first molars, but all other teeth are out of occlusion.  She has about a 2 mm anterior open bite and on the left side she has a 3 to 4 mm open bite.  She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by probably 2 mm and on the left side by probably 3 to 4 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Fascial pillars may be somewhat constricted and they are slightly posteriorly positioned.  She has some mild snoring, but no daytime somnolence or sleep apnea problems. To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Incisal opening is 40 mm.  Excursion movements are 5 mm in each direction. 
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION (from Dr. Tyree).  I-CAT evaluation:  Right TMJ shows severe condylar resorption with almost complete loss of the condylar head.  Lateral rim of the fossa appears to be intact.  Joint space looks almost excessive.  There is a significant osteophyte sitting superiorly off the anterior aspect of the head of the condyle. 
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is severely degenerated.  It has got anterior beaking and a posterior osteophyte present.  There are erosions in the lateral aspect of the condyle.  Nasal septum is deviated off to the left side and there is a septal spur present.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has severe osteoarthritis.  There appears to be decreased joint space in some of the views and a lot erosions on the condylar head.  There are some 3-D images of the joints that show significant arthritic changes present.  The 3-D shows significant resorption and arthritic changes of both condyles in the coronal views. 
MRI of the right TMJ shows a condyle that has undergone severe resorption with almost total loss of the condyle.  The remaining condylar neck appears to have some osteophytes seen off of it.  The disc appears to be anteriorly displaced, but significantly degenerated.  She has excessive fluid in the superior joint space and also in the inferior joint space.  The coronal view shows severe condylar resorption as well.  
Left TMJ MRI sagittal view shows severe degenerative changes.  There are some dark areas within the joint due to perhaps some calcifications within the joint.  There are erosions on the head of the condyle.  There is fluid in the superior joint space.  There are osteophytes extending superiorly and anteriorly.  The disc is anteriorly displaced and severely degenerated. I do not believe there is any way to save these discs, particularly in their current situation.  The articular eminences are quite flat which may be indicative of a connective tissue autoimmune kind of disease process.  She apparently has no other symptoms in relation to this process.
Lindsey had a tomogram taken 7/10/08 in our office.  Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle postured significantly forward in the fossa almost functioning on the articular eminence. There is significantly increased posterior joint space.  Left TMJ tomogram showed the condyle postured forward in the fossa.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both joints.  
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear, although there could be something perhaps in the left maxillary sinus.  Both condyles look quite arthritic and have undergone resorption, particularly on the right side.  She demonstrates an anterior open bite and posterior open bites all the way through except for the right second molars that appear to occlude some.  
Waters view shows that the turbinates appear fairly large in the sinuses.  The maxillary sinuses and frontal sinuses appear fairly clear.  
Clinically, Lindsey has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right cuspid being about 1.5 to 2 mm higher than the left cuspid.  Dental model analysis shows that she has an anterior open bite.  She has some transverse maxillary deficiency particularly in the bicuspid area and slightly in the first molar area.  Her upper left lateral incisor appears smaller than normal.  Recommended orthodontic treatment would be as follows:

Align and level maxillary arch.  Expand the bicuspids and first molars. Tip lateral roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Open up 1 mm of space between the left lateral incisor and cuspid to correct for tooth size discrepancy. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis being worse on the right side than the left side.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
Anterior open bite. 
Occluding only the right second molars. 
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1.5 mm higher than the left side. 
Chin deviated off to the right side about 3 mm.   


Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
 Align and level maxillary arch.  Expand the bicuspids and first molars. Tip lateral roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Open up 1 mm of space between the left lateral incisor and cuspid to correct for tooth size discrepancy. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction.  
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen or the buttock).
Bilateral partial coronoidectomies. 
3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.


