PAUL HISS										02/01/2008

Paul is 50 years old and an ophthalmologist.  He was referred here by Dr. Steve Nelson from Denver, Colorado.  He has had previous surgeries including bimaxillary osteotomies in November 2003, rhinoplasty in April 2004, and a revision rhinoplasty in February 2005.  He does have problems with cluster headaches that he treats prophylactically.  He takes Sansert 2 mg t.i.d.  Paul had orthognathic surgery in 2003 done by Dr. Guyuron.  Originally, the upper jaw was supposed to be advanced about 3 mm only, but the night before surgery Dr. Guyuron suggested that the maxilla be advanced further forward as well as the mandible.  Paul now feels that the maxilla is too far forward and is uncomfortable for him in talking, chewing and smiling.  He also has decreased incisor show.  He had his initial rhinoplasty done in 2004 in Las Vegas.  Surgeon apparently did a lot more to the nose than Paul had wanted.  He then had a revision by Dr. Dean Triniumi.  His office is in Chicago.  Dr. Triniumi took some rib cartilage and reconstructed the nose and put it in place a very prominent strut into the columella.   

Paul had orthodontic treatment in the 1970s with four first bicuspid extractions by Dr. Robert Ricketts in Los Angeles.  Paul’s profile was quite flattened with this treatment and was the reason that he sought treatment in 2003.  Since the 2003 orthognathic surgery, he has decreased sensation to his right lower lip, chin, teeth, and gums.  Initially after surgery, he had a total numbness, but some of it has returned.  Paul had orthodontic treatment again beginning in October 2002 and finishing in June 2004.  Paul rates his TMJ pain that occurs only on the left side at about a level of 3, average daily pain 1, jaw function at 4, diet at 3, disability at 1.  He gets headaches, but only on the right side.  They occur in the frontal and temporal area and feel as though they are behind the eye.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo.  Left elbow bothers him and he also has some lower back disk issues.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  He does have a problem with cluster headaches that are fairly well controlled with the Sansert medication.  Paul does have some problems breathing through his nose and feels he probably has allergic rhinitis that causes swelling intranasally that causes more difficulties breathing the nose.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Paul has fairly good left-to-right facial asymmetry.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper teeth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  dental midlines are on the facial midline.  In profile view, Paul appears to have a little fullness in the subnasale area.  The subnasale is anterior to upper lip superior labia.  Chin however appears a little bit retruded and the chin neckline is somewhat short.  Vertical facial dimension is reasonably good.  Intraorally, Paul is missing lower first bicuspids from his previous extractions.  Lower incisor has a little bit of lingual inclination.  He appears to have adequate gingiva.  The papilla are somewhat blunted interdentally.  In the upper arch, he has all his teeth back to the second molars except he is missing the first bicuspid as well.  He has basic Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  He has about 1.5 mm of vertical overbite.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.  Maxillary mandible may be about a 1 mm off towards the left side.  Chin may be about 2 mm off to the right side.  The left side of the face is slightly more full than the right side.  Mandibular right cuspid is about 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  Oropharyngeal areas look relatively normal.  Uvula is mild to moderately elongated.  Tonsils are present, but relatively normal in size.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  There appears to be a lot of inflammatory response intranasally.  Septum looks reasonably straight at least in the front.  Paul has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  On opening, the right joint functions smoothly, but the left side has an audible crepitation.  Incisor opening is 4-6 mm.  Excursion movements are 11 mm in each direction.  In side-to-side movements, there is come crepitus noises in the left joint as well.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all fourth and third molars and all four first bicuspids.  There is some significant root resorption on some of the teeth particularly the incisors, bicuspids, first molars in the upper arch, and in the lower arch the second molars and bicuspids as well. There is some bone loss around the teeth rather generalized.  He has root canal in maxillary left lateral incisor.  He has two bone screws remaining in the rings.  Condyles look relatively large and intact.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Waters view shows that there appears to be some passable airway at least in the bony section of the septum.  The bony septum appears quite wide in width.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  Sinuses look relatively clear.   Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has reasonably good morphology.  Joint space is thin.  Articular eminence has a relatively moderate inclination.  Left TMJ tomogram shows the condyles are very narrow anteroposteriorly and very pointed at the top.  Decreased superior and posterior joint space but increased anterior joint space.  Articular eminences are moderately steep.  There is good translation of both condyles.  Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the incisors in both upper and lower arch are vertical in orientation.  Anterior nasal spine is almost anterior to the incisor tips.  There is a high occlusive plane angle and a prominence of pogonion.  Oropharyngeal airway is very good.  _____ in the upper tooth relationship is about zero.

The basic diagnoses for Paul would be as follows:

	1.  AP maxillary excess. 
	2.  Vertical maxillary deficiency particularly posterior.
	3.  AP mandibular deficiency.
4.  Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and severe    deformation. 
5.  Vertical inclination of the maxillary incisors.
6.  Left TMJ pain.
7.  Headaches.
8.  Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars. 
9.  Periodontal problems with loss of papilla and generalized elevator bone loss.
10.  Short roots on a number of the teeth.
11.  High occlusive plane angle.
12.  Hypertrophied turbinates.
13.  Wide and deviated nasal septum.
14.  Nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

	1.  Presurgical orthodontics.
a.  Place appliances on upper and lower arches and work up to a fairly stout arch wire.     No significant dental movements are required.
	2.  Surgery.
a.  Maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior nasal spine area posteriorly, the incisors forward, down graft the posterior aspect and decrease the occlusal plane angle.
b.  Left TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ concepts total joint prosthesis.
c.  Right mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy.
d.  Fat graft to left TMJ (harvest from the abdomen).
e.  Left coronoidotomy with fixation.
f.  Partial turbinectomies.
g.  Nasal septoplasty.
h.  Bone grafting to the maxillary osteotomy areas (harvest from the cranium).
	3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

Paul wants to talk to Dr. Triniumi who did his second nasal reconstruction as he is concerned that Dr. Triniumi may try to discourage him from the surgery.  I told him I would be happy to talk to Dr. Triniumi.  He also would prefer autogenous bone grafts over synthetic bone grafts.  I told him we would have a choice between cranial bone grafts or harvesting bone from iliac crest.  He will think about it and let me know.  He will contact us if he has any other questions.  I reviewed the risks and complications.  He does have a significant deficit of the inferior alveolar nerve on the right side, and I do not feel this treatment plan will improve that situation for him.  He understands that and knows it could also get worse.  