SHELLIE HITT								01/19/2012

Shellie presents for a 9-year followup.  She was doing very well up until about 3 weeks ago.  I had previously seen her in 2008 with some headache and myofascial kind of problems.  She said that she went a long time without having any pain issues at all.  About 3 weeks though, she began developing some headaches again.  She gets headaches daily at a level of 6 that affect predominantly the frontal and temple areas.  She says she has no pain directly in the TMJ area.  Her average daily pain is about at a level of 6, jaw function at 4, diet at 3, and disability at 2.  Up to 3 weeks ago however, she was not having any of these pain issues.  The pain issues are similar to what she had in 2008.  The incisal opening today is 47 mm and excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction.  Occlusion is very stable with an anterior overbite of about 3 mm.  To palpation, she has some moderate pain over the temporal muscles, milder pain over the masseters and shoulders, and low moderate over the right TMJ and mild over the left TMJ.  She still has some weakness of the frontal branch of the facial nerve on the right side.  She gets occasional earaches but no tinnitus, however, she does get daily vertigo with the headaches.  She has no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her neck, back, hips where she does get some steroid injections.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  She drinks about one Coke per day, but says she does not relate the headaches to drinking Coke.  She was diagnosed with idiopathic edema of the kidneys in 1989 and is on diuretics since then.  She is not to use any NSAIDs.  She does take the following medications:

Synthroid 0.88 mcg.
Demadex (diuretic) 20 mg t.i.d. 
K-Dur (K+) two per day.
Potassium citrate two tablets per day.
Soma 350 mg q.h.s.
Magnesium.
Zemplar 1 mcg q.d. (for her kidney condition and parathyroid dysfunction).
Norco 7.5 mg one q.d.

Shellie states that she does not use alcohol or recreational drugs.  She does drag race cars as a hobby.  At this point, I do not know how to specifically help her.  Hopefully, this is just a transient problem and hopefully it will subside and go away as it did previously.  When I saw her in 2008, she was having headache problems at that time, but they subsided for quite some time until 3 weeks ago.  It is possible that the headaches could be related to her neck pathology.  I do not believe it is related to any clenching or bruxing at least by history.  I suggested we give it some time to see how she does.  She is to call me in a month to update me on her progress and see if these headaches have subsided by then.  