KHEK-KHUAN (KEN) HO							07/25/2011

Ken is 51 years old, birth date 09/24/1959.  Ken’s primary concerns are severe sleep apnea.  He is currently on a CPAP machine which he has been wearing for about 30 days now.  He is to be tested again in about a month or so to evaluate the effectiveness of the CPAP machine.  Ken has had snoring problems for as long as he can remember and also a lot of daytime somnolence.  Quite often he has to close the door in his office and take a nap.  He is feeling better on the CPAP machine, but it is not something that he would like to continue doing for the rest of his life.  Ken had orthodontics in 1984.  He got a night guard in 2009 for clenching and bruxing.  He has had nasal airway obstruction and has obstruction and has had three surgeries there in 1976, 1987, and 2009 which included in those surgeries turbinectomies, removal of polyps, and septoplasty.  He has no TMJ issues and no headaches.  He has no earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo.  He has no joint issues.  He does have a history of multiple schwannomas that have occurred in the back and intracranially and there is one close to his ear.  He has no TMJ pain, myofascial pain.  He rates his jaw function, diet and disability at 0.  He has had some previous teeth extracted for orthodontic reasons.

In frontal view, Ken has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 28 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is -4 mm.  The maxillary midline is about 1 mm to 1.5 mm off towards the left side, and the mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left.  Chin is almost 4 to 5 mm off to the left.  In profile view, Ken is probably about 4 to 5 mm AP deficient in the maxilla.  The chin is probably 10 or 12 mm AP deficient.  The chin neckline is short in length.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 3 mm higher than the right side.  Intraorally, Ken is missing the lower bicuspids.  There is a lot of root exposure and gingival recession around his lower teeth.  He does have adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he is missing a cuspid on the right side and a bicuspid on the left side.  He has severe buccal tipping of the mandibular left first molar and the right first and second molars.  He is basically a Class I cuspid relationship bilaterally, but has some cross bites on the left side and right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy.  Soft palate appears a little bit elongated.  He has had previous pillar procedures done on the soft palate that were effective for 2 weeks and then did not help at all.  He does have about a 2 mm vertical overbite.  He does have moderate constricture of the fascial pillars.  Difficulty seeing the tonsils, but it appears that may be relatively normal.  Ken states that he has allergy problems and monthly he goes for allergy shots.  This he feels helps his nasal breathing.  His tongue appears quite large and likely a component of macroglossia is present.  Observations of the tongue are that it is quite broad.  There are some crenations around the borders of the tongue.  The tongue looks large for the available oral cavity space. 

Ken rates his snoring as severe, daytime somnolence is moderate, sleep apnea is moderate to severe.  However, he does sleep well at night, but does breathe mainly through his mouth at nighttime and also during the daytime. TMJs seem to function reasonably smoothly except when he opens real wide he does have some crepitus sounds.  The maximal incisal opening is 52 mm, and excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  On the left side, he appears to have an open bite in the molar area of probably 1 to 2 mm.  Also on the right side, he has got about 1 mm overbite in the molar area and almost a total cross bite of the second molar on the right side.  He has a significant increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch and a significant reversed curve of Wilson in the lower arch.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, maxillary right cuspid, left probably second bicuspid, and mandibular first bicuspids.  The right mandibular second bicuspid has been replaced with an implant.  The root on the mandibular left second bicuspid is very short.  There is bone absorption around most of the lower teeth and also around the upper teeth.  There is a very unusual shape of the lateral wall of the right maxillary sinus.  

Coronal view shows that the septum at the superior aspect deviates off towards the left side and then down towards the right side.  The turbinates are moderate in size.  There is a soft tissue lesion in the right maxillary sinus area.  The tongue fills the entire oral cavity.  

Axial view shows that the turbinates are of moderate size, although the anterior part is absent as there is still some posterior turbinate left.  The airway looks reasonably.  The sinuses appear relatively clear in this view.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit degenerated.  The fossa appears quite anteroposteriorly.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  The fossa appears almost too small to appropriately contain the condyle.  Out laterally, the condyle is quite flattened and there is decrease joint space laterally.  Vertical joint space is excessive throughout the joint except at the lateral aspect.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit wider in anteroposterior dimension as compared to the opposite side.  The joint space appears a little bit more appropriate.  There appears to be a little osteophytic growth off the head of the condyle towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There appears to be a little extension off the medial pole of the condyle.  Vertical joint space appears excessive except at the lateral aspect of the condyle where there is decreased joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim appears to curve inferiorly about 4 to 5 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible appear retruded.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  The tongue fills the entire oral cavity.  

Basic diagnoses for Ken would be as follows:

Severe sleep apnea.
Maxillary AP and vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Hyperplastic soft palate.
High occlusal plane angle.
Missing maxillary right cuspid, left second bicuspid, mandibular first bicuspids.
Macroglossia.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of 3 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
History of clenching and bruxism.  
Posterior cross bites being severe on the right side.  
Bilateral posterior open bites in the molar area. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJs.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Place appliances on upper arch and align and level.
	b.	Place appliances on the lower arch and align and level.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction advancing the incisal edge approximately 6 mm.
	b.	Bilateral ramus sagittal split osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction with pogonion advancing approximately 12 			mm.
	c.	Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP).
	d.	Reduction glossectomy.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
 