LINDSEY HOBBS									09/13/2006

Lindsey is 16 years.  She was diagnosed with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis at about the age of 18 months.  About 8 years ago is when she began developing associated problems with the jaw joints.  Her bite began to start shifting and moving.  The only medication she currently takes is Enbrel 25 mg twice weekly.  She has no problems with earaches.  She gets some tenderness.  She has had 4 fainting spells during the past year of no specific etiology.  No hearing loss.  All other joints give her problems.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  She has no problems with headaches.  She rates her TMJ pain at about a level of 8.  Average daily pain is about a level of 8.  Jaw function 7, diet at 4, disability at 0.  In frontal view, Lindsey has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm on the right, 4 on the left.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Nasal tip may be just slightly off to the right side maybe 1 to 2 mm.  Roots of the maxillary incisors are tipped slightly to the left side.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right side.  Chin is about 5 to 6 mm off to the right side.  In profile view, she may have just some slight AP deficiency at point at for no more than a couple of mm.  She has some lip incompetence of probably about 6 mm.  Fairly good balance between upper lip, cheeks and nose.  Her lips are in pretty good AP balance.  Chin appears deficient and chin-neckline is somewhat short and chin-neck angle is a little obtuse.  The chin may be back approximately 10 mm or so.  Intraorally, Lindsey has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth appear nicely aligned and leveled in both arches.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally being about 3 or 4 mm Class II.  She has about a 2 mm anterior open bite.  She has an open bite on the left posterior side probably at least 3 mm in the cuspid area and it probably goes down to about 1 mm in the first molar area.  She occludes essentially on right second molars.  Oral pharynx looks clear.  The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear normal.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane.  The right side maxillary cuspid is up 3 mm compared to the left cuspid and the mandible right cuspid are probably 4 mm compared to the left cuspid.  Mandibular right cuspid is about 3 to 4 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  Maxillary right cuspid is about 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  There is a posterior yaw to the maxilla and mandible with the posterior teeth being at least 2 mm to the left.  To palpation, she has moderate discomfort over the TMJs, posterior neck and shoulder areas.  On opening, she has crepitus in her joints.  Maximal opening is about 38 mm and excursive movements are about 4 mm to the right and 5 mm to the left.  Her opening without creating discomfort is about 18 mm.  Intranasally, turbinates appear relatively normal in size as doe the septum appear relatively straight.  She has no history of snoring, daytime somnolence or sleep apnea problems. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA) affecting practically all of her joints. 
Bilateral TMJ JRA with the right side being affected significantly worse than the left side.
AP mandibular deficiency and asymmetry.
Maxillary asymmetry.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being approximately 3 mm higher than the left side.
LINDSEY HOBBS
September 13, 2006
Page 2

Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior open bite extending from the right first molar all the way through and including the left second molar.
Occluding only on the right second molars.
TMJ pain.  
 High occlusal plane angle.
 AP microgenia.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Tip right lateral incisor root mesially and cuspid root distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. 
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level transversely, upright the incisors and decrease the occlusal plane angle.
Augmentation genioplasty. 

I explicitly stated to them that Lindsey's surgery would be done by residents.  It will not be done primarily by me.  I will be there to staff and to help, but she is a "resident" case and they will do the surgery.  She and her mother understand this very clearly.  I did answer all the questions that Lindsey and her mother Sara had at this time.  They know that they can call anytime with questions and my staff and/or I will try and answer them. 