MYRTA DIEDRA HODGE								06-25-03

Diedra is 20 years old and referred by Dr. Steve Cutbirth. He is in Waco, Texas.

Patient History

Diedra has previously been diagnosed with scoliosis and had back surgery in 1999. Other than that, she is in good health with no major medical problems. She is aware of problems with her adenoids that is creating about 85% blockage of her airway. Last week she had a fainting spell and had one about two years ago but has had none other that she can recall. She apparently has a reaction to most pain medications. Apparently she has problems with morphine that made her itchy, but she has also had problems with Demerol, Darvocet, and Vicodin. The only pain medication that works for her is codeine. 

I have some previous records on Diedra from 07/16/93. At that time, she had reasonably good facial symmetry with maybe just a slightly increased fullness on the right side of the face. Perhaps some slight AP maxillary deficiency. She had an anterior open bite kind of problem with an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Her mandibular dental midline at that time was actually shifted a little bit off toward the right side. Her face is definitely a little bit more full on the right side as compared to the left side. There may have already been a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being a little bit lower than the left side. Lateral cephalometric radiographs from 07/16/93 show occlusal plane is relatively level, and she has basically a Class I skeletal relationship with perhaps a slight anterior mandibular vertical excess. On 06/06/95, the cephalometric shows the development of significant vertical asymmetry in the occlusion plane levels. Panorex also sent from 11/13/02 shows vertical discrepancies in the maxillary arch with the left teeth being displaced more into the sinus at the root apices area compared to then right side. Right condylar head and neck appear significantly longer than the left condylar head and neck. There appears to be evidence of degenerative changes on the condyle on the left side. Right sinus on this radiograph is quite cloudy compared to the left side. All four third molars are present, and the mandibular ones are bony impacted and the maxillary ones are probably soft tissue impacted.

Diedra has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo (except for the previously described episodes) and no hearing loss. She has some problems with her right shoulder, and, of course, had surgery in 1999 for scoliosis of the back. She is allergic to a number of pain medications and cigarette smoke. She is not aware of being allergic or reactive to jewelry. Of interest is that her hands are red and chapped with a silver, scaly kind of sloughing, and this is a constant problem for her. I may need to rule out the possible presence of psoriasis. 

She takes no medications. 

She believes the onset of her problems may have begun at around 1999 associated with the back surgery. Her father states that when Diedra came out of surgery that the right side of her face appeared quite a bit more swollen then the left side. She has no problems with headaches but may get a pain through the temple areas maybe once a month. She has no TMJ pain and no pain around the head and neck area. She rates her jaw function at 2, diet at 0, and disability at 0. 

Patient Concerns

She wants to make sure she doesn’t have a tumor problem as she was warned that might be going on
She has significant facial asymmetry
The right side of the face is significantly larger than the left side
Difficulties with the way her teeth fit together
Popping noises in the jaw joints

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Diedra has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Temple depressions are fairly prominent. Cheek bones are nice and full. Ear level and papillary level look quite good. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm on the left and 4 mm on the right. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm toward the left side. Chin is about 9 mm to the left side. She does have some dried red areas on the lateral aspect of her neck and upper shoulder area but not sure if that is some sunburn or if that is related to the hand problem.

In profile view, she does have some AP deficiency in the maxilla of probably 6 mm or so. Chin is retruded by approximately 12 mm. Chin-neckline may be a little bit short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. A little bit of fullness in the submental area. Lower two thirds of the lower third face appears slightly elongated. 

Intraorally, Diedra has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. The coronal portion of the lower anterior teeth appear to be tipped toward the right and apices toward the left. In the upper arch, Diedra has all of her teeth back through the second molars erupted. Some very mild crowding, upper anterior arch. She is fairly close to being Class I on the left side but may be just about 2 mm Class II at the cuspid area. She has a crossbite from the left cuspid most of the way back to the second molars. On the right side, she is pretty close to being Class I but tends toward a buccal crossbite particularly with the cuspid/first bicuspid. A little bit of an open bite tendency in the cuspid area. Incisors are almost end-on but not quite. Transversely, the right cuspid is elevated about 1.5 mm to 2 mm compared to the left cuspid, but the entire occlusal plane has a significant cant in it. In the lower arch, the right cuspid is about 1 mm lower than the left cuspid. Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right first bicuspid being about 3 mm lower than the left cuspid/first bicuspid. Likewise, in the lower arch the left arch is about 3 mm elevated compared to the right side of the arch. Mandibular dental midline is fairly well aligned with the chin if the cant in the occlusal plane is taken into consideration. As Diedra shifts her lower jaw toward the right side, it does improve her facial symmetry, although she still has significantly increased fullness on the right side of the face and cheek area as compared to the left side. Masseter muscle on the right side feels a little bit enlarged compared to the left side. Right cheek appears as though it is about 5 or 6 mm more prominent extending out laterally as compared to the left side. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is a little bit hyperplastic but probably not too significantly. Tonsils are of moderate size, but she gives no history of having problems with tonsillitis or recurrent sore throats. 

Right side of the mandibular inferior border is about 10 mm lower than the left side.

Diedra has extreme difficulties breathing through her nose, and, in fact, says she can’t breathe through her nose at all. Intranasally, the turbinates are enlarged, particularly the left side. Nasal septum is deviated a little bit from side-to-side but no really significantly. It is possible that the turbinates could be contributing some to her airway obstruction, but, in fact, the nasopharyngeal adenoid tissues may be creating even a greater problem. 

Anteroposteriorly, both the maxillary and mandibular cuspids on the left side are about 2 mm posterior to cuspids on the right side. There is a yaw in the posterior maxilla and mandible with the posterior teeth being shifted somewhere between 2 to 4 mm to the right side of the face. This may account for some of the increased fullness in the right side as compared to the left side. 

To palpation, she has no tenderness over the head and neck area. Joints function smoothly. Incisal opening is 52 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 10 mm and to the left 5 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear fairly clear. The mandibular third molars are impacted with the right one being a horizontal impaction and the left one being a distal-oriented impaction. Left third molar may still be soft tissue impacted, but the right side may be erupted, although it is angled distally. Left condyle appears small in size and appears as though it is has undergone some resorption or at least some definite osseous changes. On the right side, the condylar head and neck appear as though they may be slightly elongated and longer than normal. 

Waters view does show the significant asymmetry that is present. Angle of the mandible is at least 10 maybe 15 mm lower on the right side as compared to the left side. Sinuses all appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear somewhat enlarged. Septum appears to have some deviation associated with it, particularly back in the bony structures. Mandibular dental midline is shifted off toward the left side, and there is a significant transverse cant in the occlusal plane as well.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have reasonably good morphology. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Appears that there is adequate joint space, although it could be slightly decreased superoposteriorly. I see no abnormal formations in the head of the condyle. Left TMJ tomogram shows the condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space. May be some anterior beaking present. Condyle appears to be quite flattened on top indicative of possibly some condylar resorption problems occurring. 

On opening, there is reasonably good translation of both joints. There is flatness, and loss of vertical height on the left side is easily noted. 

Cephalometric, Diedra has what appears to be a retruded maxilla and mandible. She does have a Class II skeletal jaw relationship. She has a huge adenoid mass in the nasopharynx area that almost totally obliterates the airway. Oropharyngeal airway at the base of the soft palate measures about 7 mm and at the base of the tongue measures 11 mm. May have a slightly high occlusal plane angle. Definite difference in the vertical positions of the occlusal plane on once side compared to the other side. Diedra has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference in the anterior six teeth of 4 mm. She also has about 0.5 mm of tooth-size discrepancy with the lower second bicuspids.

Basic Diagnoses

Right mandibular condylar hyperplasia
Left TMJ condylar resorption due to one of the following
Idiopathic condylar resorption
Psoriatic arthritis
Bone changes secondary to excessive loading of the joint
Rule out disc displacement
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
High occlusal plane angulation
Significant facial asymmetry with the chin shifted toward the left side approximately 9 mm
Significant cant in the transverse occlusal plane with the right side being 3 mm lower than the left side
Left posterior crossbite
Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side (in crossbite)
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 4 mm
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars
Severe hypertrophy of the nasopharyngeal adenoid tissues
Hypertrophied turbinates
Almost total (85%) nasal airway obstruction (confirmed by Dr. Lenis at Scott and White Hospital, Temple, TX)
Rule out psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis of the left TMJ

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJs to confirm TMJ diagnosis and recommended treatment 

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip maxillary lateral incisors mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior six teeth removing 2 to 3 mm of tooth structure to correct for the significant tooth-size discrepancy 

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and transversely level the occlusal plane as well as correct the transverse discrepancies and vertical discrepancies
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back on the facial midline
Consider left TMJ high condylectomy if right condylar hyperplasia is confirmed
Left TMJ managed by one of the following methods depending on the diagnosis:
Articular disc repositioning and ligament repair if condition is ICR
No treatment if condition is just excessive loading of the joint with the disc still in position
Consider possible total joint prosthesis if the condition in the left joint is psoriatic arthritis
Removal of four impacted third molars
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy
Partial reduction turbinectomy

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
