PATRICK HODGES								12/03/2009

Patrick is 21 years old and referred by my daughter Dallas.  Patrick’s orthodontist is Dr. Stan Parker, DDS MSD, 1320 Ferris Avenue, Waxahachie, Texas 75165, phone #972-937-0424.

Patrick is in good health.  He gets allergy injections of 0.5 ml about every 2 weeks.  He also takes finasteride 1.25 mg q.d.  Patrick developed his TMJ problems when he was about 16 years old of unknown etiology and that is when he became aware of clicking in the jaw joints.  He has had orthodontics from the age of 11 to 13.  He started orthodontics again in July 2007 and had maxillary osteotomies performed on May 13, 2008.  The maxilla was expanded and advanced.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Patrick has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 2 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much aligned in the facial midline.  In profile view, Patrick has good facial balance vertically and anteroposteriorly.  Intraorally, Patrick has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He is still in appliances.  He has good attached gingival.  Roots in the lower central incisors are almost through the buccal cortex.  In upper arch, Patrick has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  It appears there is just a slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the left cuspid being about 1 mm to 1.5 mm lower than the right cuspid.  Patrick has some lip incompetence of about 3-4 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit towards the left side and the left turbinate is quite large and appears to be actually touching against the nasals septum.  The right side of the nose looks like it has a clearer airway.  To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the TMJs and retromandibular area.  On opening, he could get to 47 mm in a closed lock position, but if he manipulated his jaw to the left, he could produce an audible pop and then could open 57 mm.  Excursion movements are about 7 mm in each direction.  On opening, he could get to about 2 mm and then he starts feeling the tension in the right joint in the closed lock situation.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that all four third molars have been removed.  All the rest of the teeth are present and all have bands or brackets on them.  He has four bone plates in the maxilla.  The condyle is superiorly positioned in the fossa.   

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is deviated a little bit towards the left side.  Inferior turbinate on the right side appears normal in size, but vertically short.  The left inferior turbinate appears quite large and appears to block the airway.  The middle turbinates also are excessively large and extend downward and are pressing on top of the inferior turbinates.  There is a little blob of tissue in the left ethmoid area.    

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are moderately large, even the right one posteriorly.  The left one for sure appears to be causing some significant airway blockage. 

Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit flattened on top with a little bit of anterior beaking present.  The condyle is positioned posteriorly almost against the posterior fossa wall.  There is an increased anterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that is extremely narrow anteroposterior and appears to have lost a lot of bony structure anteroposteriorly.  The top of the condyle is peaked almost the entire way through the condyle except at the very lateral aspect.  The condyle also is positioned against the posterior wall of the fossa.  There is a significantly increased anterior joint space.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle has good mediolateral width.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm.  Superior joint space may be a little bit narrow but difficult to tell.  

Right TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There may be some decreased vertical and lateral joint space.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 4-5 mm. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows fairly good skeletal alignment.  The oropharyngeal airway measures about 7.5 mm at the soft palate level and about 3 mm at the base of the tongue.  He has a slight excess tooth lip relationship. 

Diagnoses for Patrick would be as follows:

1.	Bilateral TMJ arthritis and anterior displacement of articular disc, worse on the 	right side than the left side.
2.	Mandibular hyperplasia. 
3.	TMJ pain and myofascial pain. 
4.	Hypertrophied left turbinate causing airway obstruction. 



Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Surgery:
1.	Bilateral TMJ disc repositioning and with Mitek anchors. 
2.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone plate and screw 	
3.	Left partial inferior turbinectomy.  