Shirley Hodges                                                    11/11/05

Shirley Hodges is a 58 year old female referred by Dr. Ronald G.  Smith, at 2420 Quaker Ave, Suite 102, Lubbock, TX 79410.  She's had the following previous surgeries; tonsillectomy, tubal ligation, partial hysterectomy, facelift, rhinoplasty, and removal of melanoma from the left shoulder.  She has chronic sinus problems and a stuffed up nose.  She has a history of asthma and stomach ulcers.  She takes the following medications; Nexium and Allegra D, one capsule each per day.  She has had an adverse reaction to Tylenol 3.

Primary concerns and problems

Jaw joint pain that is getting progressively worse and becoming difficult to   tolerate.
Headaches that are occurring with increased regularity and worsening in pain.
Difficulties eating and chewing that is getting progressively worse.
Splint she has had for the past 6 months is not helping. Pain continues to worsen even wearing the splint 24 hours a day.
The jaw problems are significantly affecting her abilities to carry on normal life activities.
Right side earaches that occur frequently.

History of present illness

Shirley has had TMJ problems all of her adult life of unknown etiology.  During the past eight months her symptoms and pain have gotten significantly worse.  She has worn a splint for the past six months and wears this all the time.  She is very much aware of clinching during the day, which increases her pain even with the splint in place.  She is not aware of clinching at nighttime.

She is having significant problems with right-sided earaches, but has no tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  Other joints that she has problems with include her neck, fingers, and right hip.  She has history of significant sinus problems.

She has headaches about three times per week that occur commonly in the frontal and temporal areas at the level of 3.  She has pain in the TMJ on an average daily level of 5, but frequently the pain escalates to 8.  Average daily pain and headaches are at 5.  Her jaw function is at 5, diet at 5, and disability at 5.

Clinical examination

A frontal view shows that she has good left, right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 28 mm and upper tooth-to-lip relationship is -1 mm.  The nose, maxillary dental, mandibular dental, and chin midlines are all aligned with each other.  In profile view the maxilla is retruded along with the upper lip approximately 3 to 4 mm.  The chin is retruded by 10 to 12 mm.  The chin neckline is short.  The vertical facial heights are fairly well balanced.

Intraorally, the patient has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  All four third molars are absent.  She has a Class II end-on occlusion and a Division 1 incisor relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of 1 mm and an overjet of 4 mm. the transverse occlusal plane is fairly level.  The oral pharyngeal tissues looked healthy.  The uvula, soft palate, and fascial pillars all appear normal.

Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The nasal septum is deviated to the right side.  There is moderate to severe nasal airway obstruction.  The columella is wide and the nostrils are narrow.  She has constricture of the luminal valves bilaterally.  She has severe snoring, mild the daytime somnolence and moderate sleep apnea syndrome.  She has to sleep on her sides or her stomach in order to breathe.  She is a mouth breather at night as well as during the day.  She has frequent arousals at night and an associated sleep disorder.  The sleep disorder is associated with her sleep apnea, as well as her pain.

Her maximal incisal opening is 40 mm and 35 mm without severe pain.  Her right lateral jaw movement is 9 mm and left lateral movement is 6 mm.  These lateral excursive movements create significant pain in the right TMJ in both directions.  The patient has moderate pain over the right master muscle and right styloid areas.

Radiographic evaluation

Panorex: She is missing all four third molars.  She has crowns on the maxillary four incisors.  She has condensing osteitis at the root apexes of the mandibular left second bicuspid and first molar, as well as the right first molar.  Sinuses look clear.  Condyles are arthritic.

Waters view: The sinuses appear clear.  Her turbinates appear quite large and appear to obliterate most of the nasal airway.  The bony nasal septum is reasonably straight.

Right TMJ tomograms: The condyle appears arthritic with some flattening of the posterior and anterior head.  There appears to be decreased posterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomograms: Left condyle appears somewhat arthritic.  There appears to be decreased vertical and poster joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.

Open tomograms: There is fairly good translation of both left and right condyles with left side having slightly greater translation as compared to the right side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph: This shows that the maxilla and mandible are both retruded.  There is a skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship.  There is an overjet relationship of approximately 4 mm.  The occlusal plane is moderately steep.  The oropharyngeal airway is severely constricted with only about 2 mm of airway space between the base of tongue and posterior pharyngeal wall and about 3 mm of space between the soft palate and posterior pharyngeal wall.

Diagnoses

Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and disc deformation.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated anteriorly at the lateral aspect of the joint and medially, but with reduction and less deformation than the right side.
Maxillary hypoplasia.
Mandibular hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Severely decreased, oral pharyngeal airway.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Mild fascial pain.
Hypertrophied turbinates bilaterally.
Nasal septal deviation.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Severe snoring.
Sleep apnea.
Predominantly a mouth breather.
Earaches on the right side.

Recommended treatment

Presurgical orthodontics.  
a.  Align and level the maxillary arch.
b.  Align and level the mandibular arch.
2.  Surgery.
     a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning, and stabilization with Mitek anchor.
     b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise   direction.
     c.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
     d.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
     e.  Nasal septoplasty.
3.  Post surgical orthodontics to finish and retain the occlusion.