NICKOLE HOFFMAN								10-16-02

Nickole is 32 years old and referred by Dr. Wiele (DDS), 950 Francis Place, St. Louis, MO  63105.

Patient History

She is in good health except for her TMJ problems. Nickole’s problems began in about October of 2000 when she woke up one night with right ear pain. She now believes it was probably due to a lot of stress she was under the two months prior to the onset of the problem. She feels that she was probably grinding her teeth at night. Her problems began as ear pain. She went to an ENT doctor, who finally eliminated the potential for an ear etiology and suggested that it could be TMJ. In the meantime, her ear pain developed into headaches. 

She was then referred to an oral surgeon, where she saw Dr. Salacedo in the Philadelphia area. In December of 2000, he made a splint for her. She also was put through physical therapy, and she did get better for about three months then everything got worse again for her. She in the meantime moved back to St. Louis, where from January through June of 2001 she saw Dr. Ken Rotskoff, who injected her joints, and this would relieve her pain, while the local anesthetic lasted. He again put her on splint therapy and modified her previous splint to posture to her lower jaw forward. He also lavaged the joints and did some manipulation, where he felt he got the disc back in place. She felt good for about three days and then everything went awry once again. 

Dr. Rotskoff stopped accepting Nickole’s insurance, and so she then transferred in July of 2001 to Dr. Sclaroff. Because of her severe pain, in July of 2001 he performed right TMJ arthroplasty including eminectomy, arthroplasty, and fossaplasty. She did fine for a short time except she developed a right tympanic membrane infection referred to as a bullous myringitis. That was cleared in about 14 days but did cause severe pain for her while it was present. She then went through physical therapy, but this resulted in some limited movements. More TMJ injections were done, and while the local anesthetic was in effect, she had good pain relief, but once it wore off, the pain returned. 

In October of 2001, Dr. Sclaroff took her back to surgery once again and did an additional right TMJ arthroplasty. This helped her for a short time, and then the problems got bad again. She then went to see Dr. Wile in April of 2002, who made a new bite plate for her. The bite plate was constructed with “side bars” which seemed to decrease her pain to a more tolerable level. She has attempted to have the side bars removed, but this does cause significant pain problems for Nickole.

She has no trouble with earaches but does get occasional right-sided tinnitus. She has no problems with vertigo. No other joints bother her. She does have an ALLERGY TO NICKEL and cannot wear cheap earrings. Currently she does not feel she has any problems with nocturnal clenching or bruxism. She has a little bit of numbness in the right preauricular area but nowhere else. Facial nerve functions normally. She rates pain in the temporal area and posterior head area at about a level of 4 on the right side normally and is there consistently, but the pain can escalate up to a 7 in those areas. Her TMJ pain on the right side is constant at a level of 5 but can escalate to a level of 9. Her pain level on an average day is rated at a level of 6, jaw function at 3, diet at 4, disability at 5. 

Current Medications

Flexeril 10 mg q.h.s.
Aleve 1 tablet b.i.d. 
OxyContin 10 mg q.12h. p.r.n. pain.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Nickole has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about a millimeter off to the left side. Chin is probably just slightly off to the left side as well. 

In profile, Nickole has some nice facial symmetry and balance.

Intraorally, Nickole has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch that might be splint related. In the upper arch, she likewise has all of her teeth back through the second molars. As she bites her teeth together, she has an end-on incisor relationship. She hits only on her incisors, and all other teeth are open and apart. She has a Class III cuspid relationship being probably 4 mm Class III bilaterally. She bites probably 3 mm at least on the left side and probably 2 mm on the right side. Maxillary arch is fairly level transversely. Mandibular arch is lower on the left side than the right side. Has almost a complete anterior crossbite. From a facial standpoint, the right side of the mandible appears to be up about a millimeter or two compared to the left side.

To palpation, she has moderate pain on the right side only in the masseter, medial pterygoid, TMJ area, and milder pain in the right side only temporalis, styloid area, SCMs, posterior neck, and shoulder area. Maximal incisal opening is 35 mm, and this doesn’t cause her any really significant pain. Excursive movement to the right about 7 mm and to the left actually she gets about 4 mm of movement. Joints actually seem to function fairly smoothly on opening, except on the right side in excursive movements, she has a click that does occur. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Sinuses appear clear. Nasal airway appears clear. Right TMJ appears as though there may be some degenerative changes around the joint but difficult to tell on this view. No other pathology noted.

Waters view shows the sinuses all appear clear. Turbinates are moderate in size. Foreshortening of the mandible on the right side as compared to the left side. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle whose morphology actually doesn’t look too bad, although there may be some degenerative changes on top. However, there are significant degenerative changes in the fossa. Joint space actually looks reasonably good. There just are significant bony changes in the fossa compatible with significant degenerative changes in that area.

Left TMJ shows a condyle that has some anterior beaking and a little bit of flattening on the anterosuperior head. Joint space, however, actually looks good. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Fossa appears to be intact. 

On opening, there is moderate translation of the left condyle and some restricted translation on the right side. 

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class I relationship but Class III occlusal relationship. Lower incisors are tipped quite a ways forward probably as a result of the long-term splint therapy. Oropharyngeal airway space appears a little bit constricted.

Basic Diagnoses

Right TMJ severe arthritis and severe degeneration of the articular disc as well as disc dislocation.
Mandibular prognathism.
Class III occlusion.
Accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch.
Bilateral posterior open bites extending from the lateral incisors through the second molars, being greater on the left side (3 mm) as compared to the right side (2 mm).
End-on incisor relationship.
Overangulation of lower incisors.
Severe right TMJ pain.
Severe right-sided headaches.
Moderate to severe right-sided myofascial pain.

Recommended Treatment

CT scan of bilateral TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth to correct for an apparent tooth-size discrepancy and close the spacing.

Surgery
Right TMJ condylectomy, menisectomy, debridement, mandibular setback, and TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Right TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).
Left mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy with bone screw stabilization.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion