SUSAN HOFFMAN									10/27/2007

Susan is 36 years old and is referred by Dr. Peter Crump, 24 S. Gore Ave., St. Louis, MO 63119.  Susan is 5 feet 1 inch and weighs 99 pounds.  On June 23, 2006, she was playing whiffleball and fell striking her chin.  She required sutures in her chin.  She sustained bilateral subcondylar fractures.  Her jaw was wired together for 6 weeks.  She then wore 2 weeks of training bands after that.  Arch bars were removed at that time and that is when her jaw malalignment problems were first identified.  She has had some physical therapy as well.  

In frontal view, Susan has more fullness on the left side of the face than the right side by probably 4 to 5 mm.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm on the left and 2 mm on the right.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted off to the right side probably about 1 to 2 mm.  Chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, Susan may have 2 to 3 mm AP deficiency in the maxilla.  Chin is retruded approximately 22 mm.  Chin-neckline is extremely short.  Intraorally, Susan has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has some crowns on the first and second molars.  She has a blocked-out right lateral incisor to the lingual side.  A little bit of crowding in the lower arch of probably about 4 to 5 mm.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has an accentuated curve of Spee with the 4 incisors elevated significantly above the cuspids.  She occludes only on her second molars with the rest of her teeth out of occlusion.  Susan has a 4 mm anterior open bite.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being about 4 to 5 mm Class II.  Oropharyngeal areas look relatively normal tissue-wise.  The uvula is moderately elongated.  The soft palate is mildly elongated.  Faucial pillars may be just mildly constricted.  Susan has found that her swallowing has been affected since her injury and it is much more difficult for her to swallow, particularly for instance, swallowing a pill.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  She has a significant septal spur off the left side of the nose that seems to partially block the airway.  Turbinate appears small in that particular area but appears to be larger behind the spur.  She does not report any significant problems with snoring, daytime somnolence and sleep apnea problems. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows bilaterally fractured condyles.  The left condyle is vertically overlapped and anteriorly displaced out of the fossa.  The right condyle is fractured and displaced almost in a posterior direction.  The condyle and the condylar neck vertically overlap on both sides.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Susan has an anterior open bite and retruded mandible.  Vertical height of the angles of the mandible are differentiated with one side being significantly higher than the other side by probably 6 or 8 mm.  She does have an anterior open bite of probably 4 to 5 mm.  Oropharyngeal airway space is significantly reduced posteriorly being only probably 3 mm at the base of the tongue and maybe 4 to 5 mm at the soft palate level. 




SUSAN HOFFMAN				10/27/2006				Page 2


BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral mandibular subcondylar fractures.
AP mandibular retrusion. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Slight AP maxillary deficiency.
High mandibular occlusal plane angle.
Anterior open bite of about 4 to 5 mm.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Occluding only on the second molars.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 Difficulties eating and chewing.
 Difficulties swallowing.
 Crowding of lower anterior arch.
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm. 
 Increased curve of Spee in maxillary arch.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Extrude maxillary incisors about 1 mm or so to correct the reverse curve of Spee.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 3 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy. 
CT scans of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgical option 1.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the chin.
Surgical option 2.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
HTR implant to anterior mandible.
Surgical option 3.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry. 
