CELIA HOLCOMB									06/12/2006

Celia is 23 years old, referred by Dr. James Phillips.  She is in good health.  She does have some problems with anemia but as of December of 2005, her hemoglobin and hematocrit were within normal range.  The only medication she takes is Advil.  She has had an adverse reaction to Ultracet.  Her orthodontist is Dr. Scott Allen, 911 Osler Dr., Jonesboro, AR 72401.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Headaches.
Jaw aches mostly after eating and while eating.
Difficulties gaining weight.
Underbite jaw relationship.

In frontal view, Celia has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Nasal tip is a little bit off to the right side by about 2 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is off to the left about 1.5 mm.  Chin is probably 2 mm off to the left side.  Celia gives no history of trauma to her nose.  In profile, the upper lip appears to be deficient by 3 mm or so.  Chin is a little bit prominent by maybe 2 to 3 mm.  Chin-neckline may be just slightly long.  Chin-neck angle is very well defined.  Celia has a high occlusal mandibular plane angle and facial morphology.  She has some slight increased fullness in the left angle area maybe 1 to 2 mm at the most.  Also, some slight vertical elongation on the left side of maybe 1 to 2 mm.  Intraorally, Celia has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has appliances on all the teeth including the second molars.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She is almost a full Class III cuspid molar relationship.  She has an anterior and left posterior crossbite.  She has about ½ mm reverse overbite relationship.  She has a reverse overjet of probably approximately 7 mm.  Both arches are fairly symmetric.  As Celia shifts her mandible about 1.5 mm to the right to align her dental midlines, the posterior crossbites are a little bit better balanced and a little bit more equal.  Transverse occlusal plane in the maxilla is fairly level although the right side may be down about ½ mm compared to the left side.  Oropharyngeal area looks relatively normal.  The uvula is a little bit elongated.  The soft palate length looks relatively normal.  Faucial pillars may be just mildly to moderately constricted but not too significant.  Her tonsils are present and are normal in size.  Intranasally, the septum appears to be deviated off towards the left side but there is some septal type spur coming off towards the right side at the base of the floor.  Left turbinate appears large and boggy filling a good portion of the nasal airway.  The right side, at least anteriorly, the turbinate appears to be a little bit more normal in size.  The columella is wide and the nostrils are constricted.  The luminal valves look relatively normal.  She probably has at least moderate nasal airway obstruction.  Dental models show that there appears to be slight tooth size discrepancy probably secondary to small upper lateral incisors.  Tooth size analysis shows a Bolton’s difference of about 1.5 to 2 mm.  To palpation, Celia has some high moderate pain over the TMJs to palpation but no other pain around the head and neck area.  Maximal incisal opening is about 47 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is about 9 mm, to the left 5 mm.  


CELIA HOLCOMB				06/12/2006				Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  All the other teeth are present.  Midline is fairly good except the left cuspid root has a mild dilaceration associated with it and it is actually tipped forward.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  Turbinates appear enlarged particularly on the left side.  Condylar heads and necks appear elongated particularly on the right side.  There does not appear to be a coronoid process on the right side.  The left side appears that there is still one present.  There appears to be a neurovascular canal that is fairly high on the ramus.  
Dr. Phillips did begin the surgery on the right ramus where he realized the anatomical difficulties.  

Waters view shows that the bony septum at least is reasonably straight.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged and the nasal airway is constricted.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa with decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  Increased anterior joint space.  Condylar head and neck is long and the absence of the coronoid process is noted.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has decreased joint space vertically.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  The condylar head and neck are somewhat elongated.  On opening there is fairly good translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Celia has a Class III occlusal relationship.  Slight reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch is present.  Oropharyngeal airway is larger than normal.  There is a Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ condylar hyperplasia (arrested.)
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations. 
Mandibular deviated prognathism. 
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Vertical maxillary excess.
Class III occlusion.
Anterior and left-sided crossbites. 
TMJ pain.
Headaches. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. 
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.
CELIA HOLCOMB				06/12/2006				Page 3


Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly, advance and expand. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible posteriorly.
Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I did do an analysis comparing a lateral cephalogram taken by Dr. Allen in December of 2004.  Compared to today’s radiograph of which we had an exact magnification between both radiographs, it demonstrated no further mandibular growth.  