RODNEY HOLCOMB								03/30/2009

Rodney is 53 years old.  Referred by Dr. Richard Ingraham, 5525 S. Staples, Corpus Christi, TX 78411.  Rodney is in good health with no major medical problems.  Rodney gets headaches about three times a week in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally at about a level of 6.  He rates his TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 8, diet at 3, disability at 3.  To the best of Rodney’s knowledge, his joint problems began when he was about 15 to 16 years old in 1969 to 1970 of unknown etiology.  He did have orthodontic treatment from the age of 48 to 50 and then began orthodontics for the second time in December 2008.  He has no trouble with earaches, but gets occasional tinnitus and vertigo and has some hearing loss.  The only other joints that really bother him are his knees and this is due primarily to sports injuries.  He is aware of clenching his teeth at night and also some during the day.  He apparently demonstrates moderate snoring and moderate daytime somnolence which has become more of a problem recently.  He may have some moderate sleep apnea problems, but he observes this more in the day where he has difficulties catching his breath.  He has a mild to moderate sleep disorder and tosses and turns a lot at night.  He is predominantly a nasal breather most of the time. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Rodney has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about zero.  The maxillary midline is pretty much close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline may be just slightly off to the right side.  The chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, Rodney has fairly good balance with the upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  The mandible appears retruded about 15 to 18 mm.  Maxilla may be back just 1 to 2 mm.  Chin neckline is short.  He has a slight head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, Rodney has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  The teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.  He has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth actually back through the third molars on the right side and second molar on the left side.  Rodney has almost a full Class II end-on cuspid relationship being probably 5 to 6 mm Class II.  He has an overjet of about 2 to 3 mm.  He has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  The oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal.  Soft palate may be just a little bit elongated.  Fascial pillars could be a little bit constricted.  The septum is deviated anteriorly off to the right side and then off the left side just posterior to the anterior aspect of the septum.  Turbinates appear fairly large.  There may be a moderate amount of nasal airway obstruction.  Rodney states he has difficulties getting enough air breathing through his nose.  The columella is moderately wide.  Luminal valves are mildly constricted.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  I-CAT:  Panorex shows the presence of maxillary right erupted third molar, but the other third molars are gone.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Articular eminences are moderately steep in both joints.  
Axial view shows that the maxillary sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates are significantly enlarged.  Septum is deviated off towards the right side, and there is a spur in the posterior aspect of the bony septum.  
In the coronal view, the sinuses are clear.  The septum is deviated off towards the right side.  Turbinates are quite large.
Left TMJ sagittal tomograms shows condyle that has moderately good morphology.  There is some slight anterior beaking present.  Joint space looks slightly increased in thickness superiorly and also posteriorly.  Articular eminence is quite steep. 
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with some flattening on the anterior head.  Joint space looks fairly well balance.  In fact, there is a slight increased posterior and superior joint space in some of the views likely related to chronic posturing of the mandible forward.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows that there is a decreased lateral joint space, but the medial and superior joint space looks good.  This would go along with the MRI findings of medially displaced articular disc.  Some mild arthritic changes are present.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.     
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased lateral joint space compatible with medial displacement of the articular disc as seen on the MRI.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Rodney has an AP mandibular hypoplasia.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate measures slightly under 5 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 5 to 6 mm.  

To palpation,  Rodney has some mild tenderness over the masseter muscles and left TMJ.  On jaw opening, he has audible clicking and popping bilaterally.  It appears on opening at about 10 mm and on closing at about 5 mm.  Rodney states that when he chews that the noise is loud enough that people can hear it across the room.  Maximal incisal opening is 51 mm, excursion movement to the right 12 mm, to the left 10 mm.

For medications, Rodney does take ibuprofen for his headaches as needed. 

Basic diagnoses for Rodney would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation anterior and medially with reduction. 
Severe AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Class II occlusion. 
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.  
TMJ pain, myofascial pain, and headaches. 
Sleep apnea.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Deviated nasal septum.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Malaligned maxillary right third molar.





Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make just a little bit more room for interdental osteotomies, if they are necessary. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.    
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction bringing pogonion forward approximately 18 mm.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Nasal septoplasty.
Extract maxillary right third molar. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
