ALLISON HOLLEK									07/19/2010

Allison is 19 years old, birth date 11/21/1990.  She will be starting her sophomore year at Texas A&M this fall.  Allison had orthodontics from 2003 through 2004 and then again from August 2006 to May  2008.  She had double jaw orthognathic surgery in May 2007.  Prior to the surgery, she wore a splint from February 2006 to August 2006.  She received another splint post surgery in 2008 and has been wearing it since that time.  

Allison became aware of having TMJ problems at age of 15 in 2005.  The joint symptoms began shortly after she had her wisdom teeth removed.  She developed a closed lock situation with inability to open her jaw very wide.  She had no real other overt symptoms.  Following the orthognathic surgery, she actually felt much better for a while and it has only been more recently in the last 6 months that she has developed headaches, popping, locking, as well as TMJ pain and headaches.  Allison gets headaches that can occur daily at a level of 5 that are predominantly in the temporal and frontal area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 6, diet at 5, disability at 4.  She has no earaches or hearing loss, but gets occasional tinnitus and vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime.

Primary concerns Allison has include the following:

She had surgery to fix the bite, but her bite is still shifting and moving. 
Headaches. 
Locking and popping in the jaw joints.

In frontal view, Allison has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  The left eye may be about 2 mm lower than the right eye.  Upper lip length is 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 3.5 on the left and 4 on the right.  Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Allison has some AP deficiency of the maxilla of probably 3 to 4 mm at the incisal edge.  Chin is retruded 12 to 15 mm.  Chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Allison has a lip incompetence of about 7 mm.  She shows about 4 mm of her lower incisors.  Intraorally, Allison has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  The teeth are fairly aligned and leveled.  In the upper arch, Allison has all of her teeth  back through the second molars.  Allison has a Class II end-on occlusal relationship, being approximately 2 to 3 mm Class II.  She has an overjet of about 2 mm.  She has about a 1 mm vertical overbite relationship.  In centric relation when she closes down, she hits prematurely on the left side and around the first and second molar area.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the left turbinate appears enlarged.  The septum may be just slightly off towards the right side.  The right turbinate, at least anteriorly, does not look as big as the left side.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the masseters, TMJs, retromandibular area.  On opening and closing she has some crepitus sounds in the jaw joints.  The maximal incisal opening is 55 mm, opening without pain and discomfort 34 mm.  Excursion movements to the right is 7 mm, to the left 8 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of 3 bone screws in each ramus area.  In the maxillary, there is a bone plate in the paranasal area bilaterally and an additional bone screw on the right side as well.  There are six screws in each plate.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has lost significant condylar volume vertically as well as some anteroposteriorly.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  The joint space looks reasonably good.  At the lateral aspect of the joint, the condyle is quite flattened with perhaps a posterior osteophyte sticking off the end.  

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram likewise shows a condyle that appears small in size and appears to have lost vertical and anteroposterior volume.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  Joint space looks reasonably good, although somewhat decreased posteriorly.  The condyle appears more deformed at the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has more of a mushroom type shape to it.  There is definite loss of vertical volume.  The joint space appears reasonably good.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that demonstrates loss of vertical volume.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The condyle also has a mushroom shape to it.  

Coronal radiograph shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The nasal septum deviates a little bit off towards the right side.  The sinuses are reasonably clear, although there is one area where there is some fat impingement into the fossa.  

Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The sinuses are reasonably clear. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Allison has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  She has a skeletal and occlusal Class II jaw relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway is reasonably good up high, but at the base of the tongue measure about 6 mm.  The maxilla appears to be retruded AP wise and also appears to be posterior vertical deficient.  The mandible is AP deficient.  

Basic diagnoses for Allison would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction (compatible with adolescent internal condylar resorption: AICR).  
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia but anterior vertical hyperplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle. 
TMJ pain.
Headaches. 

Because the TMJ articular discs are displaced, non-reducing, and significantly degenerated as well as she is a college student going back to school this fall, I am making the following recommendations:

1.	Surgery Stage 1:  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with 	Mitek anchor. 
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch. 
3.	Surgery Stage 2.
	a.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 				counterclockwise direction. 
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 