MARIANNE HONG									09/12/2008

Marianne is 59 years old, referred by Dr. Michael Arvystas, 24 Washington Square North, New York City, NY 10011.  Marianne is in good health except for her current jaw problems.  She does have an ovarian cyst right now that is being evaluated.  She has also had breast biopsy done in the past and a myomectomy.  She does have thalassemia minor.  Marianne has been under some extensive dental work for a time period.  In May 2006, she began noticing some changes in her jaw alignment.  By the end of 2006 and 2007, her bite changed and moved.  She had fairly significant pain for a while throughout the head and neck area including headaches and myofascial pain problems.  She was seeing Dr. Isabella Farmer for a number of years to take care of her dental work.  In approximately March 2008, she saw Dr. Michael Arvystas who began orthodontic treatment.  She has had no other major treatment.  Currently, the primary concerns that Marianne has includes the following:

Lower jaw feels pulled back. 
She feels that there is not adequate tongue space. 
Numbness and tired feeling through the lower jaw and neck area. 
Chewing causes the temples, eye areas, nasal area, shoulders, neck, and jaw areas feeling extremely tired.  

She currently takes no medications, although she is taking some supplements.  

Marianne gets headaches in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area at about a level of 5.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 4, diet at 5, disability at 4.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  She gets earaches occasionally and vertigo occasionally, but does have tinnitus more often.  No other joints appear to be a problem.  She does not snore, but has some mild daytime tiredness but is not aware of sleep apnea problems.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Marianne has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -2 mm.  The maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are about 1 mm or so off to the left side.  The chin is probably about 2 to 3 mm off to the left side.  In profile view, Marianne has good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  The chin may be just slightly retruded maybe about 4 to 5 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle, however, is well defined.   Intraorally, Marianne is missing the mandibular left second bicuspid, first molar, and on the right side is missing the mandibular right first and second bicuspid and first molar.  She has second molars in left and right side of the mandible.  In upper arch, she has an implant in the left central incisor, but the rest are her natural teeth.  She is missing maxillary bicuspid in each arch and perhaps it is the first bicuspid.  She is fairly close to a Class I cuspid relationship.  She has a vertical overbite relationship of about 1.5 mm.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about almost 2 mm higher than the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Fascials appear moderate in size.  Intranasally, the right turbinate appears fairly large, but left one at least anteriorly appears more normal in size.  Luminal valves appear constricted bilaterally.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles, TMJs, and SCMs.  Joints seem to function reasonably smooth.  Maximal incisal opening is about 46 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 8 mm, to the left 7 mm. 
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that she has implants in the mandibular right bicuspid first molar area x2 and in the maxillary left central incisor.  She has a root canal on the maxillary left cuspid.  She also has a root canal on the mandibular right second molar.  The condyles show a little flattening on the anterior heads.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  
Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum in the bony area is reasonably straight.  The right turbinate is enlarged compared to the left side.  A little bit of vertical asymmetry is seen with the left side being shorter vertically as compared to the right side. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a slight skeletal Class II relationship and maybe just a slight Class II cuspid relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted with an airway dimension of about 5 mm at the base of the tongue and about 7 mm at the base of the soft palate.  
Basic diagnoses for Marianne would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated with early reduction. 
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia and slight AP maxillary hypoplasia.  
AP mandibular hypoplasia.  
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm (normal airway 11 mm).
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
Slight Class II occlusal relationship in centric occlusion. 
Missing mandibular left second bicuspid, first molar, mandibular right first bicuspid, second bicuspid, and first molar. 
Missing maxillary first bicuspids.  
Missing maxillary left central incisor. 
Dental implants placed in the mandibular right bicuspid and first molar area as well as the maxillary left central incisor. 
High occlusal plane angulation. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Hold current maxillary alignment.    
Hold current mandibular alignment.  
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction bringing progonion forward about 7 to 8 mm.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomy to down graft the posterior aspect and advance slightly, decreasing the occlusal plane angle. 
3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

