THOMAS BRAD HOOD							03/16/2011

Brad is 42 years old.  Primary concerns that Brad has includes the following:

Bone loss on the left side of face, jaw and forehead area. 
Bad bite and difficulties eating.
Pain issues involving the TMJ and also some headaches.  

His jaw problems probably began back in his teenage years as he has some photographs showing he had some facial asymmetry at that time.  However, it was not until he was about 40 and in around August 2009 when he developed shingles on the left side of his face and scalp area.  It was then be became aware of his jaw issues.  He currently gets headaches about once a month at about a level of 3 in the temple areas.  He rates his TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 2, diet at 2, disability at 5.  He has had no treatment today for his jaw problems.  He takes no medications.  No earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  Other joints that cause him some problems include his knees and his shoulders.  He is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also during the day.

In frontal view, Brad has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  The left eye might be inferiorly positioned about 2 mm compared to the right eye.  The maxillary dental midline is off to the left side about 2 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is off to the left about 3 mm.  The chin is off to the left about 10 mm.  Upper lip length is 24 mm, tooth exposed on the left 1 mm and on the right side 0.  Brad has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane where the left maxillary and mandibular cuspids are up to 2.5 to 3 mm compared to the right side.  He has increased fullness of the right side transversely of about 5 mm.  Inferior border of the mandible is inferiorly positioned on the right side about 8 mm compared to the left side.  In profile, lips are retruding maybe 2 to 3 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded about 8 mm.  The chin neckline is short and the chin neck angle is not well-defined.  Intraorally, Brad has all of his lower teeth back through second molars.  There is moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch.  The cuspid on the left side is about 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  In the upper arch, Brad has all of his all teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch, the left cuspid may be about 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  Brad has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship but has a cross bite on the left side.  Anteriorly, he has got a 0.5 mm overbite on the left side and 0.5 mm open bite on the right side in the incisor area.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy.  Tonsils are enlarged and there are some areas where he has a crypts, particularly on the left side.  In centric relation, Brad’s mandible shifts a little bit more towards the left side.  His right side then disoccludes for the most part.  The left side does not fit together very well, but he does hit on that side predominantly in the cuspid area.  

Brad reports no problems with snoring, daytime somnolence, sleep apnea, but does say that he has moderate sleep disorder which just developed and has gotten worse in the last couple of years.  To palpation, Brad has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints function reasonably smoothly.  The incisal opening is 65 mm, excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  He has a root canal in the maxillary right second molar and mandibular left first molar.  He has crowns on the mandibular first molars and maxillary right second molar.  Left mandibular condyle and condylar neck are elongated compared to the left side.  On the left side, the condyle is smaller in size than the right side.  The sinuses look relatively clear and bony septum appears relatively straight.

Coronal view shows the septum is reasonably straight.  Turbinates are normal in size and there appears to be good functional airway.  Sinuses are clear.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates are normal in size and septum is straight.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is small in size and appears to have undergone some resorption.  The joint space actually is reasonably good except it is narrowed at the lateral aspect of the joint in a vertical direction.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  Out lateral, there appears to be an additional calcified process.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The joint space looks fairly well balanced and almost increased in dimension.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good mediolateral width, although not quite as wide as the opposite side.  There is decreased lateral joint space, but also some decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 or 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  The condyle almost extends beyond the lateral rim of the fossa.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is a slight skeletal Class II relationship.  The mandible may be moderately retruded.  Oropharyngeal airway looks good.  Tongue is held in a low position in the mouth.  Vertical discrepancy is not seen as great in this film likely due to head posturing when the film was taken.  

Basic diagnoses for Brad would include the following:

Right TMJ osteochondroma.
Left mandibular arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe deformation and nonreducing.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and vertical asymmetry with the right side 2.5 to 3 mm lower than the left side. 
Maxillary AP and transverse asymmetry with the right side being 2.5 to 3 mm lower than the left side.  
Posterior yaw with the maxilla and mandible being shifted towards the right side approximately 5 mm. 
Left posterior cross bite.
Hitting prematurely on the left side in centric relation with an open bite on the right side. 
Crowding in the lower anterior arch.
Mild crowding in the maxillary anterior arch.

Recommended treatment would include the following:

1.	Bone scan of TMJs.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Open up 1 			mm of space between the upper cuspids and lateral incisors as the upper 			lateral incisors are small in size.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch. 
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Left TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts 		total joint prostheses.
	b.	Right TMJ low condylectomy to remove the osteochondroma and 				reposition the articular disc with a Mitek anchor. 
	c.	Fat grafts to the left TMJ (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, correct the 				posterior yaw, and level transversely.  
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  