CATHERINE (ANNA-CLAIRE) HOOVER						07/06/2009

Catherine is 18 years old and referred by Dr. Richard Burt, 71 Richardson Heights Village, Richardson, TX 75080, phone #972-235-6768.

Primary concerns that Anna-Claire has is that her teeth do not fit together.  She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function, diet and disability all at zero.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her left knee and left wrist.

She takes the following medications:

Nexium. 
Celexa.
Seasonique (BCP)

She did have some previous orthodontics which included a palate expander and she had braces to align her front teeth in the upper arch.  This was done by Dr. Michael Plunk.  Anna-Claire is not aware of having any significant problems breathing through her nose, but at night she may breathe through both nose and mouth.  She has no sleep apnea issues. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Anna-Claire has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The maxillary dental midline may be about 1 mm off to the right.  The chin appears to be fairly well aligned as well.  In profile, Anna-Claire has some AP maxillary deficiency.  The maxilla may be retruded about 4-5 mm at the supralabrale.  Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably 2 mm.  She actually appears to have reasonably good AP projection of the chin and chin neckline and chin neck angle are reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has an accentuated curve of Spee and crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has a 90 degree rotation of the mandibular right second bicuspid.  She also has a significant malrotation of the left bicuspid.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has had first bicuspids extracted.  She has a full Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally.  She has an anterior reversed deep bite of probably 6-7 mm.  She has a slight reverse curve of Spee in upper arch and significantly accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.  She has anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy.  Tonsils are present and they are just mildly enlarged.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the left side.  The left turbinate is moderate in size and appears to be almost touching the septum.  Right side is quite open.  Maximal incisal opening is 61 mm, excursion movement to the right 9 mm, to the left 7 mm.  She has no pain to palpation around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function smoothly.  Anna-Claire has a transverse cant in the occlusion with the maxillary left cuspid being about 1-2 mm higher than the right cuspid.  In the lower arch, there is also a transverse cant with the left cuspid being 1-2 mm higher than the right cuspid.  


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex evaluation shows that there are impacted maxillary third molars, but the lower third molars are absent.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  Bony septum is reasonably straight and turbinates appear moderate in size.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints.  
Axial view shows the sinuses appear reasonably clear.  Left turbinate appears fairly large and the right one appears moderate in size.  
In the coronal view, the septum appears reasonably straight in the bony area.  Turbinates appear enlarged, particularly on the left side.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.
Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking.  Joint space actually looks fairly well balanced.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has fairly good shape with just some slight anterior beaking.  Joint space looks fairly well balanced.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.
Left TMJ coronal view shows that there may be a slight decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint, however, the vertical joint space looks normal.  Lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 3-4 mm.   
Right TMJ coronal tomograms show slight decreased lateral joint space, but vertical joint space appears relatively normal.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 mm.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal and occlusal Class III relationship.  She was not biting down all the way when this x-ray was taken.  Oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal.  Lower incisors appear to have some lingual inclination.  Occlusal plane may be just slightly elevated.  Anna-Claire has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2.5 mm.  Placing the models into a Class I cuspid relationship shows that she still has bilateral crossbite tendencies.  Reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch is noted too when the models are placed into a Class I cuspid relatively.  

Basic diagnoses for Anna-Claire would be as follows:    

Maxillary AP transverse and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular prognathism.
Class III occlusion.
Anterior reversed deep bite of 6-7 mm.
Class III cuspid relationship.
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal airway obstruction.
Impacted maxillary third molars x2. 
Significant crowding in the lower anterior arch.
Missing maxillary first bicuspids that were extracted previously for orthodontic reasons.
Accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch and reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2.5 mm.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1-2 mm shorter vertically than the right side. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Open up 1 mm of space between each maxillary lateral and cuspid to correct for the tooth size discrepancy. 
Align and level mandibular arch trying the level the excessive curve of Spee.
Surgery. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it maxilla forward approximately 6-7 mm, expand it approximately 5 mm, and down graft it posteriorly approximately 4 mm.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to counterclockwise rotate the mandible and transversely level it.  
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Surgical removal of maxillary third molars x2.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
