DAVID HOPKINS								01/28/2011

David is 49 years old and referred by Dr. Frank Stitch, 495 S. Denton Tap Road, Coppell, TX 75019. 

Primary concern that David has is sleep apnea.  Dr. Keith Thornton has been treating David for the past 10 years with sleep aid devices to posture the lower jaw forward.  It has been noted that there has probably been some changes in the dental alignment perhaps related to these devices.  David has no problems with headaches, TMJ problems, myofascial pain, etc.  He has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He is aware of clenching at nighttime probably with the devices in position.  

In frontal view, David has fairly good left-to-right facial asymmetry.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is about 1 mm to the left.  The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm to the right.  The chin is pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 8 mm and chin is retruded about 18 to 20 mm.  Intraorally, David has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.  He only has three lower incisors.  The lower incisors are over angulated.  There is good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  Transverse width of the maxilla is narrow.  He has a full Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally.  In fact, his lower dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline since there are only three lower incisors.  He has anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites.  He has a reverse deep bite of 1 mm.  It appears that his mandibular right central incisors that is missing.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy and normal.  Soft palate may be slightly long but not too bad.  Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The septum is deviated at the base off to the left side and more centrally off to the right side.  To palpation, there is no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints function smoothly, but he does translate anterior to the articular eminence and a little bit of noise is generated with that movement, however, the discs seem to be in position.  The incisal opening is 51 mm.  The excursion movements were difficult to measure, but I estimate they are probably about 8 mm in each direction.  Protrusion is very good.   With his sleep device, he probably has mild snoring and without it he probably has moderate snoring.  He has moderate daytime somnolence.  He has been diagnosed with sleep apnea.  He feels that he does breath a lot through his mouth at night.  He does breath through his mouth some during the day as well.  He does have a head postured forward neck position.  He has not been placed on a CPAP as the oral device has managed him reasonably well so far.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars as well as the mandibular right central incisor.  The sinuses are clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  

Bilateral TMJ films shows that the condyles have fairly normal architecture with good joint spaces bilaterally.  In the coronal views, there is decreased joint space bilaterally at the lateral rim of the fossas.  In both sides, the fossas curve inferiorly about 3 or 4 mm.  In the mid part of the joints, the joint space looks good.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The turbinates are fairly large compared to the transverse width of the nose.  The transverse width of the nose is narrowly constricted.  Middle turbinates are quite large as well.  The entire transverse width of the nose superior to the inferior base is constricted.  

Axial view shows that the turbinates are enlarged relative to the width of the nose and appear to be blocking most of the airway.  He has a septal spur off of the left side of the nose at about the anterior aspect of the maxillary wall.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that David has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  The lower incisors are over angulated, even though there are just three of them.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 mm at the soft palate level and about 6 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Dental model analysis reveals that David is missing mandibular right second incisor, but has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars.  There is a little bit of spacing between the lower second bicuspids and first molars.  Upper lateral incisors appear small in size.  Simply hand articulating the models into a Class I cuspid relationship seemed to give us a good jaw relationship.  

Basic diagnoses for David would be as follows:

Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia. 
Class III occlusion. 
High occlusal plane angle. 
Missing mandibular right central incisor. 
Over-angulation of lower incisors.  
Anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially 			and cuspid roots distally in case interdental osteotomies are necessary. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch. Consider some expansion of the lower 			arch and retraction of the incisors.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction. 
	c.	Partial nasal turbinectomies. 
	d.	Nasal septoplasty.
	e.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy. 
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  