#DYLAN HOPKINS								12/21/2009

Dylan is a 16-year-old male referred by Dr. Farhad Moshiri, 1320 E. Kingsley, Springfield, MO 65804.   Dylan does not present with any significant TMJ problem.  He has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain, earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  To palpation, he has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  He rates his jaw function, diet,  disability at 0.  His incisal opening is 64 mm.  Excursion movements are 8 mm in each direction.  He has a full Class III occlusion on the left side and a super Class III occlusion on the right side.  He has an 9 mm anterior open bite and occludes only on his first and second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion.  He has a cross bite on the right side and also anteriorly.  He has had previous orthodontic treatment to include maxillary expander and head gear, but is not in appliances at this time.  He takes some medication for his acne (SMZ/TMPDS 800/160).    

Clinical examination shows that Dylan has an upper lip length of 22 mm and an upper tooth lip relationship of 2 mm.  He has a transverse cant in the occlusal plan with the right side being about 2 mm lower than the left side in the cuspid area.  The maxillary midline is shifted 1-2 mm to the left, the mandibular dental midline is 1 mm to the right.   The right ring is essentially a little bit more full than the left side 1 to 2 mm.  In profile, the maxilla appears retruded by 3-4 mm and the chin appears retruded by about 10-15 mm.  He has a lip incompetence of about 10 mm.  He has an accentuated curve of Wilson in the upper arch and an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch as well.  His oropharyngeal tissues are healthy and appear normal.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  He has no history of snoring nor sleep apnea, but does have some mild daytime somnolence.  He does have a moderate macroglossia.  

Radiographic evaluation shows that he has all of his teeth back through the third molars with at least the mandibular ones partially erupted and the maxillary right one may be erupted, but the left one is still impacted.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates appear enlarged.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints, but the condylar head and necks appear somewhat elongated.  He has a huge anterior open bite.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  His turbinates are fairly large particularly on the right side.  Septum appears reasonably straight. 

Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged with the right side being the largest.  It appears that there is a septal spur present extending towards the right side of the nose.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology and fairly good joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  There is slight decreased anterior joint space, but for the most part it looks reasonable.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has moderately good width.  There is some joint space present, but the discs are likely thin if they are in place.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a little bit more space than the left side and the condyle has fairly good shape.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm. 

Lateral cephalogram shows that he has a deficiency in maxillary projection and Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship.  He has a large anterior open bite and a high mandibular occlusal plane angle, but the maxillary occlusal plane angle is a little bit more normal.  He does have an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.  He has a decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of about 4.5 mm at the soft palate level and almost 7 mm at the base of the tongue.  Maxillary and mandibular incisors are over angulated.  

In evaluating the models, it appears that the break in the occlusal plane in the upper arch is between the cuspids and first bicuspids.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia.
Mandibular prognathism.
Large anterior open bite of 9 mm.
Class III occlusion.
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.
Over angulation of the maxillary and mandibular incisors.
Macroglossia.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Malalignment of third molars x4.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.  
a.	Align and level maxillary arch.    Place a step in the arch wire between cuspids and first bicuspids.  Tip cuspid roots mesially and first bicuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
b.	Align and level mandibular arch.   
2.	Surgery. 
a.	Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.  
b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly, level the occlusal plane, y correct for any transverse discrepancies.   
c.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
d.	Reduction glossectomy.
e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
f.	Surgical removal of third molars x4. .
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.