VICTORIA HOPKINS								12/22/2010

Tori is 16 years old and referred by Dr. Frank Stitch, 495 S. Denton Tap Road, Coppell, Texas 75109.  Primary concerns Tori has are:

Anterior open bite.
Bilateral cross bite.

She has had previous orthodontics from about 2006 to 2008 that included exposing cuspids and pulling them into position.  She has had her wisdom teeth removed in 2009.  Tori has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability at 0.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, hearing loss or other joint problems.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism, although apparently she has been told that she has wear on her back teeth.

In frontal view, Tori has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry, although a little bit more prominent in the face on the right side than left side by probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline, although the chin might be just slightly to the left side 1 or 2 mm.  In profile view, the maxilla is retruded about 4 mm and the mandible is retruded about 12 mm.  She does have a C-shape curve to the upper lip.  She has a lip incompetence of probably 5 to 6 mm.  Intraorally, Tori has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a little flap of tissue over the distal of the second molars bilaterally.  She has some mild crowding over the anterior arch, but has reasonably good attached gingiva, although with some inflammation around some of the teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars with some minimal crowding of the upper anterior arch.  She has a little bit of a Class II end-on occlusal relationship by about 2 mm.  She has anterior open bite of about 1 to 2 mm.  The transverse occlusal plane is fairly level.  Tori does have a cross bite on the right side and a tendency towards a cross bite on the left side.  
Right eye is about 2 mm higher than the left eye.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side with a spur at the base.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged with probable moderate nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  TMJs. Seem to function smoothly.  However, she does have some hypermobility and both condyles can subluxate anterior to the articular eminence.  The maximal incisal opening is 56 mm, excursion movement to the right 7 mm, to the left 9 mm.  There is a transverse yaw with posterior maxilla and mandible being about 2 mm to the right.


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Condyles look reasonably good.  Sinuses appear relatively clear in this view.  

Coronal view shows that there are hypertrophied turbinates.  Sinuses appear clear.  

Axial view shows that there is deviation of the nasal septum off towards the left side.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged but the sinuses are clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has little bit of flattening on the anterior head and some slight anterior beaking, but joint spaces look good.  The articular eminence is moderate in inclination.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head particularly towards the medial aspect of the joint.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space is fairly well balanced.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has adequate unilateral width.  There is some slight decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint, but the rest is fairly balanced.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a slight decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint, but otherwise the joint space looks good.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Tori has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm at the base of the tongue but about 8 mm at the soft palate level.  There is an overjet of about 3 to 4 mm and a vertical open bite of probably 2 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Tori would be as follows:

Maxillary AP, posterior vertical, and transverse hypoplasia, but slightly anterior maxillary vertical hyperplasia. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Anterior open bite.
Bilateral posterior cross bite tendency.
Hypertrophied turbinates with deviated nasal septum and partial nasal airway obstruction.
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.


Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip upper lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid 		roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth, removing 			about 1.5 mm of tooth structure to correct for the slight tooth size discrepancy and 		to help keep from flaring the lower incisors forward.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 				counterclockwise direction.
	b. 	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, expand, and down graft the posterior 			aspect.
	c.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies with consideration for a nasal septoplasty.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
