HEATH HOPSON									04-26-04

Heath is 13 years old. He will be 14 in a couple of weeks. He was referred by Dr. Al Bishop, 3001 Brown Trail, #101, Bedford, TX  76021.

Patient History

Heath is in good health with no major medical problems. Heath’s problems began about three years ago as far as having noises in his jaw joints. It is of unknown etiology. When he was quite a bit younger, about 8 years old, he still had his primary incisors in and got accidentally hit by his brother, and his two front teeth got knocked out, but these were his primary teeth. Heath has had orthodontic appliances on for about two years now. He takes Advil or Tylenol for his headaches. He gets headaches about three or four times a week at an average level of about 4, although they an vary from that in either direction. Headaches are predominantly in the temporal and top of the head area. His headaches began just in the very beginning of this year. He rates his TMJ pain at 0, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 1, diet at 2, and disability at 0. He has no earaches. Gets tinnitus sometimes but no vertigo and no hearing loss. Other joints that bother him include his back, knees, and ankles. He is aware of nighttime clenching but does no feel that he does that during the day.

Patient Concerns

Difficult to get his lips together
Shows a lot of teeth and gums
Difficulties breathing through the nose creating primarily predominant mouth breathing

Clinical Examination

Upper lip length is about 18 mm, but if the upper lip is filled out a little bit, it lengthens to about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 7 to 8 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all fairly well aligned with the facial midline. 

In profile view, Heath has a head postured forward neck position. Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably 6 to 8 mm. Chin is retruded by probably 15 to 20 mm. Chin-neckline has moderately good length, and the angle is reasonably well-formed. Heath has lip incompetence of about 11 mm. 

Intraorally, Heath has all of his lower teeth back to the second molars. Teeth appear to be nicely aligned and leveled. In the upper arch, Heath has all of his upper teeth back through the second molars. Upper right lateral incisor looks small in size. He has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship by probably about 3 mm bilaterally. There is only about a millimeter of overjet probably a result of the tooth-size discrepancy created by the small upper lateral incisors. He has a 1 to 1.5-mm vertical overbite relationship.

To palpation, Heath has some minimal tenderness over the styloid areas but no other significant pain through the head and neck area. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly. Incisal opening is 53 mm. Excursive movements are about 11 mm in each direction. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is a little bit elongated but not too significantly. Appears to be fairly good dimension anteroposteriorly from the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall. Tonsils are present but look normal.

Intranasally, it appears that the septum is deviated a little bit off toward the right side. Turbinates are moderately large, and the entire transverse width of the nose may be a little bit narrow. Appears that the turbinates are offering some airway compromise intranasally. Does have a wide columella base. He has been wearing elastics between the upper and lower arch. He has worn Class II elastics for about the last six to nine months.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear a little bit large particularly on the right side. Septum may be deviated a little bit off toward the right side. There are four impacted wisdom teeth. He has a root canal in the maxillary left first molar and has adequate space between the upper laterals and cuspids. The cuspids are tipped distally significantly. Condyles appear to have relatively normal shape. 

Waters view shows that the turbinates appear quite large intranasally. Not much of an airway space. Bony septum looks reasonably straight but cannot determine the position of the cartilaginous septum. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit flattened on top with some anterior projection of the condylar head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Appears to be reasonable joint space around the condyle. A little alteration of trabeculae inside the condyle perhaps. 

Left TMJ tomograms shows a condyle with fairly good morphology with a little bit of anterior beaking and a little slight sclerosis on the anterior leading edge. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space seems relatively balanced. 

On opening, there appears to be good translation of both condyles. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the presence of a high occlusal plane angle and Class II skeletal relationship although fairly close to a Class I occlusal relationship. Large adenoid mass in the nasopharynx. Oropharyngeal and soft palate pharyngeal airways appear fairly good, but there is some constricture between the large adenoid mass and the nasopharynx and the posterior aspect of the turbinate. There is significant lip incompetence and a high occlusal plane angle. Heath has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 4 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

Anterior vertical maxillary excess
AP maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Class II end-on occlusion
High occlusal plane angulation of 17 degrees (normal 8 degrees)
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 4 mm
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4
Hypertrophied turbinates
Deviated nasal septum off to the right side
Nasal airway obstruction
Rule out TMJ problems
Significant lip incompetence of approximately 10 to 12 mm
Overangulation of lower incisors
Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Consider removing appliances and placing in retainers for a year-and-a-half to two years

MRI of left and right TMJ

Continue to monitor facial growth and development

Presurgical orthodontics 
Replace appliances on maxillary arch
Replace appliances on mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure and retract closing the spaces to help correct the tooth-size problem

Surgery
Possible bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors if discs are identified as being displaced by clinical and MRI evaluation
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, move the maxilla superiorly approximately 7 mm, and correct any transverse problems that may be present
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Partial inferior turbinectomies
Nasal septoplasty
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
