MELISSA HORADAM							11/22/2011

Melissa is 21 years old, birth date 06/02/1990.  Melissa is referred by Denise Do, mother of Stanley Do.  

Melissa has no major medical problems.  Her TMJ problems began when she was about 14 years old when the joints started to click and pop of unknown etiology.  She had orthodontics from the age of 9 to 14 including the use of head gear.  She was inli spnt therapy from 2009 to the present.  Her primary concerns are as follows:

Constant jaw pain.
TMJ clicking.
Jaws get stuck closed.
Difficulties eating and chewing.  

Melissa rates her headaches at a level that occur in the temporal and posterior head area and also the right frontal area.  On the average day, they are at 6 but can increase to a level of 8 and the headaches are constant.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 6, diet at 4, disability at 5.  She gets occasional earaches, no tinnitus, occasional vertigo.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  She has apparently no other joint issues.  

Medications she takes include:

Reclipsen.
Fluoxetine.

In frontal view, she has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 10.5 mm. The dental and chin midlines are fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, she has some good facial balance.  Intraorally, she all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch, but she appears to have adequate attached gingiva, although it is somewhat thin.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class I cuspid molar relationship and a 2 mm anterior deep biter relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  Her right tonsil is quite enlarged.  The left one is mildly enlarged.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated just a little bit off towards the right side.  The left turbinate is enlarged and appears a little bit more normal in size.  Melissa is not aware of having any difficulties breathing through her nose.  On jaw function, Melissa has a glitch in her right joint, but the left one seems to function reasonably smoothly.  She reports that she used to have some clicking in the left joint but does not experience that as much as today.  As Melissa opens her jaw, the mandible shifts to the right about 3 to 4 mm.  If Melissa manipulates her right jaw joint, her wide opening will be more centered and could reach a maximum of 45 mm.  Excursion movement to the right was about 9 mm and to the left was 6 mm but painful going towards the left.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but the presence of all of the remaining teeth.  Left turbinate appears quite large.  The bony septum at least appears reasonably straight.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  The left joint appears a little bit sclerotic on top and the right joint appears to have some little bit of sclerosis and a little bit different shape compared to the left side.  The articular eminences look moderate in inclination.  

Coronal view shows that the left turbinate is quite large and fills most of the nasal cavity on the left side.  The septum is deviated off to the right side with a small spur extending out laterally in towards the right turbinate.  The right turbinate appears more normal in size.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Axial view shows that the septum deviates a little bit to the right side and anterior slightly to the left.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  Left turbinate appears to block the majority of the left nasal airway.  On the right side, the turbinate appears more normal in size with a larger functional airway.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic with a little bit of flattening on the anterior head and some slight anterior beaking.  There is decreased posterior joint space and increased anterior joint space being greater increase of the posterior joint space a the lateral aspect of the joint.  The articular eminence has a moderately steep inclination, but does not appear to be too long in length.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space through most of the lateral and medial part of the joint, but more medially the joint space appears a little bit more balanced.  There appears to be a little osteophytic type of growth off the top of the condyle and some minor anterior beaking developing.   The articular eminence has a moderate inclination, but does not appear to be significantly elongated.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral dimension.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly 3 to 4 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Melissa has fairly good vertical and anteroposterior facial balance.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the soft palate level and at about 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  The occlusal plane level appears fairly low.  

Basic diagnoses for Melissa would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with reduction on the left side and without reduction on the right side.  
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Class I occlusion.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics:  Apply maxillary and mandibular orthodontic 	appliances.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning with ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain the occlusion and 			allow the ramus and condyle to move down and forward to accommodate 			the articular discs.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  