TERRELL HORTON									05/16/2006

Terry is 47 years old, referred by Dr. Al Bishop.  He had back surgery about 37 years ago.  He currently weighs 265 pounds and is 6 feet tall. 

PRIMARY PROBLEMS:
Severe snoring.
Severe daytime somnolence.
Severe sleep apnea. 
Prominently mouth breather.
Difficulty breathing through the nose.

In frontal view, Terry has fairly good left to right facial asymmetry.  Upper lip length is about 28 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about –1.  Maxillary midline is pretty much aligned with the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm off to the right.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other.  Terry is slight Class II cuspid on the right side by probably about 2 mm and Class I on the left side.  He has about 1 to 2 mm vertical overbite.  Terry has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or hearing loss.  He gets occasional vertigo.  No tenderness around the head and neck area to palpation.  No headaches.  No TMJ pain.  He rates jaw function, diet and disability all at 0.  Incisal opening is 51 mm.  Excursive movement is about 7 mm in each direction.  On opening, he has a loud audibile pop at about 40 mm on the right side and closing click probably at 30 mm.  The left side seems to function relatively smoothly.  In profile view, Terry has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably a good 6 to 8 mm.  The mandible is deficient by about 15 to 20 mm in AP direction.  Chin neckline is non-definable.  Intraorally, the oropharynx appears to have healthy tissues.  The uvula is mildly enlarged.  The soft palate is probably moderately elongated.  Faucial pillars appear relatively normal.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the left side but there is a spur off to the right side.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Terry is missing right bicuspid tooth.  He also had the left first bicuspid extracted as well for orthodontic reasons when he was much younger.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of an impacted mandibular right third molar.  The other third molars are not present.  X-rays are a little bit cloudy.  The sinuses look clear.  It is difficult to evaluate the TMJs in this view.

Waters view shows that he has incredible deviation of the bony nasal septum.  He appears to have a lot of nasal airway obstruction.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There are some mild arthritic changes at the head of the condyle.  

Left TMJ tomogram is a little difficult to evaluate but it appears there is a more balanced joint space although there is some flattening on the posterior head and anterior head of the condyle.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints.

TERRELL HORTON				05/16/2006				Page 2


Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are retruded.  He has a severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of probably only about 2 mm at the soft palate level and down at the base of the tongue is probably around 5 to 6 mm.  There is a high occlusal plane angle present.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Right TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Severe nasal septal deviation. 
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Missing maxillary first bicuspids.
Impacted mandibular right third molar.
Severe snoring.
Severe daytime somnolence. 
Severe sleep apnea. 
Hypertrophied soft palate. 
Hypertrophied uvula. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
MRI of left and right TMJs. 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Maxillary advancement and down graft off the posterior aspect. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomy to advance the mandible approximately 
15 mm.  
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP.)
Bilateral partial turbinectomies. 
Nasoseptoplasty. 
Surgical removal of impacted mandibular right third molar. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
