MIRANDA HORUFF								12/28/2011

Miranda is 16 years old, birth date 04/12/1995.  Referred by Dr. James Clarke, 110 Vintage Park Blvd. #280, Houston, TX.  

Mandy reports the onset of her problems at the age of 12 in 2006 when she was running track and tripped over a hurdle and fell and struck her chin.  She required no stitches, but she did have significant pain and discomfort associated with it.  She said the next day she woke up and her jaw popped, but shortly after that time she has had difficulties opening her mouth.  She had orthodontics from the age of 12 to 14. She began splint therapy in about 2006 through 2010 and had a total of 3 splints.  In 2007, she had Botox injections into the masseters muscles.  In 2007, she was evaluated by an ENT specialist who put her through 3 sleep studies and she was actually put on a CPAP machine for a while for approximately 3 months, but it was discontinued because it did not seem to improve her situation.  She had physical therapy beginning in January 2009 for about 4 weeks without improvement.  She has had multiple arthrocenteses including being performed on 09/16/2009, 09/25/2009, 10/05/2009, and 05/07/2010.   The main purpose apparently was to flush out the joints and in at least 3 episodes steroids were injected into the joints.  On 07/27/2010, she had bilateral TMJ arthroplasties.  In the right joint on the operative report, it states that the disc was repositioned with a Mitek anchor, but in the left joint they removed the disc.  

Primary concerns that Mandy has currently include the following:

Loss of all range of motion in the jaws.
On a very soft to liquid diet.
Popping and grinding in her joints that is getting worse.
Jaw tilts downward towards the left side.
Teeth do not touch.
Worries of bone loss in the joints.
Constant pain.  She does get pain down through her lower back in between her shoulder blades and she gets periodic headaches.  

Mandy reports headaches that occur about two times per week in the temple areas at about a level of 2.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 7, diet at 6, disability at 3.  She gets frequent earaches, moderate tinnitus, but no vertigo and no hearing loss.  She has problems with her SI joints.  She has no known allergies.  She has no known allergies in reference to jewelry.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime, but does not believe she does it during the day.  The only medications she currently take include: 

Doxycycline 100 mg b.i.d. for her complexion.
Hydrocodone 7.5 mg ????? one to two per week.

In frontal view, Mandy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 6 mm.  The maxillary midline is just slightly to the left about 0.5 mm and the mandibular dental midline may be about 1 mm to the left and chin may be about 2 mm to the left.  Nasal tip is deviated 2 to 3 mm off to the left side.  Left eye and orbit are about 2 mm lower than the right side.  She has a lip incompetence of almost 12 mm.  In profile view, Mandy has a little bit of nasal prominence with a dorsal hump present.  The maxilla is retruded probably about 5 mm.  The chin appears retruded about 20 mm.  The chin neckline is somewhat short and chin neck angle is not well defined.  She has an inversion of the lower lip and prominence of the labial mental fold.  Mandy does have a head posture forward neck position.  Mandy’s right angle of the mandible is probably about 4 mm more prominent than the left side.  This gives an impression of the jaws shifting off towards the left side.  Her cheek appears a little bit more prominent than the left cheek.  She did use a CPAP machine in 2007.  Intraorally, Mandy has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  She has fairly good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Upper lateral incisors appear a little bit small in size.  She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship bilaterally by probably about 2 mm, but she does have about a 0.5 mm vertical overbite.  The left cuspids are about 1 and at the most 2 mm higher than the right side.  The left maxillary and mandibular cuspid is about 1 mm posterior to the right cuspids.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy.  Fascial pillars are somewhat constricted.  Tonsils may be just mildly enlarged.  Intranasally, the turbinates at least in the front look relatively normal in size.  Mandy does have a significantly constricted left nostril and appears to primarily be the product of a septum that is deviated off towards the left side anteriorly and with a moderately wide columella.  To palpation, Mandy has high moderate pain over the masseters, TMJs, and mild tenderness over the left medial pterygoid, left retromandibular area.  The maximal incisal opening is 29 mm, opening without significant pain 20 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 1.5 mm and to the left 3.5 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary third molars, mandibular right third molar and a crown on the mandibular left third molar with the roots retained.  Evidence of metallic implants in the TMJs bilaterally.  Both joints appear to have lost vertical height and volume and appear arthritic.  The articular eminences appear quite flat.  Turbinates appear enlarged.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer on the lower arch.  

Coronal view shows that the maxillary sinuses and ethmoid sinuses are clear.  Nasal septum is deviated significantly off to the right side at the superior aspect back in the bony aspect of the septum.  The left inferior middle turbinates are quite large and the left turbinate appears to obliterate a good portion of the functional airway.  The right turbinate is relatively normal in size.  


Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The left turbinate is quite large and appears to block most of the functional airway whereas the right turbinate appears relatively normal in size.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows the presence of a Mitek anchor and appears what must be a micro anchor.  There is decreased vertical joint space and advanced arthritis and sclerosis on the condylar head.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows the presence of a micro anchor.  The vertical joint space is quite narrow at the lateral aspect of the joint and also over towards the middle and medial aspect.  There appear to be degenerative changes in the fossa as well.  There is anterior beaking present on the condyle and it appears that there is loss of vertical volume. 

Left TMJ coronal view shows the presence of an anchor in the condyle.  There is significantly decreased vertical joint space.  There are some erosions on the head of the condyle and perhaps some in the fossa as well.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly and in some areas it appears that there is almost bone-on-bone contact.  There is decreased vertical and lateral joint space.  The downward curvature of the lateral rim is quite steep and comes down covering the majority of the head of the condyle.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows the micro anchor positioned fairly high in the condyle.  There is decreased vertical and lateral joint space.  There appears to be some degenerative changes in the fossa as well as on the condylar head.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that maxilla is AP deficient, although has anterior vertical maxillary excess.  There is probably a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  The lower incisors appear to be over angulated.  The mandible was retruded.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm from the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall and about 5.5 to 6 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnoses for Mandy would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ advanced and severe arthritis.
Bilateral TMJ articular discs anteriorly displaced, but significantly degenerated.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia but anterior vertical hyperplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Class II end-on occlusion by about 2 mm.
Hypertrophied left nasal inferior turbinate.
Nasal septum deviated off towards the left side anteriorly creating small nostril and airway obstruction.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally in case interdental osteotomies are necessary to 			maximize the occlusal fit.  
	b.	Align and level the mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 			removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure and retracting.  
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a 				counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla and move the anterior 		aspect superiorly approximately 5 to 6 mm. 
	c.	Bilateral mandibular coronoidotomies.
	d.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	e.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin. 
	f.	Left turbinectomy.
	g.	Nasal septoplasty.
	h.	External rhinoplasty.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  