JOANNA HOUSTON								01/31/2007

Joanna is 25 years old and is referred by Dr. Brian Stone.  She has had some previous surgery which included some eye surgery (1990), birthmark treated with 2 laser treatments and then 1 surgery (1993, 1994 and 2003) on her forehead by Dr. Jay Burns, chin implant in 2002 done by Dr. Jay Burns.

Joanna has had previous orthodontics by Dr. Frank Moranda.  He followed her from the age of 8 through the age of 25 and just recently retired.  He treated with orthodontics from 1997 to 1998 and used headgears, retainers and splints.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Enbrel. 
Ortho-Cyclen.
Prednisone 5 mg daily. 

Joanna has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her neck, fingers and toes.  The neck does significantly affect her range of motion.  At one time she was told that she was allergic to sulfa but she has had some more recent treatment with medications that did include sulfa so it is questionable whether that in fact is true or not.  

Joanna was diagnosed with having juvenile rheumatoid arthritis at the age of 4.  She was treated at Scottish-Rite Hospital from the age of 4 to 18. 

She is not aware of clenching or bruxism at night.  She has no problems with headaches, no TMJ pain and in fact has no pain in any of her other involved joints either.  She has no pain on an average day.  She rates her jaw function at 7, diet at 0, disability at 3.  In frontal view, Joanna has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 17 to 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm.  She has some slight increased fullness on the left side of her face as compared to the right side by maybe about 2 mm.  Maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are pretty much on the facial midline.  Nose is deviated a little bit off to the right side about 2 mm.  Chin is deviated off to the right side about 3 mm.  Transversely, there is a cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1.5 mm lower than the right side.  

In profile view, she is probably at least 6 mm AP deficient in the maxilla.  The chin is probably somewhere around 20 to 22 mm AP deficient.  Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not well defined.  Joanna has some prominence to the nasal dorsum.  She has good projection of the cheeks and good balance around the eyes.  She has a slight end-on Class II occlusion bilaterally.  She has about a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Very difficult to evaluate the oropharynx, but as best I can see the tissues look healthy and the uvula and soft palate looked relatively normal in length.  Cannot really evaluate the faucial pillars.  I could not see the tonsils.  Transverse width of the nasal cavity appears somewhat narrow.  The nasal septum has a little bit of a spur at the base on the left side.  There could be some slight deviation.  The turbinates appear somewhat moderate in size.  It appears that there could possibly be some decreased airway in the nasal area though she does not really complaint about it.  The columella appears a little bit wide and the nostrils appear a little bit constricted.  
JOANNA HOUSTON			01/31/2007				Page 2

Joanna has had all of 4 first bicuspids extracted.  To palpation, Joanna has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function smoothly and she is not aware of any noises in the joints.  Incisal opening is 27 mm and surprisingly the excursive movements are 6 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows that all 4 first bicuspids had been extracted.  Mandibular third molars are absent but apparently never developed.  She does have impacted maxillary third molars.  Sinuses appear clear.  She appears to have significant deviation of the nasal septum that may be a septal spur.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  Condyles are functioning completely out of the sockets and anterior to the articular eminences. 

Waters view is more of a PA ceph because of the lack of ability to flex or extend the neck.  The septum appears deviated significantly off towards the right side.  Turbinates appear significantly large and the passable airway appears somewhat constricted.  Difficult to evaluate the maxillary sinuses but the frontal sinuses and ethmoids appear clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the condyles are functioning 12 mm or so anterior to the posterior wall of the fossa.  It may be part of the orthodontics and perhaps some long-term Class II elastics.  

Right TMJ tomogram likewise shows that the condyle is functioning anterior to the articular eminence about 12 to 14 mm anterior to its normal position.  On opening, there may be some translation of the condyles.  In the open view, the severe resorption of the condyle is noted.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that in more of a centric relation she does have a significant Class II occlusion with about a 5 mm overjet.  She has a high occlusal plane angle and vertical orientation of the maxillary incisors.  Mandibular incisors have been over retracted.  There is evidence of a chin implant of silastic that has previously been placed.  Her oropharyngeal airway is significantly decreased with an airway dimension of only about 4 mm between the soft palate and posterior pharyngeal wall and base of tongue and the posterior pharyngeal wall with perhaps a maximum of about 5 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ juvenile rheumatoid arthritis with severe condylar resorption. 
Severe AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Class II occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Previously placed silastic implant to chin.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm. 
 Impacted maxillary third molars x2.
JOANNA HOUSTON			01/31/2007				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Open up 1 mm of space between the crowns of each maxillary cuspid and lateral incisor to help correct the tooth size discrepancy. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider slenderizing lower anterior teeth removing only about 1 mm of tooth structure.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly.
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Removal of impacted maxillary third molars x2.
Remove previously placed silastic chin implant.
HTR implant to anterior mandible.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.


cc:  Dr. Brian Stone