AMY HOWARD									03/19/2008

Amy is 16 years old, referred by Dr. James Compton, 4610 N. Garfield, Suite A9, Midland, TX 79705.  Amy has had a previous dislocated left kneecap and she had her wisdom teeth extracted in July 2007.  Primary concerns that Amy has includes the following:  
Headaches.
Popping in jaws.
Teeth alignment.

Amy currently takes the following medications:

Allegra 180 mg p.r.n. allergy and sinus problems. 
Advil p.r.n. headaches.

Amy believes that her clicking and popping and headaches began sometime during this past year.  Her problems began in about 2007 about a year ago of unknown etiology.  She had orthodontics beginning in the summer of 2004 through January 2007.  Dr. Compton had told her she would likely need surgery fairly close to the onset of treatment.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Amy has a little bit of asymmetry particularly in the nose area.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -2 to 3 mm.  Nasal tip is deviated off to the right side about probably 2 to 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is off to the right side at 1.5 mm and mandibular dental midline and chin are off to the left side 1 to 1.5 mm.  In profile view, she has fairly good facial balance.  Chin may be just slightly strong.  Her upper lip appears to have fairly good fullness, but could be just slightly deficient.  Chin neckline appears to have fairly good length and chin neck angle is fairly well-defined. Intraorally, Amy has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  Teeth appear to be nicely aligned and level.  There is a slight increased curve of Spee perhaps.  She has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars.  There is a moderately increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  Fascial pillars are moderately constricted.  Tonsils are moderate in size.  She has no history of problems with recurrent sore throats.  Amy has almost a full Class III cuspid relationship on the right side with Class III by probably 3 to 4 mm on the left side.  She has anterior crossbite and a left posterior crossbite.  She has about a 1 mm reverse deep bite.  She has a slight cant to the transverse maxillary plane with the right side being about 1.5 mm lower than the left side.  Intranasally, the right turbinate at least anteriorly appears relatively normal in size.  Left turbinate appears moderately enlarged.  There may be some mild to moderate obstruction in the left side of the nose.  Columella is moderately wide.  She has no history of snoring or sleep apnea.  She says she is moderately tired during the day, but this may be because of the significant schedule that she keeps and being a teenager.  On opening, Amy had a pop in the right joint at about 10 mm of opening and about 10 mm of closing.  On the left side, it opened relatively smoothly, but on excursion there was some popping in the left joint.  Maximal size is 65 mm, excursion movement to right about 10 mm and to the left about 7 mm.   
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch.  Condylar head and necks appear moderately elongated.   Sinuses look relatively clear.  
Waters view shows that there is deviation in the bony nasal septum with it tipping off towards to the right side with a spur on that side.  Turbinates appear moderate in size with perhaps a little bit more obstruction on the left side as compared to the right side.  The maxillary sinus looks a little more cloudy on the left side as compared to the right side, although the right side also appears to be not as clear as preferred.  Some asymmetry in lower jaw can be seen with the right side being a little bit lower than the left side.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows relatively normal architecture of the joint.  
Right TMJ tomogram likewise shows relatively normal architecture in this view.  On opening, there is some restriction in translation, but clinically she does have good translatory abilities.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship.  There is a vertical difference in the anterior borders of the mandible and also in the occlusal planes with the left side being higher than the right side.  Bolton’s analysis shows a difference of 2 mm. 
The basic diagnoses for Amy would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation with early reduction.
Rule out bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia. 
AP vertical and transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
Mandibular deviated prognathism. 
Class II occlusion on the right side, end-on Class III occlusion on the side.  
Anterior and left-sided posterior crossbite.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Nasal asymmetry with the nose rotated 2 to 3 mm off towards the right side.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Assess for disproportional and excessive mandibular growth.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
Consider bilateral mandibular high condylectomies if condylar hyperplasia verified.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to slightly advance, expand, and level transversely.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back on the 
facial midline. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  	