JAMIE HOWE									12-16-02

Jamie is 17 years old and referred by Dr. Russell Stover. Dr. Stover’s address is 326 Edmond Lane, #105, Lewisville, TX  75067.

Patient History

Jamie had his wisdom teeth removed in January of 2002. Jamie is in good health with no major medical problems. Jamie has had previous orthodontics when he was in the eighth and ninth grade for about 18 months. It wasn’t really directed towards straightening teeth as much as trying to correct the bite problem. Once the braces came off, the jaw problem redeveloped again. 

Patient Concerns

The primary concerns Jamie has include the following:

Lower jaw shifted off towards the left side
Teeth don’t fit together very well

Jamie has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, headaches, TMJ pain, or TMJ noises. 

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Jamie has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Some asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is 1 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline and chin are pretty much aligned to each other, but are off to the left 2 to 3 mm. In profile view, Jamie has AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 mm. Mandible actually appears to be in fairly good AP position. Chin-neckline looks fairly good, and chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.

Intraorally, Jamie has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, he has almost a full Class III cuspid-molar relationship on the right of probably 7 mm, but on the left, only 2 to 3 mm. There is a posterior crossbite on the left side and a tendency on the right side. There is an anterior open bite.

Intranasally, nasal septum is deviated off towards the right side. Right turbinates are not too large, but airway may be a little bit compromised because of the deviated septum. In the left side, the turbinate is a little bit larger than normal, but the airway is a little bit better because of the deviated septum. 

No pain to palpation around the head and neck area including the TMJ areas. TMJs seem to function fairly smoothly, although on his initial one or two openings, he had some glitches that occurred in his joints, but after that, joints seemed to function relatively smoothly. Oropharynx is quite clear.


Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but all other teeth are present. Septum is deviated off towards the right side. Airways look compressed on the right side compared to the left side. Sinuses appear clear. Joints look relatively normal as best as could be ascertained from this radiograph. 

Waters view shows the mandible deviated off toward the left side. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Septum appears deviated. Airway may be a little bit compromised.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Relatively low inclination of the articular eminence. Joint space looks fairly good around the condyle. Disc may be a little bit thin. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology, and the fossa again has a fairly shallow articular eminence. Joint space appears a little bit more narrow in this joint. 

Opening views show some moderate translation, but the condyles seem to stop beneath the head of the condyles. 

Cephalometrically, he has a skeletal Class III relationship. Oropharyngeal airway appears good. Appears he may have a slightly high occlusal plane angulation. Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm. Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia, being worse on the right side as compared to the left side
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations with reductions
Mandibular deviate prognathism
AP maxillary deficiency
Class III occlusion on the right side, Class III end-on occlusion on the left side
Crossbite on the left posterior side and anteriorly

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJs

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch
Align and level mandibular arch. Maintain current transverse widths of each independent arch as they do line up quite well when repositioned into a Class I occlusion

Evaluate for disproportionate mandibular growth (i.e. condylar hyperplasia)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors if active condylar hyperplasia is present, and if the articular discs are confirmed to be dislocated
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and downgraft it posteriorly and correct any transverse problems that may arise
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to correct the deviate prognathism and realign the mandible onto the facial midline

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion