HANNAH HUDSON									03/23/2007

Hannah is 18 years old, referred by Dr. Tom Lowder, 2709 W. Huntsville Ave. Springdale, AR 72762.  Hannah has polycystic ovary syndrome and toxoplasma chorioretinitis.  The only previous surgery has been for an appendectomy.  She has some mild eczema.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Jaw joint pain. 
Open bite.
Clicking when chewing.

She has no problems with headaches.  Rates her TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 5, diet at 3, disability at 2.  She has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  She had a hip dysplasia when she was young and wore braces in her legs for about 6 months.  She has a little bit of a problem with her hips now, right side a little bit worse than the left.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night but does not feel that she does that during the day. 

Hannah first became aware of having joint problems in about 2000 when she was in her orthodontic treatment.  Her jaw joints started to click and pop for unknown etiology.  She had orthodontic treatment from 2000 to 2002 by Dr. Goodwin Thomas, when she was 12 to 14 years old.  She has had no other treatment for her jaw problem.  She states that her jaws still click and pop.  Hannah has at least moderate snoring problems.  She has moderate daytime somnolence but she is not aware of having sleep apnea problems.  

In frontal view, Hannah has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm to the right but the chin appears to be pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency probably about 4 mm or so.  Upper lip supralabrale is slightly posterior to the subnasale by probably 2 mm.  Chin is retruded by about 15 to 18 mm.  Hannah has a head postured forward neck position.  Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, Hannah has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer.  Right cuspid is probably 2 to 3 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch, Hannah has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side by probably 2 mm and on the right side she is almost a full Class III.  She has an overjet of about 4 mm and anterior open bite by about 1 mm.  Lower dental midline is at least 2 mm to the right of the chin midline.  She appears to have good attached gingiva.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  The uvula and soft palate appear relatively normal.  Tonsils are quite hyperplastic.  They may cause some mild to moderate constricture of the faucial pillars only because of their size.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side.  Turbinates are both enlarged with the left side being significantly larger, although because of the deviated septum the airway is better on the left side than the right side.  She has mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction.  She says that when she sleeps she does breathe through both her mouth and her nose.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  

HANNAH HUDSON				03/23/2007				Page 2

On opening, she has clicking in the left joint about 30 mm and the right side about 35 mm and closing clicks occur probably around 20 mm on the left side and 25 on the right side.  Although the clicking was consistent, the occurrence with the clicking on opening had some moderate variability.  That is when the clicks actually occurred in the opening and closing cycles.  Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm.  Opening without discomfort is about 35 mm.  Excursive movements about 7 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of 2 impacted third molars including the mandibular thirds and the maxillary right third molar.  The left third molar is absent.  Sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  Both condyles appear somewhat arthritic.  

Waters view shows that the bony nasal septum is reasonably straight.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  Dental midline seems to be shifted off to the right side.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows that she has fairly good joint space.  In fact, it actually appears increased.  There is flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.  A little bit of anterior beaking and some peaking on the condyle.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  Opening shows good translation of that condyle where the condyle comes actually down beneath the articular eminence.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has actually increased posterior joint space and perhaps a slight decrease vertical joint space.  There is anterior beaking and peaking on the condyle.  Articular eminence is not as steep as the opposite side.  There is flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.  On opening, there is good translation of the condyle.  Dental model analysis shows that she has probably about a 2 mm tooth size discrepancy.  In the lower arch, the right cuspid is about 2 to 3 mm posterior to the left cuspid and the lower dental midline is 2 mm to the right of the chin midline.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption and articular disc dislocations.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Impacted bilateral mandibular third molars and maxillary right third molar.
Slight anterior vertical maxillary excess and posterior vertical deficiency.
High occlusal plane angle. 
End-on Class II occlusion on the left side, full Class II occlusion on the right side.
Anterior open bite.
Hypertrophied tonsils.
Nasal septal deviation towards the right. 
 Mildly hypertrophied turbinates.
 Snoring.
 Daytime somnolence.
 TMJ pain. 
HANNAH HUDSON 			03/23/3007				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Preliminary surgery.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x3.
Consider placement of TAD on the left mandible.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Shift lower mandibular dental midline 2 mm to the left and retrude the left cuspid and advance the right cuspid a total of 2 to 3 mm to achieve lower arch symmetry.  Consider using TAD versus heavy archwire in the maxilla and Class III elastics on the left side, Class II elastics on the right side.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it and decrease the occlusal plane angle as well as move it superiorly and anteriorly.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
