TRACEY HUGG									08/07/2006 

Tracey is 36 years old, referred by Dr. Duane Keller, St. Louis, MO.  Her dentist is Dr. Eric Von Hoven, 380 Suppiger Way, Highland, IL 62249.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Carafate 1 gram b.i.d.
Cholestyramine b.i.d.
Nexium 40 mg daily.
Zantac 150 mg b.i.d.
Darvocet p.r.n. 
Robaxin q.i.d.
Ibuprofen 800 mg p.r.n. 
Multivitamins and iron supplements. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Severe TMJ pain. 
Severe headaches.
Severe difficulties eating and chewing.
Severe limitation of jaw function.

Todate, she has had no treatment for her TMJ problems.  Tracey gets severe earaches but no tinnitus.  She gets vertigo but has no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her left foot and ankle, right index finger and possibly her neck and back but she is not real sure.  She has not had her neck evaluated although she has severe pain in that area.

ALLERGIES:  Latex and Biaxin and Tylenol No. 3 does not agree well with her.  

She cannot wear cheap jewelry.  Even with her glasses, they have to be either plastic or titanium.  Other metals caused her significant problems.  She is aware of clenching her teeth at nighttime and during the day.  She rates her headaches at a level of 9 and they occur predominately in the frontal, temple and posterior head area.  She rates her average TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 10, jaw function at 10, diet at 9 and disability at 9.  Tracey does smoke about one pack of cigarettes per day and has done that for 20 years.  She weighs 150 pounds and is 5 feet 6 inches tall.  

PREVIOUS SURGERIES: 
Gastric bypass.
Gallbladder removal.
C-section for her fourth daughter. 

In addition to the joint problems, she does have GI problems, chronic anemia, ulcer problems and liver problems.  She had her gallbladder removed in December 2005.  Since that time, she has not been able to get her liver enzymes back to a normal range.  


TRACEY HUGG				08/07/2006 				Page 2


In frontal view, Tracey has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  She has normal upper lip length and upper tooth-to-lip relationship.  Midlines all appear to be pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, she has good balance of her facial structures.  Intraorally, Tracey has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars and all quadrants except on the left side she is missing mandibular second molar.  She has had her wisdom teeth removed.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm and tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  She has no difficulties breathing through her nose.  She has a Class I cuspid molar relationship and about a 3 to 4 mm anterior deep bite relationship.  Because of her limited opening, it is a little bit hard to see the oropharynx but as best as I could see it, it appeared that the tissues were in normal appearance and the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are all within normal range.  Tracey continues to have apparently some intraabdominal bleeding.  She is not aware of snoring nor is she aware of any sleep apnea problems.  She does have severe daytime tiredness but feels this is likely related to her anemia, her continued intraabdominal bleeding and difficulties sleeping because of the pain issues.  The onset of her TMJ problems is unknown.  Her pain factors actually began about 18 months to 2 years ago.  Her severe pain began this year.  The etiology is unknown.  Today she has had no treatment except for medications.  Maximal incisal opening is 17 mm and she can open 13 mm without severe pain.  Excursive movements are about 1 mm in each direction.  Because of her severe limited movement, I cannot detect any noises in the joint today.  She does report that she has significant problems with grindy, gravely kind of sounds in her joints.  To palpation, she has very high moderate pain to palpation of the TMJ and styloid areas, moderate pain over the medial pterygoids, left shoulder and milder tenderness over the temporalis muscles.  

OTHER SYSTEMS:  Tracey has problems with her shoulders, right index finger, left ankle, left foot and possibly the neck and back.  She has had lots of urinary tract infections particularly when she was younger.  When her kids were born she was hospitalized for six days because of a kidney infection.  She currently may have a kidney infection.  She does have polyuria at times and nocturia times one.  She is somewhat irregular occurring every 35 to 36 days and she has excessive pain with them.  No fertility problems.  She has had five to seven miscarriages and has four children, all girls ages 17, 15, 10 and 3.  She had an ovarian cyst in high school but no endometriosis.  She has had some eye infections usually as a result of her kids bringing them home from daycare.  She gets seasonal sinusitis.  She smokes one pack of cigarettes per day.  She gets earaches and vertigo.  She gets frequent colds and viruses in the fall and winter.  She has been diagnosed with adult onset asthma that occurs only in the fall and winter.  She has a cough.  She gets recurrent sore throats in the fall and winter.  She gets occasional chest pain.  She gets bronchitis almost yearly all of her life.  She has had pneumonia at least once and perhaps more often but it is not confirmed.  She has problems with nausea, not diagnosed with irritable bowel syndrome.  She does get abdominal pain and cramping and has problems with diarrhea.  She is not aware of any diagnosis for chlamydia.  She has chronic fatigue.  She feels she runs a low-grade fever for the past year.  Thyroid has tested normal.  During her school age years she did visit her grandmother who did have some chickens but she does not really remember handling them that much.  No cats.  She has had dogs most of her life that are outdoor dogs.  The only implants are stomach staples and stomach band. 

TRACEY HUGG				08/07/2006 				Page 3


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and mandibular left second molar.  All other teeth are present.  The right condyle appears arthritic.  Left condyle for some reason is blocked out and did it did not show up.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows the presence of arthritis and what appear to be osteophytes sticking up from the condylar head.  The fossa appears a little bit more healthy but there could be some degeneration there.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows significant arthritis present and perhaps there are some osteophytes sticking up.  It is difficult to see the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There could be some degenerative changes in the fossa.  On opening there is severely restricted translation of the condyle with virtually no movement.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The bony septum is relatively straight and the turbinates appear relatively normal in size.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Tracey has good facial balance anteroposteriorly and vertically.  She interestingly has some adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx area.  Oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal with an airway space at the soft palate level of about 8 mm and at the base of the tongue at 9 mm.  

Based on clinical, radiographic and MRI analysis, Tracey's diagnoses are as follows: 
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis (possible reactive arthritis versus connective tissue autoimmune disease.)
Severe TMJ pain. 
Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
Severe masticatory dysfunction.
History of hypersensitivity to metals.
Rule out connective tissue autoimmune diseases. 
Liver problems, chronic fatigue, chronic low-grade fever and history of continued internal bleeding. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows.
Placement of material samples used in prostheses into the forearm to include titanium alloy and chromium cobalt alloy.
Laboratory tests.
Rheumatoid factor.
ANA.
Sedimentation rate.
C-reactive protein.
Hematology studies to rule out bleeding and coagulation problems.
CBC.
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Physical therapy as necessary to rehabilitate the jaw function. 

