CHRISTOPHER HUGHES							01/04/2010

Chris is 17 years 11 months of age and will be 18 in four days.  He is referred by Dr. Terry Carano.  Chris has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain around the head and neck area.  He rates her jaw function, diet, and disability at 0.  The only medication he takes is Advair.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

He had orthodontics in 2003 into 2005 for about 18 months.  His bite was pretty good at the end of his orthodontic treatment and he was about 13 or 14 at the time.   When Chris was about 10 years old, he had a roller blading accident and damaged his left maxillary central incisor.  The tooth was knocked out and the root put back in and the tooth built up.  However, other problems developed and the root was finally removed in March 2009.  Chris now has a flipper to replace the maxillary left central incisor. 

Primary concerns that Chris has include the following:

1.	Inability to bite or chew anything with the front teeth.
2.	Struggles to eat normally.
3.	Under bite jaw relationship. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Chris has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline and chin.  In profile view, Chris has some maxillary AP deficiency of probably about 8 mm.  The chin has pretty good AP projection.  He has some sallowness in the infraorbital area.  The nasal structures have good and relatively normal projection.  The chin neckline looks relatively normal.  Intraorally, Chris has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  Lower incisors are tipped back in lingual inclination.  In the upper arch, he has all the teeth back through the second molars except for the maxillary left central incisor which is replaced by a flipper.  He has a full Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally and has anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites.  He has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm.  TMJs function smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 63 mm; excursion movements are about 7 mm in direction.  No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  Joints function smoothly.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy and normal in architecture.  Tonsils are moderately enlarged.  Intranasally, the septum appears to be deviated a little bit off towards the left side.  The left turbinate appears somewhat enlarged, but the right side looks relatively normal with a good airway.

Chris’ initial orthodontics were done by Dr. Jesse Schroeder.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary left central incisor.  All four third molars are absent.  The maxillary second molars are out of occlusion.  He has a root canal in the maxillary right central incisor.  Sinuses look relatively healthy.  Condylar head and necks may be slightly elongated.

Coronal view shows that there is a deviated septum with a septal spur that appears to touch against the left lateral nasal wall.  Turbinates appear enlarged and actually the right side looks larger than the left side and both airways seem to be somewhat compromised.  Sinuses appear clear. 

Axial view shows the turbinates are moderately enlarged with the right one actually larger than the left one, but the sinuses are clear.  

Bilateral TMJ sagittal views show that the condyles have fairly good morphology with the left side having perhaps some slight anterior beaking present.  Joint spaces look relatively well balanced and articular eminence has a moderate inclination.   

Bilateral TMJ coronal views show that there appears to be some decreased joint space that may be just related to thin discs.  Lateral rims are fairly flat with only about 1-2 mm downward curvature.  Condylar heads look relatively large. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Chris has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  Lower incisors may be a little bit vertical.  There is slight accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.  He has a skeletal and occlusal Class III relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 8 mm at the soft palate level and almost 10 mm at the base of the tongue.  There appears to be a slight increased occlusal plane angle.

Basic diagnoses for Chris would be as follows:

1.	Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
2.	Mandibular prognathism. 
3.	Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia.
4.	Class III occlusion.
5.	Anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites.
6.	Anterior open bite.
7.	Bilateral nasal turbinate hyperplasia. 
8.	Over angulation of the maxillary incisors.
9.	Decreased angulation of the lower incisors.
10.	Missing maxillary left central incisor replaced with a flipper.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 
                        cuspid 	roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Place a     
                        pontic in the maxillary left central incisor position and attach to the 
                        orthodontic arch wire to maintain the spacing.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Increase torque on the lower incisors to 			tip the incisal edges anteriorly and the root apices lingually.
2.	Evaluate for disproportionate mandibular growth.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies and articular discs repositioning 			with Mitek anchors if condylar hyperplasia confirmed.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it and expand.
	c.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly.
	d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
6.	Restorative dentistry.
	a.	Placement of osteointegrated implant into the left maxillary central incisor 		position.
	b.	Placement of crown on implant.