ANGELA HULL								11/11/2011

Angela is 20 years old, birth date 11/28/1990.  Referred by Dr. Joseph Baba.

When Angela was born, there was a prolapse of the umbilical cord and she sustained hypoxia and anoxia.  She did have a tracheostomy for 12 years.  Then Dr. Ken Nelson apparently performed some distraction for Angela to bring her jaw forward and then she was able to eliminate the tracheostomy.  Angela cannot open her mouth, cannot chew, and has extreme difficulty swallowing.  She has been on a feeding tube since birth.  Among the reasons for seeking treatment is that the dentist cannot get in to clean Angela’s teeth.  

Angela has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, nor myofascial pain.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo nor hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  

In frontal view, Angela has fairly good left-to-right symmetry.  Upper lip length is probably 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is at least 5 to 6 mm.  The maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to the right.  The mandible dental midline is off to the left about 2 mm.  Chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In subnasale, the maxilla is retruded about 3 to 4 mm.  Upper lip however is protrusive probably by 3 to 4 mm at the upper lip supralabrale.  Chin is deficient by probably a good 15 to 20 mm.  She has a lip incompetence of almost 15 mm.  Intraorally, I believe she has most all of her teeth present.  She has about a zero overbite relationship.  She has an incisal opening of about 4 mm.  She is Class I cuspid on the right and Class II end-on cuspid on the left.  The left mandibular cuspid appears to be about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of impacted third molars x4.  She has some metal plating objects remaining in her mandible with two in each side, one in the ramus, one in the body bilaterally with 2 screws in each remaining partial device.  On the anterior device, there is an extension of the metal inferiorly to the inferior border of the mandible that you can actually palpate clinically.  She has bilateral horizontal impacted mandibular third molars and an impacted maxillary right third molar, but with the left third molar erupted through.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  Left TMJ is ankylosed.  On the right, it is difficult to tell if there is an ankylosis there on this view.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are moderate in size with the right one being larger and more obstructed than the left one.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that there is a bony ankylosis incorporating most of the entire condyle.  The articular eminence is hypoplastic.  There is no joint space present.

On the right side, there may be slight space in the joint, but it is extremely narrow.  Out lateral, there possibly could be a bony ankylosis present.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows frank bony ankylosis that encompasses the entire head of the condyle.  Left TMJ shows areas where is bone-on-bone contact and some areas that might indicate that there could be a bony ankylosis on this side as well.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has high occlusal plane angle and over angulation of the upper incisors.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 8 mm at the soft palate level and about 7 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnoses for Angela would be as follows:

Moebius syndrome.
Bony ankylosis of left TMJ.
Fibrous ankylosis of right TMJ.
Maxillary vertical and AP hyperplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Bimaxillary protrusion.
AP microgenia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Class I cuspid relationship on the right side, Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Feeding difficulties requiring an abdominal feeding tube.
Speech articulation disorder.
Horizontally impacted mandibular third molars, impacted maxillary right third molar, and erupted malpositioned maxillary left third molar.
Four metal plates in mandible with eight screws.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
2.	Surgery Stage 1.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses.
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.
	c.	Bilateral mandibular coronoidotomies.
	d.	Removal of 4 bone plates and 8 screws from the mandible.
	e.	Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.
	f.	Removal of maxillary third molars, one impacted and one erupted.
	g.	Extract maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids.
3.	Orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch closing extraction space.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch closing extraction space.
4.	Surgery Stage 2.
	a.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly probably 6 			to 7 mm and correct any transverse problem that may arise.
	b.	Augmentation genioplasty of 6 mm.
	c.	Surgical removal of impacted mandibular third molars.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
6.	Surgery Stage 3.  Consider possible soft tissue reconstruction of the lower lip if 	lip incompetence persists.  