BROOKE HULSEY									10-11-04

Brooke is 13 years old. Her birthday is 07/31/91.

Patient History

Brooks is in good health with no major medical problems. She takes Rhinocort which she is supposed to use twice a day but sometimes forgets. Brooke has had a reaction to PENICILLIN where she got some hives. As far as Brooke’s mother and sister are aware, when Brooke had her primary teeth, her teeth fit together reasonably well. It is only since her permanent teeth have erupted in that she has developed the bite problem. When Brooke was 3 or 4 years old, she did have a fall where she struck the under part of her chin on a chair and did require some stitches. 

Clinical Examination

To palpation, Brooke has no tenderness around the head and neck area. On wide opening, there is a little bit of a glitch in the joint area but not a discrete pop in the joint.

In frontal view, Brooke has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1 mm. Mandibular dental midline and chin are pretty much on the facial midline. Maxillary midline may be about a millimeter off to the left side.

In profile view, Brooke has good facial balance. Chin-neck line looks relatively normal, and chin-neck angle looks fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, Brooke has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth are fairly well-aligned and leveled. Has really thin attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch, but it appears it may be adequate. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars, although the second molars are not quite erupted in all the way yet. When Brooke bites together, she occludes only on her first and second molars. She has about a 2-mm anterior overbite. She has a Class II end-on occlusion by about 4 mm on the left side and 3 mm on the right side. Tissues in the oropharynx appear healthy. Uvula appears normal in length and size as does the soft palate. Faucial pillars may be just mildly constricted.

Intranasally, turbinates appear large, but the mucosa appears healthy on them and do seem to block off a fair portion of the functional nasal airway.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses look relatively clear. Nasal airway looks reasonably good. There are four developing unerupted third molars present. Difficult to evaluate the condyles. There appears to be an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Upper left lateral incisor appears small in size. She has appliances back through the first molars. Upper left lateral incisor appears much smaller than normal and might account for some of the shift of the maxillary midline off toward the left side. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are good and clear and appear healthy. Turbinates appear quite large and appear to be blocking a good portion of the functional airway.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good size to it. May be a little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space appears fairly well-balanced. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Appears to be reasonable joint space around the condyle. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. It appears there could be some decreased joint space on the left side between the condyle and posterior wall of the fossa. Articular eminence appears a little bit steeper on the left side as compared to the right side although retrospectively the articular eminence on the right side is moderately steep. It appears the joint space could be slightly decreased superiorly and posteriorly in both joints. 

Percussion to the maxillary teeth elicited a relatively normal sound. Brooke’s tonsils are of moderate side but they extend down along the base of the tongue. Oropharyngeal airway measurement is about 5 mm at the soft palate level and about 7 mm at the base of the tongue. Brooke apparently did suck her thumb nightly until she was about 6 or 7 years of age. 

Relative to the small upper left lateral incisor, there are other members in the family that have that same small hypoplastic tooth.

Basic Diagnoses

Posterior vertical maxillary excess
Slight AP mandibular deficiency
Apertognathia
Rule out TMJ pathology
Class II end-on occlusion 
Occluding only on the maxillary and mandibular first and second molars bilaterally 
Severely hypoplastic maxillary left lateral incisor
Maxillary midline shifted to the left 1 to 2 mm
Moderately high occlusal plane angle
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4
Hypertrophied turbinates
Probable partial nasal airway obstruction
Moderately hyperplastic tonsils
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of approximately 5 mm at the soft palate level and 7 mm at the base of the tongue (normal 11 mm)
History of thumb sucking until the age of 7 years

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJ

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch back through the first molars. Do not include second molars in the arch wire. Open at least a millimeter to 1.5 mm of space on each side of the maxillary left lateral incisor. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially to make room for interdental osteotomies between the lateral incisors and cuspids
Align and level mandibular arch back through the first molars. Do not include the second molars in the arch wire

Surgery
Consider bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair if it is determined from the MRI that the discs are displaced
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the occlusion and move the posterior aspect of the maxilla superiorly, expand, and upright incisors
Consider possible bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a slightly counterclockwise direction
Partial reduction turbinectomies
Surgical removal of impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4
Consider possible tonsillectomy

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary left lateral incisor
