PAULA HUMISTON								04/04/2007

Paula is 50 years old, referred by Dr. Tariq Quadri, 1 Professional Dr., Alton, IL 62002.  Paula's original problem began sometime in 1987/1988 when she was on an airplane trying to equalize pressure and she heard her disc jump out of place in the right jaw joint.  In 1988, she had TMJ surgery to reposition the articular disc on that side and that was done by Dr. Bradley Roberts.  She actually did quite well until February of 2006 when she woke up in the morning and thought that she had a sinus infection.  She saw several doctors and was told that it was TMJ related.  This was after a round or two of antibiotics where the problem did not get better.  She then went to see Dr. Greg Hosch, oral surgeon, in St. Louis.  On 04/05/2006, Dr. Hosch performed a lavage followed by physical therapy and Paula states she had good range of motion for about 1 month and the problems developed again.  Her pain, however, remained the same.  On 04/26/2006, Dr. Hosch repeated the lavage with more physical therapy.  This time there was no improvement in movement and the pain has continued to be quite severe.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Fioricet 4 to 6 tablets per day. 
Forteo injections for osteoporosis.
Mobic 7.5 mg daily.
Ambien 10 mg p.r.n.
Vicodin 5/500 prescribed at 3 tablets q.3h. p.r.n. pain. However, she does not take it this frequently because she finds that it does not seem to be of much help.

Paula has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  Right hip aches occasionally.  She does have osteoporosis for which she takes the Forteo injections.  She has had an adverse reaction to penicillin, fentanyl and Versed.  She has no known problems with jewelry.  She is aware of clenching during the day and may clench at night but she is not sure.  Her pain is constant throughout the day.

She rates her TMJ pain at a level of pain, average daily pain at 9, jaw function, diet and disability all at 9.  She rates her headaches at 9 and they occur on the right side in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area.

In frontal view, Paula has reasonably good facial symmetry.  There may be a little bit increased fullness in the right masseter area but not too significant.  Upper lip length is about 19 to 20 mm.  Maxillary midline is off to the right side maybe 1 to 1.5 mm.  She has good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, nose and chin.  A little nasal ptosis.  Paula states that her pain is predominately on the right side but if she has been talking on the phone for awhile it will also go to the left side and bother her there.  However, the predominant pain is on the right side and can actually come down and progress down through and forward in the lower jaw.  Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspid.  Significant crowding in lower anterior arch.  She appears to have good attached gingiva.  



PAULA HUMISTON 			04/04/2007				Page 2

In the upper arch, she likewise is missing first bicuspids but has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship with a 2 mm vertical overbite.  To palpation, Paula has severe pain over the right masseter, right medial pterygoid, right TMJ area, right styloid area and high moderate pain over the left styloid and moderate pain over the left medial pterygoid, left TMJ.  Joints function relatively smoothly.  She is not aware of any noises in the joints.  Maximal opening is 28 mm but she has pain through all levels of opening and can to no position where she is pain-free.  Excursive movement to the right 8 mm, left 2 mm.  She reports no difficulties breathing through her nose.  The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all look relatively normal.  Turbinates appear relatively normal with maybe just slight constriction in the right nasal airway.  The turbinates may be just slightly enlarged but not too significant.  Paula has no difficulties by history of breathing through her nose.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the sinuses appear relatively.  All 4 third molars and all 4 first bicuspids are absent as well as the maxillary left lateral incisor that has been replaced by a 4-unit bridge extending from the second bicuspid cuspid and the incisor.  She also has a crown on the right maxillary second bicuspid.  Right condyle appears a little flattened on top compared to the left joint.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  Right turbinate appears somewhat enlarged compared to the left side although there does appear to be a passable airway.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that condyle and fossa structures look relatively normal.  Articular eminence is moderate in angulation and actually may be slightly shorter in length.  Condyle appears to have fairly good morphology.  Joint space looks relatively normal.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that there is a decreased superior and posterior joint space and some anterior beaking present.  More degenerative changes are present in this joint.  Articular eminence may be a little bit steeper on this side compared to the opposite side.  On opening, there is minimal translation in the left joint and no translation in the right joint.  At least on the MRI taken yesterday showed that she had fairly good translation in the left joint and some restricted translation in the right joint without any movement of the disc although on the right side the disc is anteriorly displaced.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a skeletal Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She does appear to have somewhat decreased oropharyngeal airway with airway dimension being about 7 mm at the soft palate level and about 5 mm at the base of the tongue.




PAULA HUMISTON 			04/04/2007				Page 3

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with adhesions.
Right TMJ severe pain.
Right-sided severe headaches.
Right-sided severe myofascial pain.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Previously extracted first bicuspids and maxillary right second molar and all 4 third molars.  Also, missing maxillary left lateral incisor replaced by a bridge.

I did discus with the patient the factors involving the retruded maxilla and mandible as well as decreased airway.  She has relatively minimal symptoms based on her and her husband's observations relative to sleep apnea symptomatology or problems.  Therefore, she is not interested in pursuing any correction of that area but she is very much aware that she could develop problems in the future particularly if she gains weight.  Therefore, based on her and her husband's desires and after thorough discussion of the treatment options for the TMJ including total joint prostheses versus Mitek anchor for disc repositioning and sagittal split osteotomy on the right side, we arrived at the following treatment recommendation. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications.
Klonopin 1 mg dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x5.
CT scans of TMJs and jaws ( TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Right TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis.
Fat graft to right TMJ (harvest from the abdomen.)
Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.
Physical therapy only if necessary postsurgery (probably will not be required.)
