WHITNEY HUNT									04/16/2007

Whitney is 12 years and 10 months of age.  She is referred by Dr. Anthony Harwell, Amarillo, TX.  She is in good health with no major medical problems.  The primary concern that she has is asymmetrical jaw growth.  She would like to have her jaws properly aligned and leveled to eliminate problems later on in life.  She does have a concave sternum.  There is a question as to whether Whitney may have Marfans syndrome.  She has long fingers and long arms and she is 5 feet 7 inches.  She does have a concave chest problem.  

In frontal view, Whitney has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm.  Maxillary midline is a little bit to the left side about 1 mm as is the mandibular dental midline but they are fairly well aligned with each other.  The chin is probably about 6 mm off towards the left side.  The right side of the mandible is about 5 mm lower than the left side.  In profile view, she has very good facial symmetry.  Upper lip may be about 2 mm posterior at the subnasale area.  The chin may be back just about 5 or 6 mm.  Intraorally, on the right side she has an end-on cuspid relationship in a Class II position and on the left side a little bit Class II end-on by probably 2 mm.   There is about a 3 mm anterior overbite relationship.  Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right maxillary teeth in the first bicuspid being about 4 mm lower than the left side.  In the lower arch, the first bicuspid tooth is about 5 mm lower than the left side.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the medial pterygoid area being a little bit greater on the left side as compared to the right side.  No tenderness around the joints or other areas of the head and neck.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Incisal opening is about 54 mm.  Excursive movements are about 6 mm to the right and about 7 mm to the left.  She has a slight increased curve of Wilson in the lower arch on the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Tonsils are present but appear to be relatively normal in size.  Intranasally, turbinates appear moderately large considering the internal dimensions of the nose.  The septum looks relatively normal.  Apparently there is some mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction.  She does have some allergy problems.  Not aware of any problems with snoring, daytime tiredness or sleep apnea problems.  She does feel that she does breathe through her mouth when she sleeps. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows presence of all the teeth with the 4 third molars beginning to develop but impacted.  Mandibular and maxillary second molars are unerupted.  She has retained primary E's in all 4 quadrants with secondary teeth in the maxilla bilaterally with the second bicuspids developing and root resorption occurring on the primary teeth.  In the mandibular right arch, a second premolar tooth is developing beneath the retained primary molar.  On the left side, she has a primary second molar with no succeeding tooth.  Turbinates appear enlarged.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Condylar head and neck appears longer on the right side than the left side. Vertical height of the mandible in the first molar area is greater on the right side than the left side by about 3 mm.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear.  Turbinates appear enlarged.  The bony septum at least appears relatively straight. 


WHITNEY HUNT				04/16/2007				Page 2

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  A little narrow anteroposteriorly and a little bit of flattening in the anterior head.  Decreased superior joint space.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears smaller than the opposite side.  There may be a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the vertical discrepancy between the left and right sides with the right side being significantly longer vertically at the inferior border by about 8 mm in the second molar area, about 7 mm in the first molar area and about 4 mm in the cuspid area.   There is some adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx.  Airway dimension at the soft palate level is about 9 to 10 mm and at the base of the tongue it is 10 mm.  A little bit of a high occlusal plane angle is present.  Tooth size analysis shows there is a Bolton's difference of 2+ mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Right TMJ osteochondroma/osteoma versus condylar hyperplasia. 
Right mandibular vertical hyperplasia.
Right side maxillary vertical hyperplasia.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 4 mm lower than the left side. 
Class II end-on occlusion. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Partial nasal airway obstruction. 
Retained primary mandibular left E with no successor.
 Retained right mandibular primary E but with a second bicuspid tooth present but 
       unerupted.
 Impacted maxillary mandibular third molars.
 Unerupted bilateral maxillary and mandibular second molars. 
 Bilateral hyperplastic inferior turbinates.
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2+ mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up 1 mm space between each of the upper lateral incisors and cuspids.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Maintain mandibular left E but consider slenderizing it some to make it more compatible in size of a second bicuspid.
Extract mandibular right primary E if indicated.
Continue to monitor facial growth and development.


WHITNEY HUNT				04/16/2007				Page 3

Surgery (approximately the age of 14 to 15.)
Right mandibular high condylectomy versus low condylectomy (depends on pathology) with repositioning of the articular disc with a Mitek anchor.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to transversely level the maxilla and advance it slightly. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back on the facial midline and advance it slightly and level transversely. 
Removal of impacted third molars x4.
Partial inferior turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
