DALLAS HUNT								01/19/2012

Dallas is 19 years old, birth date 11/19/1992.  He is not sure exactly when the jaw joint problems began but maybe around the age of 10 to 12.  He did have some orthodontics that was initially begun in the first grade for some alignment of the front teeth, but then he had fixed braces on for probably about 2 to 3 years with Dr. Cliff Alexander.  He more recently began in June 2011 Invisalign with Dr. Nathan Harris.  Dallas gets headaches maybe once or at the most twice a week that occur in the frontal and temporal areas at about a level of 2.  His TMJ pain is somewhere around 3, average daily pain may be a 3.  Jaw function is 6, diet at 2, disability at 1.  He has no trouble with earaches, gets periodic tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He is not sure if he clenches or bruxes at night.  He is aware of probably moderate to severe snoring and at least moderate daytime somnolence.  He has periodic episodes of waking at night unable to catch his breath.  He is predominantly a mouth breather at nighttime and also during the day.  He takes the following medications:

Vyvanse 30 mg q.d.
Lexapro 10 mg q.d.

In frontal view, Dallas has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm.  The maxillary midline is probably just slightly off to the right side maybe about 1 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is probably about 2 mm off to the right side and chin is probably 4 to 5 mm off to the right side.  He has a lip incompetence of about 11 mm.  In profile, the maxilla is deficient by about 8 mm.  The chin is AP retruded by about 20 to 24 mm.  He has a strong head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, Dallas is missing the probably lower first bicuspids.  He has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has some minimal crowding in the lower anterior arch.  He has real thin attached gingiva on the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, he is also missing the first bicuspids.  Dallas is missing all four first bicuspids.  He has got a Class II occlusion, being a little bit greater Class II on the right side than the left side.  He has a 5 mm anterior open bite.  He appears to occlude only his second molars.  He also has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 1.5 to 2 mm higher than the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal except there is some scarring on the left side of the soft palate from the previous tonsils that were removed at the age of 4 that pulls the soft palate and uvula just off to the left side probably about 3 or 4 mm.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated significantly off towards the left side.  The turbinates are probably moderate in size.   The incisal opening is 40 mm, but only about 20 mm without discomfort.  The excursion movements are about 7 mm in each direction.  To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the TMJs, masseters, and retromandibular area.  On opening, he could hear a small glitch in the left joint but the right side seemed to be more smooth.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids.  Condyles look relatively small in size.  The septum is deviated off towards the left side.  The sinuses appear relatively clear and turbinates appear to difficult to evaluate in this view.  

Coronal view shows that there is a septal spur off to the left side.  Turbinates are of moderate size.  The sinuses are clear. 

Axial view shows that the septum is deviated off to the left side in the anterior part of the nose, but posteriorly the bone is a little bit more straight.  Turbinates have a moderate size to them.  The sinuses are relatively clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is small in size and may have lost some volume.  There is anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle which appears a little bit more arthritic than the left side.  There is anterior beaking present.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa and there is an increased anterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is somewhat narrow mediolateral and appears it may have lost some vertical volume.  The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with a downward curvature of about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that may also be a little bit narrow mediolaterally.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves downward about 2 to 3 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the maxilla is retruded with a little bit of vertical maxillary excess.  The mandible is significantly retruded.  He has a high occlusal plane angle associated with the mandibular arch, but the upper arch is relatively flat.  The oropharyngeal airway measures about 3 mm at the soft palate level and about 6 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnoses for Dallas would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated without reduction. 
Maxillary AP hypoplasia, vertical hyperplasia.
Severe mandibular AP hyperplasia.
Class III occlusion.
Anterior open bite of 5 mm.  
Occluding only on second molars.
Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars.  
Deviated nasal septum off to the left side blocking the nasal airway.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Retruded maxillary second molars from functional overloading.
Mild crowding in maxillary and mandibular arches.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJs.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Place brackets on the second molars, but 			do not include in the arch wire.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they 			are necessary. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly 				approximately 4 mm and advance it forward approximately 7 to 8 mm.  
	c.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction.
	d.	Nasal septoplasty.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 