COURTNEY HUNT									11-24-04

Patient History

Courtney’s problems began when she was a young teenager, and she was aware of clicking and popping in her jaw joints at that time. The etiology is unknown. On her way home from school Thanksgiving of 2003, her right jaw joint locked up. The patient treatment she has had since then included physical therapy for four weeks with no improvement. She has worn a splint, but this has not improved her situation either. These are the treatments she has had so far for her current condition. She previously had orthodontics for about 10 months at the age of 15 to 16. She has had her third molars extracted. 

Courtney is unaware of any changes in her occlusion, although she is aware that when she opens her lower jaw shifts off toward the right side. Courtney has no problems with headaches. She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 7 particularly during function. Her average daily pain is at a level of 6, jaw function and diet at 7, and disability at 4. 

Current Medications

Naproxen 500 mg 1 to 2 q.d. 
Lexapro 10 mg q.d. 
Mircette (BCP)
Toprol XL 25 mg q.d. 

Patient Concerns (in no specific order)

Right joint locks
Right-sided earache that radiates down into the jaws
Jaw pain
Jaw joint pain
Sleeping problems related to the pain
Talking creates pain
Difficulties eating and chewing

Clinical Examination

To palpation, Courtney has some mild to moderate pain in the right masseter muscle and the right styloid areas. Doesn’t have any significant tenderness directly over the joints at this time. On opening, she has clicking in her left joint with an opening click at about 15 mm and closing click at about 10 mm. In the right joint, she has some crepitus type of sounds. 

Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. She has good left-to-right facial symmetry. The dental midlines and chin midline appear fairly well with the facial midline. 

In profile, she has fairly good facial balance. Some slight retrusion of the maxilla and mandible. Chin-neckline is a little bit decreased in length.

Intraorally, Courtney has all of her teeth back through the second molars present in the lower arch. Has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship and about a 2-mm overbite relationship anteriorly. Maximal incisal opening is about 27 mm, and she can open about 23 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movements to the right are about 8 mm and to the left 7 mm. She had crepitation in the right joint on excursive movements. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. The rest of the teeth are in place. A little calcification occurring between the mandibular right bicuspids. Sinuses appear relatively clear. She has a nasal stud present on the right side. Right condyle appears to be somewhat arthritic with some peaking of the condyle and some flattening on the anterior head. The left side shows some minor changes but appears more normal. Articular eminences are moderately steep.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows basically a skeletal and occlusal Class I relationship. Oropharyngeal airway looks good. Relatively normal occlusal plane angle. 

Waters view shows the sinuses are clear. Septum may have some deviation to it. Turbinate on the right side appears moderately large. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a hockey stick shape to it. Posterior joint space and superior joint space are decreased. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Anterior aspect of the condyle is flattened.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit smaller in size then the opposite side. The cortical bone is a little bit more difficult to identify. Condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Increased anterior joint space.

On opening, there moderate restriction of translation in both joints, a little bit greater on the right side than the left side. 

Basic Diagnoses

Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and a closed lock situation
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction
Right earaches
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Sleep disorder
Masticatory dysfunction

Recommended Treatment
Orthodontics
Apply appliances to maxillary teeth
Apply appliances to mandibular teeth. Can use bonded brackets

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion and create space in the joints for the discs 

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 