BERNADETTE HUNTER								11/20/2006

Bernadette is 45 years old, referred by Dr. Jeffrey Donlevy, 10100 Culver Blvd., Ste. C, Culver City, CA 90232.  Bernadette does have lupus but it is in remission.  She also gets migraines.  Previous surgeries include tonsillectomy, hernia repair, reduction of broken nose, 2 C-sections and previous jaw surgery.  Bernadette is in good health.  She has had an adverse reaction to tetracycline and to Dilaudid.  Her orthodontist is Dr. Mario Paz.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Jaw mobility issues. 
Pain in her jaws, ears and gums.
Headaches.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Grinding and pressure on her teeth especially in the a.m.
Tooth loss.

OBJECTIVES:
To be pain free.
Proper jaw alignment and bite with good jaw support and proper jaw movement.
To be able to open the jaws and chew normally without pain.  

Bernadette's problems began on December 19, 2005.  She was on the couch having a migraine headache.  She received a Demerol injection.  She later got up and went in to the kitchen where she fell striking her chin.  She sustained apparently a left parasymphysis fracture and a left angle fracture that was apparently nondisplaced according to the otolaryngologist, Dr. Jason Van Tassel.  There may have been some undiagnosed subcondylar fractures.  He took her to surgery on December 21, 2005, and did open reductions on her fractures and placed arch bars and wired her together.  On January 4, 2006, he removed the arch bars.  Very shortly after removal of the arch bars, Bernadette noticed that she had a space between her front teeth that she could put her tongue through.  She eventually was referred to Dr. Jeffrey Donlevy.  Dr. Donlevy apparently identified subcondylar fractures and placed her back into maxillary fixation on January 11, 2006.  She was wired together 4 to 6 weeks at least.  Her bite has turned out okay since that treatment.  She gets earaches, no tinnitus.  She gets some vertigo and has no hearing loss.  No other joints bother her except she has a toe that she apparently has injured more recently.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and during the day and she has a lot of clicking in her jaws as well.  She frequently will place her tongue between her teeth and this helps her be more comfortable.  She takes no medications currently although she did take Topamax but not consistently.  She still has some but has not taken any in a few days.  She has no facial numbness.  No facial nerve involvement.  

She gets headaches at a level of 10 in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area.  She gets headaches about 3 to 4 times per month but when she does get these headaches they can last several days.  She rates her TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain 4, jaw function at 7, diet and disability at 6.  There are changes in facial appearance that Bernadette is aware of:
The chin is more retruded than it was before.
She has more looseness of the skin in the submental area and neck area.  
BERNADETTE HUNTER			11/20/2006				Page 2

She has more fullness on the left side of the face than the right side of the face.
Lower lip is more intruded and smaller now than it was prior to her injury.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:
In frontal view, she has a little bit more fullness in the left side of the face than the right side by probably about 4 to 5 mm.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Nasal tip is about 2 to 3 mm to the right.  Mandibular dental midline may be about 1 mm to the right although she is missing a lower incisor.  Chin may be just about 1 to 2 mm off to the left side.  In profile view, Bernadette has pretty good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  Chin appears to be retruded.  Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not well defined.  Chin is retruded by about 10 or 12 mm.  Bernadette feels that her lower jaw is more angled now than it was before and more noticeable on the left side than the right side.  Intraorally, Bernadette is missing probably a mandibular right central incisor.  She has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a crown on the left second molar and she some temporary crowns on currently as well.  She is essentially pretty close to being a Class I cuspid although slightly Class II on the left side.  She has small upper lateral incisors and significant tooth size discrepancy which accounts for the probably previous extraction of the lower central incisor.  The maxillary left first bicuspid apparently got partially extracted when the arch bars were removed the first time.  The tooth was sort of pushed back in place.  It is quite sore and sensitive to Bernadette.  She has recently had a portion of the buccal distal cusp on the maxillary right first molar break off.  She also has a discoloration of the maxillary left central incisor due to the trauma from the fall.  She has had a temporary root canal done on that tooth but the tooth has not been bleached or finalized yet.  Oropharyngeal tissues look good.  The uvula is relatively normal in length.  The soft palate looks relatively normal in length but it is asymmetric with the uvula being shifted towards the left side.  Faucial pillars look relatively normal.  Intranasally, turbinates look relatively normal.  Septum appears relatively straight.  There appears to be no nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness of the TMJs and right masseter.  Maximal incisal opening is 26 mm.  Excursive movement is about 1 mm in each direction.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has had a previous fracture and is rotated way over medially.  There appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact along the medial aspect of the superior aspect of the fossa and the medial wall of the fossa.  I see no real evidence of discal tissue although there could be some perhaps anterior to the condyle but difficult to see it.

Right TMJ condyle also shows previous fracture medially displaced actually functioning on the inferior aspect of the medial wall of the fossa.  Decreased joint space between the head of the condyle and the inferior aspect of the medial wall of the fossa.  Increased joint space superiorly in the fossa area.  There may be discal tissue up in the fossa but difficult to tell.  Both condylar heads go off the remaining condyle at about at a 60-degree angle. 



BERNADETTE HUNTER			11/20/2006				Page 3

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle over medial to the ramus.  Difficult to identify tissue but the cuts do not go all the way through the medial aspect of the condyle.  On the T1 films, the disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting along the posterior wall of the fossa.  Joint space is slightly increased posteriorly.  There appears to be a little osteophyte sticking up off the top of the condyle.  There appears to be some peaking on the head of the condyle and some flattening on the anterior aspect.

Right sagittal view shows a condyle that is positioned actually underneath the articular eminence with very minimal joint space.  Significantly increased posterior joint space.   Difficult to identify discal tissue in this joint.  There is one area that appears the joint space is significantly decreased.  It appears there may be some arthritic changes in one of the views on top of the condyle.  On the right side it appears that there may be some discal tissue around the area of the joint but it appears quite degenerated.  The condylar head appears quite flat and arthritic.  There is some unevenness on the head of the condyle with depressions in the cortical bone.  Fossa appears a little degenerated as well particularly opposite where the condyle is positioned.  The condyle is positioned along the articular eminence.  

IMPRESSION: 
Left TMJ subcondylar fracture with the condyle rotated significantly medially and anteriorly displaced articular disc with arthritic changes in the condyle. 
Right TMJ previous subcondylar fracture with the condyle positioned over medially and anteriorly towards the articular eminence with significant arthritic changes and articular disc remnants but difficult to identify much discal tissue. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of bone place in the mandible.  She has a root canal in the maxillary left central incisor.  Missing perhaps mandibular right central incisor.  All 4 third molars are absent.  She has evidence of bilateral subcondylar fractures with significant displacement on the right side.  Sinuses appear clear.  Septum has some deviation in it.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The septum appears fairly straight.  The turbinates are moderately in size.  Bone plate is present on the left side in parasymphysis.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle is displaced anteriorly sitting beneath the articular eminence.  The styloid process is seen at the posterior border of the mandible.  Subcondylar fracture area noted at the level of the sigmoid notch.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is postured downward in the fossa.  The subcondylar fracture is present at the sigmoid notch area.  On opening, there does not appear to be any translation.  




BERNADETTE HUNTER			11/20/2006				Page 4

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has Class I occlusion with Class II skeletal relationship and high occlusal plane angle.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway dimension about 5 mm at the soft palate level and probably about 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  Bone plate is present on the anterior aspect of the mandible.  She has some platysma banding on the right side of the neck that extends up to the posterior border of the symphysis.  This is very bothersome and of concern to her.  Apparently this was not present prior to the injury.  

DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral mandibular subcondylar fractures with malunion.
Bilateral TMJ fibrous ankylosis. 
Mandibular hypoplasia.
Maxillary hypoplasia.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Missing one mandibular central incisor.
High occlusal plane angle. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
 Nocturnal and daytime clenching.
 Bone plate in left parasymphysis.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications.
Klonopin 1 mg q.h.s. to help control nocturnal clenching.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. 
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to rotate the maxilla in a counterclockwise rotation to level the occlusal plane.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Removal bone plate from the mandible. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to rebuild the teeth and bleach the maxillary left central incisor. 