TARU HUNTER									08-09-04

Taru is 31 years old. 

Patient Concerns

His teeth don’t fit together
Difficulties eating and chewing
Abnormal swallowing pattern with his tongue coming forward between his teeth
Clicking and popping in his jaws
Speech effect associated with slurring of some of his words

Patient History

Taru has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. No other joints bother him. He is not aware of clenching or bruxism. He takes no medications. He had his third molars extracted about two weeks ago. He says he has some clicking in his jaw joints of unknown onset and unknown etiology. Doesn’t have any trouble with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Taru has good left-to-right facial balance. Upper lip length is about 27 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -2 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned with each other. 

In profile view, Taru has fullness in the upper lip where it extends about 10 mm anterior to subnasale. Lips are actually in fairly good AP balance. Chin appears AP deficient by probably 12 mm or so. 

Intraorally, Taru has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Third molars were recently extracted. A lot of wear on the mandibular second molars particularly on the right side, although that may be a temporary crown. Has good attached gingiva. Minimal crowding, lower anterior arch.

In the upper arch, he has a temporary crown on the maxillary right first molar and a crown on the maxillary left first molar. Has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars, and the third molars were recently removed. In centric relation, he has basically a Class I cuspid relationship bilaterally. Has a crossbite tendency from the lateral incisors through the second bicuspids bilaterally. First molars appear out of crossbite. Has an anterior open bite of 6 mm. Has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch and probably slightly reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch. When Taru bites together, he hits on the right side on the second bicuspids and first and second molars. On the left side, he hits on just the first and second molars. Oropharynx looks normal. Uvula is of normal size and shape. Soft palate looks normal. Faucial pillars are relatively normal. Does have a history of occasional sinus problems.

Intranasally, septum looks fairly straight. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. A little hypervascularity on the turbinates and on the septum. Airway looks fairly good.

He has no myofascial pain tenderness. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly. It does come out beyond the articular eminence, and there is a little bit of a click there, and this may be the click that Taru was referring to. It does not feel as though it involves the articular discs. 
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex is a little hard to read. Sinuses look relatively clear. Third molars have recently been extracted. Appears to occlude only on the first and second molars bilaterally with the rest of the teeth essentially being out of occlusion. Has had a root canal on the maxillary left first molar. May have a little calcification around the right first bicuspid but difficult to tell. Could be a little hypercementosis around that tooth. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Some deviation of the nasal septum. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Appears to be airway present. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of peaking at the superior surface. Posterior joint space looks good. Superior joint space in one view looks okay. A little difficult to see the cortical bone across the anterosuperior aspect of the condylar head. Articular eminence is relatively shallow.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Fossa looks relatively normal. Articular eminence is a little bit steeper on this side. Joint space looks good. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles beyond the articular eminences. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch and a significant anterior open bite. Appears to be occluding only on the first and second molars. High occlusal plane angulation appears to be present. Some bimaxillary protrusion is present as well. Upper and lower incisors appear overangulated.

Tooth-size analysis reveals a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary excess
Anterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical excess
AP mandibular deficiency
AP microgenia
Anterior open bite of 6 to 8 mm
Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
Slight reverse curve of occlusion, lower arch
Occluding only on right second bicuspids and first and second molars and left first and second molars
Crossbite tendency in the lateral incisor through the second bicuspid areas 
High occlusal plane angulation
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Tooth-size discrepancy
Apertognathia

Recommended Treatment

Restorative dentistry to place temporaries where necessary to control caries, etc.

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch in three segments:
Segment 1:  First bicuspid through first molar
Segment 2:  Left cuspid through right cuspid
Segment 3:  Right first bicuspid through first molar
Place brackets on the upper second molars but do not incorporate the second molars into the arch wire. Place a step in the arch wire to align the cuspids and four incisors in an elevated plane level compared to the bicuspid and molars. Tip cuspid roots mesially and first bicuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to help keep the teeth from tipping forward anymore and actually allowing some slight retraction and elevation of the lower incisors

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the posterior aspect superiorly, anterior aspect inferiorly, and expand to correct any transverse discrepancies that may be present 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Consider chin augmentation (currently Taru would prefer not to have a chin augmentation performed)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Definitive dental work as necessary to finalize his crown and restoration requirements
