JAKOB HURLIN									2/28/05

Jakob is 20 years old and referred by Sheryl Estes. 

Jakob does have some hypothyroidism and takes Synthroid 0.75 mg daily.  Jakob also took a growth hormone to help because he had a growth deficiency prior to that.  Jakob's problems began when he was about 2 years of age.  He developed rhabdomyosarcoma behind the right ear.  He received 4500 RADS of radiation at the age of 2.  There apparently was a recurrence and so he was treated with chemotherapy at the age of 5 to 6.   The mother and Jakob really did not notice a development of significant facial asymmetry until he was about probably 10 to 11 years of age.  Apparently, when he was in the primary dentation, he could still open fairly well.  When he started getting his permanent dentation it was recognized that he had more difficulty opening.  Around the age of 10 to 11, there were some attempts to try and improve his jaw function.  He was put to sleep and cracked fairly vigorously and apparently sustained a fracture of the mandible.  He was then given a TheraBite device and Jakob worked very diligently with that and made the fracture apparently worse.  Then he had his jaws wired together apparently to treat the fracture.  He then went and saw Dr. John Polley in Chicago, who did distraction on the right mandible to lengthen the jaw.  He apparently had 2 different distractors placed when it may not have worked and then it was replaced with another one.  He then went and saw Dr. Ian Jackson and Dr. Jeffery Topf and they did another distraction plus a rib graft to try and establish the joint.  Apparently, Jakob ankylosed and then had another procedure where Silastic implant was placed.  However, apparently the Silastic implant got infected and remained infected for about a year before it was finally removed in January of 2001.  He did fracture his right collar bone sometime in 2000.  Apparently, Dr. Polley took out the right SCM or deltoid muscle removed because Jakob's head was tilted over towards the right side.  Muscles were removed.  It is not clear, but it could have been the sternocleidomastoid or perhaps part of the deltoid muscle.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:   
Right sided jaw is frozen.
Significant difficulty in eating and chewing.
Facial nerve paralysis on the right side of the face.
Facial asymmetry.

Jakob has no earaches, gets occasional tinnitus but no vertigo.  He has significantly decreased hearing loss on the right side and it has been recommended that he get a hearing aid.  Other joints that bother him include his back.  His right ankle also pops.  He thinks he may clench some at night.  He has trouble with headaches and no TMJ pain.  He gets some neck and back pain at about a level of 2.  He rates his jaw function at 9, diet at 0, disability at 2.  He has altered sensation to the right side of his face.  Facial nerve is essentially nonfunctional on the right side.

CLINICAL EVALUATION:  
Upper lip length is 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is -5 mm.  Maxillary dental midline is shifted off to the right side 2 mm.  Mandibular dental midline off to the right 5 mm and chin off to the right side about 14 to 15 mm.  Significantly increased facial fullness on the left side and severe deficiency on the right side.  There is about at least a 15 mm transverse deficiency at the angle of the mandible.  
JAKOB HURLIN				2/28/05				Page 2


Vertebral height of the mandible on the right side is deficient by about 10 to 15 mm.  Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 10 mm higher than the left side.  In profile, Jakob has fairly good balance between the upper, cheeks and nose.  Chin is deficient by about 10 mm.  Decreased vertical facial height.  Lower lip is large fairly significantly.  Vertical asymmetry is present.  To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the right medial pterygoid area, right styloid area but not other pain to palpation.  He has an end-on incisor relationship with the right central and about a mm over-bite with the left central.  Mandibular dental midline shifted back to 3 mm to the right of maxillary midline which is 2 mm off to the right of the facial midline.  Mandibular arch to the lower right cuspid is probably 3 to 4 mm higher than the left cuspid.  He is about 2 mm Class III on the left side, close to a Class I on the right side.  He has a crossbite on the posterior right side.  Maximal incisal opening is about 3 to 4 mm and go about 1 mm excursion movement to the right, but none to the left.  Jakob is not aware of any difficulties with snoring.  I could not evaluate the uvula, soft palate or fascial pillars.  Jakob does not report any difficulties with snoring when he sleeps or does not report any sleep apnea problems.  He does give a history of waking up and having stuff in his nose.  Nasal examination shows turbinates look reasonably good and the septum appears to be reasonably straight.  He has a severe fibrosis of the masseter muscle.  It is back inside his cheek just a short distance and extremely firm and fibrotic.  Extremely short roots on the maxillary anterior teeth and the absent roots on the mandibular right first molar. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows that from the cuspid posteriorly in the upper jaw on the right side all the teeth are absent.  In the lower right side, he has molars without any roots and has a bicuspid with an extremely short root.  He has cuspids and incisors around to the right first bicuspid although there is a large space between the first bicuspid and the cuspid on the left side.  He has one molar that has very good roots on the lower left side.  In the upper arch, he is missing all the teeth on the right from the cuspid on posteriorly.  He does have central and lateral incisors and a cuspid on the left side with fairly good root.  Incisors appear to have extremely short roots.  He appears to have a retained primary first molar and is missing both permanent bicuspids except it appears that there is a bicuspid between 2 molars that could be transposed bicuspid.  First molars are in functional contact.  The bicuspid looking tooth and the posterior molar are nonfunctional teeth.  Left sinus looks reasonably good.  Right sinus looks pretty much obliterated.  Some bone screws are present in the zygomatic arch oval rim area on the right side.  He has hypereruption of mandibular left transverse, second bicuspid and posterior molar.  These teeth will probably be indicated for removal.  Airway is difficult to evaluate.  There appears to be ankylosis in the right but cannot see the entire condyle.  The left joints are difficult to evaluate.

Left TMJ shows a condyle that actually has fairly good anatomy and good joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  This joint may be relatively normal particularly in coordinating with the MRI.  



JAKOB HURLIN				2/28/05				Page 3

Right TMJ, however, shows what appears to be a massive area of ankylosis extending along the remnant of the fossa and articular eminence on forward.  Root on the right posterior teeth are essentially nonexistent particularly on the first molar.  It actually appears to be soft tissue crease between the crown and the bone itself.  Sinus is extremely small on this side.  

Waters view shows that the septum looks pretty straight and the turbinates are not too large and nasal airway looks quite good.  Bone screws around the orbit indicative of previous bone grafting to build up the orbits.  Severe asymmetry in the mandible is seen with the left side being about 10 or 12 mm vertically shorter than the right side.  Occlusal planes at the cuspid levels shows a vertical difference with the right side being about 4 or 5 mm higher than the left side.  Left maxillary sinus appears fairly small and appears clear on some of the areas that we can see.  The right sinus is extremely small and appears there may be some inflammation of the sinus membrane, but difficult to tell from that x-ray.  Waters view shows that the tongue is moderately small.  Has a good oropharyngeal airway.  He has vertical deficiency of the maxilla and of the mandible.  Reconstruction with a bone plate to the zygoma and lateral orbital rims are seen.  Transversely, there is a yaw in the mandible and maxilla with the mandible being probably being 4 to 6 mm to the left and the maxilla being probably 6 to 8 mm to the left.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Post radiation for rhabdomyosarcoma at the age of 2.
Previous chemotherapy for recurrence at age 5 to 6.
Right mandibular bony ankylosis.
Severe fibrosis of the right buccinator, masseter and medial pterygoid muscles. 
Mandibular hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Maxillary hypoplasia and severe asymmetry.
Severe masticatory dysfunction.
Missing maxillary right cuspid through third molar, mandibular right second bicuspid first and third molars, maxillary left first bicuspid but with a transposed second bicuspid behind the first molar.  
Missing mandibular left second bicuspid, second and third molars.
Anterior right posterior crossbite.
Maxillary midline shifted to the right 2 mm, mandibular dental midline shifted to the right 5 mm and chin shifted to the right 14 to 15 mm.   
Jaw and maxillary mandible being shifted off the right side 5 to 6 mm in the mandible and probably 6 to 8 mm in the maxilla.
Class I cuspid relationship on the right side (patient missing maxillary right posterior teeth) and slight Class III cuspid relationship on the left side. 
Neck and back pain.
Nighttime clenching.





JAKOB HURLIN				2/28/05				Page 4

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Hyperbaric oxygen treatment with 20 dives pre surgery.

Presurgical orthodontics
Apply appliances to maxillary arch.
Apply appliances to mandibular arch.

Surgery stage I
Excise fibrosis involving the buccinator muscle.
Release of bony ankylosis, right mandible with mobilization.
Right TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis.
Left mandibular ramus osteotomy.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to downgraft the maxilla and advance it as well as transversely level it. 
Free forearm flap to right cheek.
Fat graft to right TMJ area (harvest from the abdomen.)
Hyperbaric oxygen treatment times 10 more.

Post Surgical Orthodontics 									Finish and retain 

Surgery stage II
Dental implants to maxilla and mandible as necessary.
Augmentation of left bony facial structures with alloplastic materials.
Fat grafts to right cheek and facial area.
Dental reconstruction to maxillary mandibular arches. 





