TAYLOR HURST									11/10/2006

Taylor is 14 years old and is referred by Dr. Mike Steffen.  Taylor is in good health.  She does have allergy to shellfish and to cats.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Jaw pops.
Headaches that she gets from 2 to 7 days a week.  

She got braces in May of 2006.  Taylor will occasionally take Tylenol or Advil for her headaches.  Taylor gets occasional earaches.  She does have tinnitus and has a hearing loss in the left ear that has been there since birth.  Her neck makes some clicking noises but is not painful or uncomfortable for her.  She gets headaches 2 to 7 times a week at about a level of 6 in the frontal and temple area.  Headaches occur most often after eating lunch.  She is aware that she does clench at night and also during the day.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain 6, jaw function at 4, diet at 3, disability at 0.

Taylor has good facial symmetry and balance.  Upper lip length is 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm.  Dental midline and chin midline appear to be on the facial midline.  In profile she has good facial symmetry and balance.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars erupted in and she has orthodontic appliances back to and including the second molars.  She has a band around the right second molar but brackets on all the rest of the teeth.  She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch she all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a good Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has about a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal area looks healthy.  Uvula is a little bit enlarged and she has a little appendage off the uvula on the right side.  Other areas look relatively normal.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged but she does appear to have adequate nasal airway.  She gives a history of some mild snoring and some mild daytime somnolence but no sleep apnea symptoms. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of all 4 third molars impacted.  All teeth are banded except for the maxillary second molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  Right condyle appears a little bit blunted compared to the left.  

Waters view shows that the nasal septum in the bony area is deviated off towards the left side.  Right turbinate appears enlarged and there may be some nasal airway restriction more posteriorly than what can be seen anteriorly.  

Left TMJ shows a condyle with a little bit of anterior beaking.  It appears that there is actually a little bit of increased joint space.  Articular eminence has a relatively moderate inclination.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit more arthritic.  It is more posteriorly and superiorly positioned within the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints.  

TAYLOR HURST				11/10/2006				Page 2

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway dimension at the soft palate level is about 6 mm, base of the tongue is closer to about 8 to 9 mm.  Soft palate appears a little bit elongated although part of that is the uvula.  The tongue is sitting down and posterior within the oral cavity with good space anteriorly and superiorly.  Midway up the soft palate, the airway is 8 mm.  The tongue may be postured downwards and backwards when the x-ray was taken.  She does have moderate adenoid mass still remaining.  Turbinates extend beyond the posterior aspect of the hard palate.  To palpation, she has some mild to moderate tenderness over the TMJs and styloid areas and mild tenderness over the masseters and posterior neck muscles.  Maximal incisal opening is 52 mm.  Excursive movements are 10 mm in each direction.  As Taylor opens her jaws she definitely has a click in the left joint about 15 mm of opening and closing about 5 mm from being closed all the right.  On the right side, she may have some noises there as well but difficult to tell.  When she opens slowly, she has a definite opening click at about 35 mm of opening. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Left TMJ arthritis and anteriorly displaced articular disc.
Right TMJ arthritis and anteromedially displaced articular disc.
Relative mandibular hyperplasia. 
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Impacted third molars x4.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Continue the aligning and leveling of the dental arches.
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies.
Surgical removal of 4 impacted third molars. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
