BAYLIE HURT									11/03/2006

Baylie is 21 years old and is referred by Dr. David Brown, Midland, TX.  Her dentist is Dr. Chet Gray, Midland, TX.  She has seen Dr. Grant Giles in Midland who is a TMJ specialist.  Baylie's current situation is believed to have begun when she was 19 years old.  In November of 2004 she was playing soccer and tried to hit a ball and hit the head of another player.  She sustained a concussion.  She was taken to the emergency room and keep in overnight observation. 

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Armour thyroid.
Allegra.
Yaz.

She has no other joints that bother her.  She is unaware of clenching or bruxism.  She gets headaches that begin in the back of the head then come up to the temples and towards the front at about a level of 8.  The headaches occur about 5 times per week.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 6, diet at 3, disability at 4. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Popping and clicking in the jaw joints. 
Headaches.
Pain in the joints.
Jaw discomfort around the head and neck area.

In frontal view, Baylie has good facial symmetry and balance.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm.  Maxillary and mandibular dental midlines as well as the chin are fairly well aligned to the facial midline.  In profile, she has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Baylie has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  Teeth appear reasonably well aligned.  She has good attached gingiva with just some mild inflammation.  In the upper arch, Baylie has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  There is basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship and has about ½ mm vertical overbite with the incisors and a slight open bite in the lateral incisor area.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  The uvula, soft palate and the faucial pillars all appear relatively normal.  She had her tonsils removed although there are a couple of areas of some residual adenoid kind of tissue that for the most part looks clear and healthy in that area.  Baylie has a wide columella and narrow nostrils. Holding her nostrils open with a nasal scope she felt it significantly improved her ability to breathe through her nose.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged in size and do appear a little bit boggy.  There is a fairly normal airway space through the nose.  It appears that the large part of breathing difficulty is with the size of the nostrils.  She is predominately a mouth breather when she sleeps at night.  She has some mild snoring, mild daytime somnolence but is not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  On opening, her joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  However, when we go forward and there is protrusive movement, both joints would pop.  On excursive movements she would have almost audible popping on the right side.  Maximal incisal opening is about 46 mm.  She can open about 24 mm comfortably.  Excursive movement to the right was about 7 mm and to the left about 8 mm.  

BAYLIE HURT				11/03/2006				Page 2

Baylie has some different bite patterns.  In her more centric relationship she actually has about a 1 mm vertical overbite relationship of the incisors.  Other times she tends to posture her mandible forward a little bit even into an end-on incisor relationship.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows that all 4 third molars are absent but the rest of the teeth are present.  The condyles show some bony changes.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking present.  Joint space may be somewhat decreased.  Articular eminence appears moderately steep.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows that it appears that there may be some decreased joint.  May be a little bit more arthritic change on this side compared to the other side but difficult to tell.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is moderately good translation bilaterally.  Waters view shows that the bony septum is straight but turbinates are enlarged with the right side being larger than the left side.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  She only has the frontal sinus on the left side and none on the right side.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Mandibular hyperplasia.
Bilateral TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Wide columella creating narrow nostrils.
Nasal airway obstruction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone plate stabilization.
Reconstruction of the columella.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I did discuss with her nonsurgical treatment that may or may not work for her that would include predominately splint therapy.  In order for this to be effective it will shift her occlusion and she will have an end-on incisor relationship and posterior open bites, if in fact, that would relieve her symptoms.  However, it would create an instability in her bite and could require extensive orthodontics or extensive restorative dentistry work to maintain the mandible in a reduced disc position.  They understand this.  My impression would be that surgery would be much more predictable and conclusive in the treatment.  