MICHAEL HUSTED								12/29/2011

Michael is 55 years old, birth date January 1, 1956.  Mike’s TMJ problems began when he was 19 years old in about 1975.  He was in the military police and also did martial arts and was hit in the jaw probably more than one time.  He sustained an injury to the left jaw joint at that time.  He would have clicking and popping in his joints and would get sore intermittently.  It was not until January 2009 that his jaw began to lock up on him.  He went to Scott and White Hospital in Temple, Texas.  In April 2009, he had surgery that consisted of a diskectomy and placement of a fat graft into that joint.  Orthodontics was initiated in October 2010.  Primary concerns that Mike has at this time are:

The MRI shows that the left TMJ disc does not completely recapture.
Not able to open jaw completely.
Pain and burning sensation in left TMJ area.
Bite is off.
Tinnitus.
Frequent earaches.

In frontal view, Mike has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm off to the left side.  The chin also is shifted off to the left side about 2 to 3 mm.  The mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other.  In profile view, Mike has fairly good balance in his upper lip, but may be just slightly AP deficient.  The chin appears to be deficient by probably 10 mm.  The chin neckline is not well defined.  Intraorally, Mike is missing probably mandibular right first molar, but the second molar is drifted forward with the remaining space about the size of the bicuspid.  On the left side, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He is missing one lower incisor, probably left central.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side being about 5 mm Class II, but is Class III cuspid relationship on the left side by probably 3 to 4 mm.  The mandibular right cuspid is about 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch, the maxillary left cuspid is about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  He has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the maxillary right cuspid being about 2 mm higher than the left cuspid and right mandibular cuspid is 1 mm higher than the left one.  Mike has a posterior cross bite tendency on the right side in the molar area.  He has about a 3 mm anterior vertical over bite relationship.  The maximal incisal opening is 23 mm, opening without discomfort 18 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 2 mm and to the left 8 mm.  To palpation, Mike has pain at a level of 5 directly over the left TMJ, but no pain otherwise to palpation around the head and neck area.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the mandibular right first molar with a space size remaining of about two-thirds of a bicuspid crown.  He has a 3-unit bridge down there.  In the maxillary left arch, he is missing both bicuspid teeth with a 4-unit bridge to replace those teeth.  Lower left central incisor is missing.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Right joint looks reasonably healthy.  Left joint appears arthritic.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is fairly straight, but it is bifid at the superior level.  Right turbinate is relatively normal in size, but left inferior turbinate is excessively large and appears to block most of the functional airway.  Unfortunately, the sinuses are not seen in this cut.  

Axial view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side.  The left turbinate is quite large and actually obliterates the left nasal airway.  The right turbinate appears a little bit normal in size and there appears to be adequate airway.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is severely arthritic as is the fossa.  The articular eminence is quit flat.  There is anterior beaking and sclerosis in the head of the condyle.  There are some areas where there appears to be close bony interface with possible bone-on-bone contact.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly reasonably shape with just some slight flattening on the anterior head and some very minimal beaking towards the medial aspect of the joint.  The joint space looks reasonably good.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic with areas of sclerosis, irregularities and bony protuberances.  The fossa also is degenerative with areas of erosions and bony deposition.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  There are some areas where it appears that it is fairly close to being bone-on-bone.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has much better morphology with relatively normal mediolateral width.  There appears to be reasonably good joint space between the condyle and the fossa.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are somewhat retruded.  The oropharyngeal airway measures about 3.5 mm at the soft palate level and about 3 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnoses for Mike would be as follows:

Left TMJ advanced arthritis affecting the condyle and the fossa.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
Hypertrophied left turbinate with nasal airway obstruction.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Missing mandibular left central incisor and mandibular right first molar as well as the maxillary left first and second bicuspids.
Anterior deep bite of 3 mm.
Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side and Class III end-on cuspid relationship on the left side. 
Cross bite tendency right posterior arch.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to open up spacing around the lower 		incisors and tip the left cuspid and first bicuspid labially to get into a better 		alignment.  Consider opening up either a lower incisor space versus 			adjusting spacing between the 3 remaining lower incisors which will later 			require bonding or veneers.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Left TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts 		total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Mandibular right sagittal split osteotomy to advance the mandible.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a 					counterclockwise direction.
	d.	Left nasal partial inferior turbinectomy.
	e.	Left TMJ coronoidotomy.
	f.	Left TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
5.	Restorative dentistry as necessary to place the missing mandibular left central 	incisor or bonding and veneers if spacing is distributed around the 3 incisors.  