MELODY HUTCHINS								02-19-03

Melody is 30 years old and referred by Dr. Paul April and Dr. Pat Shannon. 

Patient History

Melody was recently diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis in January 2003. Previous surgeries involved removal of her wisdom teeth in 1993 and a gum graft in November of 2002. Melody is aware of having TMJ problems beginning as a child of unknown etiology. However, she only became aware of shifting changes in her bite and jaw alignment in the past eight years. She was involved in an MVA where she was hit from behind by a drunk that hit her quite hard. She developed some joint problems at that time and in 1993 was receiving splint therapy. She also did have some physical therapy performed as well. She has had really no other significant treatment for her current condition.

She has no earache problems, gets occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo, and she is not aware of having any significant hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her elbows, right thumb, knees, right hip, and right ankle. She is not aware of clenching and bruxism. She says that virtually none of her teeth touch anymore. She cannot wear cheap jewelry as this tends to make her break out and itch, etc.

Current Medications

Vioxx
Liquid vitamins

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Melody has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 m. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about a millimeter to the left, and lower dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other.

In profile view, she may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency maybe a couple of millimeters. Chin is deficient by probably 15 to 18 mm. Chin-neckline is quite short. Chin-neck angle is not well defined at all. She has some fullness in the submental area. Very short distance between the trachea and the genial tubercles. 

Intraorally, Melody has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Lower cuspids are almost totally blocked out of the arch. She probably has at least 12 mm of crowding in the lower anterior arch. Fairly good attached gingiva in most areas except is quite thin around the cuspids. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has some mild malrotations particularly around her incisors and maybe just some mild crowding in that area. In centric relation, she appears to occlude only on her second molars bilaterally. She has an anterior open bite of about 3 mm. She had an AP overjet of 10 mm. She is fairly close to being a full Class II malocclusion. Melody does tend to posture her mandible forward where it will fairly closely approximate a Class I position, although she still maintains a 2 to 3 mm anterior open bite.

Melody rates her headaches at a level of 6 in the temporal and posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain she gets about twice a week at about a level of 4 on the average but it can escalate up to 9. Average daily pain is at 4. Jaw function is a 8, diet at 5, and disability at 5. Maximal incisal opening is 37 mm. Excursive movements in each direction are approximately 7 mm. To palpation, she has mild to moderate tenderness over the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, styloid areas, and SCMs. On opening, she had a palpable click on the right side, and she feels as though she has some crepitation on the right side as well. On the left side, she had some noises in the joints on excursive movements as she also did on the right side. Melody is aware when she wakes up in the morning that she hasn’t been breathing really well at night.

Intraorally, the oropharynx looks pretty much normal. 

Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderately enlarged. She has a deviated nasal septum, and anteriorly it goes significantly off toward the left side constricting the nostril on the left side. I can hold her nostrils open, and she can breathe easier.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Appears to be significant crowding in the lower arch. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged. Septum appears deviated and appears to be a septal spur off on the right side. Sinuses on the right side appear a little bit cloudy. Condyles appear severely deformed and resorptive and are postured out on the articular eminences. She has relatively prominent gonial notches.

Waters view shows that there is some deviation of the nasal septum. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. Airway doesn’t appear to be really good intranasally. Sinuses, however, do appear relatively clear. Anterior open bite is quite evident. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone severe resorptive changes with an osteophyte extending posterior and a small one anterior. Articular eminence is somewhat shallow although quite long in length. Bone thickness in the eminence area is thinner than usual. Condyle is postured forward in the fossa. May be some decreased anterior joint space between the anterior osteophyte on the remaining condyle and the articular eminence. Increased vertical and posterior joint space. Probably at least half to two thirds of the condyle and neck have been lost relative to original volume. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone severe condylar resorption. Appears to be an osteophyte sticking off the top of it. Joint space is decreased superiorly but increased posteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately shallow and somewhat elongated. 

Opening shows that there is fairly good translation with it being greater on the right side as compared to the left side. The smallness of the condyles and the deformity of the condyles is well appreciated in the open views.

Cephalometrically, Melody has a severely retruded mandible. She has a high occlusal plane and probably some posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. Oropharyngeal airway is surprisingly good. From the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 8 mm and from the base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall also about 8 mm. Down around the hyoid bone measures about 6 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ rheumatoid arthritis with severe condylar resorption
Severe AP mandibular deficiency
Slight AP maxillary hypoplasia
Class II occlusion 
Anterior open bite of approximately 3 mm
Overjet of 10 to 11 mm
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Severe crowding, lower anterior arch
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference approximately 4 mm
Hypertrophied turbinates
Deviated nasal septum
Nasal airway obstruction

Recommended Treatment

Evaluation at Environmental Center at Dallas to evaluate for hypersensitivities to materials to be used in the prostheses

Surgery, Stage 1
Placement of distraction osteogenesis device
Vertical midline interdental osteotomy

3.	Distraction
       Wait 7 to 10 days, then activate distraction osteogenesis device at the rate of mm per day for approximately 10 to 14 days
      Retain device for at least three months

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 to 3 mm of tooth structure to help adjust for the significant tooth-size discrepancy 

CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol) to aid in manufacturing of a 3-D model of Melody’s jaws

Surgery, Stage 2
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla, advance it, and level the occlusal plane
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Fat graft to bilateral TMJs (harvested from abdomen)
Bilateral partial turbinectomies
Nasal septoplasty

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

The consultation lasted for approximately 3 hours and 45 minutes.