LARRY HUTCHISON			Telephone Conversation 			04-25-03

This is a patient of Dr. William Hang’s. He is 44 years old. 

Patient Concerns

The primary concerns that he has are as follows:

Has had significant difficulties eating and chewing
Only has two front teeth, with some of the teeth on the left side touching, whereas on the right side, his teeth do not touch

Patient History

He doesn’t have any significant TMJ symptomatology, except he does have subluxation of the condyle on the left side where he would get locked out of place, and he has to manipulate it to get it to reduce. He is not aware of any clicking or popping and normal jaw function. He doesn’t have any TMJ pain or headaches. He does have significant muscular problems in his neck and shoulders to the point that physical therapists have not been able to do much with it. He says he believes he breathes through his mouth perhaps when he sleeps but is not aware of having any significant nasal airway problems. He has a history of having previous orthodontics done when in high school. 

Basic Diagnoses:
 
AP maxillary hypoplasia
AP mandibular hypoplasia and asymmetry
Class III end-on occlusion
Anterior crossbite 
Moderate crowding, upper anterior arch
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Missing all four first bicuspids. These are in the presence of all four third molars
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Slightly accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
Periodontal concerns around maxillary cuspids and left lateral incisor
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm
Rule out hypertrophied turbinates causing nasal airway obstruction

Recommended Treatment:
 
Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the significant tooth-size discrepancy 

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and correct any transverse discrepancies
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible and correct the asymmetry 
Consider partial turbinectomies if they are causing any airway obstruction

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
											