AMY HUTSON									     01-19-05

Amy is 15 years old and referred by Dr. George Adams, 2845 Parkwood Blvd., #100, Plano, TX  75093.
  
Patient History

Amy is in good health with no major medical problems. She takes Claritin 1 tablet per day for allergies. Amy has been aware that her bite has been off for a few years. She feels it may be getting a little bit worse for her currently. She has had a maxillary expander in place for the past year. She got her expander off just last week and currently has an upper retainer. Apparently Dr. Adams has informed Amy that the lower jaw may be growing forward compared to the upper jaw. 

Amy has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She has NO KNOWN ALLERGIES.  No problems wearing jewelry. She gives no history of clicking or popping in her jaw joints. She does not feel that she clenches or bruxes at all. No TMJ pain. No myofascial pain. Rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 1, and disability at 0. From last October to November of 2004, she got fairly severe migraine headaches, and this occurred in four incidences. She rated the level of pain at about a level of 7 in the frontal and temporal area. She has had none of those headaches since the end of November. As the headaches began to come on, she would lose her peripheral vision. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Amy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary midline may be about a millimeter off to the right side. Nasal tip is about 1 to 2 mm off to the right side. Mandibular dental midline is perhaps a millimeter off to the left. Chin is in fairly good position.

In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is about 3 mm posterior to subnasale. Upper lip appears to be retruded by probably 5 mm. Chin is actually in fairly good AP balance. Pogonion is a little bit prominent compared to the projection of the lower lip. Chin-neckline has a fairly good length to it, and chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. Vertical facial balance appears good.

Intraorally, Amy has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars. She has some crowding in the lower anterior arch. Lower bicuspid is blocked out of the arch more so than the left one is. Lower incisors appear to be in lingual version. Appears to be adequate attached gingiva around the lower posterior teeth. She has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. In the upper arch, the upper right second molar doesn’t appear to be quite in place yet. She has a full Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and closer to an end-on Class III relationship by about 2 mm on the left side. On the right side, she is almost a full Class III. There is about 0.5 mm vertical overbite present. There is probably about a 1-mm vertical discrepancy in the transverse plane of the upper arch with the right side being up 1 mm compared to the left side. A little bit of asymmetry in the lower arch anteroposteriorly with the right cuspid being 1 to 2 mm more anterior than the left cuspid. Right maxillary cuspid is probably a good 2 mm anterior to the left cuspid. Amy has a posterior open bite on the right side of about 2 to 3 mm.

To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area of any significance except in the SCMs she has some very minor tenderness. Joints seem to function smoothly.

She had her maxillary expander removed on 01/10/05.

Amy has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm. 

Intraorally, uvula is a little bit elongated. Soft palate appears perhaps slightly long but not too significantly. Faucial pillars appear relatively normal. She does have quite large tonsils that extend out from the faucial pillar areas fairly significantly. 

Turbinates are moderately large. She feels as though she breathes through her mouth a fair amount particularly when she sleeps. Septum is relatively normal with some curvatures in it. Probably has some moderate nasal airway obstruction. Columella and nostrils are relatively normal. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars. Sinuses actually look relatively clear. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Joint space appears somewhat decreased vertically and posteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. She could possibly have thin discs.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Superior and posterior joint space appears to be somewhat decreased. Again this could be related to thin discs.

On opening, there is good translation of both left and right condyles. 

Waters view shows that she has pretty much obliteration of the right maxillary sinus. Ethmoidal and maxillary sinuses appear clear. Left maxillary sinus appears fairly clear, although some of the walls appear to have thickened mucus over them. Septum appears to be deviated quite significantly. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Left nasal airway appears patent, and the right side is difficult to identify any patency. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class III jaw relationship. Oropharyngeal airway spaces appear reasonably good. 

In comparing radiographs taken in Dr. Adams’ office on 10/15/01 as compared to x-ray taken today, the maxilla does not appear to have developed much at all. The mandible has grown for an additional 5 mm at pogonion.

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Mandibular prognathism
Rule out bilateral condylar hyperplasia
Full Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and end-on Class III cuspid relationship on the left side
Crowding, lower anterior arch
Lingual inclination of lower incisors 
Right-sided posterior open bite
Impacted third molars x 4
Hypertrophied turbinates 
Partial nasal airway obstruction
Enlarged tonsils but asymptomatic
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm
Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are required at surgery
Align and level mandibular arch. Consider stripping lower anterior teeth removing no more than 2 mm of tooth structure to compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy of 2 mm
Consider using inter-arch elastics to establish anteroposterior symmetry within each arch. Use Class III mechanics on the right side and Class II mechanics on the left side (maxillary right cuspid is 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid and mandibular left cuspid is 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid)

Reassess for growth to determine if condylar hyperplasia is present or not

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and correct any transverse problems that may be present
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to align the mandible in relationship to the maxilla
Removal of four bony impacted third molars
Bilateral inferior partial turbinectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 