KATHLEEN HUTTON								04/08/2009

Kathleen was referred by John Kois, DDS, 5615 Valley Avenue E, Tacoma, WA 98424.  Kathleen has been through a significant surgical odyssey.  She has orthodontics from 2005 through June 2008.  In August 2006, she had maxillary and mandibular osteotomies.  Apparently, the bone plates in the lower jaw broke and, on February 6, 2007, the lower jaw surgery was repeated.  In November 2008, she had extensive soft tissue work done on the facial structures to try to repair some of the defects that she has.  She currently takes the following medications:

Lyrica 100 mg t.i.d.
Wellbutrin.

Primary concerns that Kathy has includes the following:

She cannot eat well because the teeth do not fit together.
She has difficulties speaking. 
She has problems with drooling. 
Chin is too big, too wide, and too far forward.  
Lower face is too far forward.
She has had significant changes in the expressions on her face as a result of the previous surgeries.  
She now is developing TMJ problems, particularly on the left side. 
The face is crooked. 
Significant inabilities to close her lips. 
Lower lip is too low and exposes all of her lower teeth.

She has had fascial slings done to try to support the lower lip.  It has improved her situation, but she still has a significant amount of lower tooth exposed.  She had reconstructive surgery to include a facelift.  She also has had bilateral blepharoplasties and also an implant to her right cheek.  She has had canthoplasty also performed.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Kathy has some slight increased fullness in the right cheek area compared to the left side.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm on the left and about 3 mm on the right.  She has some slight vertical asymmetry in the upper lip, although the commisures are fairly level.  The lip on the right side is shorter vertically than the left side.  Pupil level and ear level are fairly symmetric.  Nose is fairly well aligned with the facial midline.  The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the fascial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is also fairly close to the facial midline.  Chin is shifted off to the right side about 4-5 mm.  Kathy has a lip incompetence of 12 mm on the right side and 10 mm on the left side.  The maxilla appears a little bit retruded by about 3-4 mm.  The mandible also is slightly retruded, but the chin appears quite large and is prominent in AP dimension and perhaps also in vertical dimension.  Chin neckline is about normal and chin neck angle is well defined.  She has a high mandibular plane angle facial morphology.  The AP position of the chin may actually be just slightly retruded, although the chin itself looks quite large.  Intraorally, Kathy has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch, but has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Sammy is probably Class I cu on the left side, but on the right side she is slightly Class III by probably 2 mm.  She has a crossbite on the right side.  She has almost an anterior end-on occlusion.  Transversely, there is a slight cant in the occlusion with the right side being about 1-1.5 mm higher than the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Uvula is elongated, but the rest of the structures look relatively normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderate size, particularly on the left side.  The septum looks reasonably straight.  She is not aware of snoring.  She said it is hard for her daytime somnolence, because she works a night shift.  She is not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  Kathy is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day.  She has no trouble with earaches or tinnitus, but gets frequent vertigo she feels could be related to the Lyrica that she takes.  Her right knee bothers her, but she is not aware of any other joint issues.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  Incisal opening is 60 mm and excursion movement to the right 9 mm and to the left 10 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  On I-CAT, coronal view shows enlarged turbinates.  There is slight deviation of the septum off to the left side in the bony area.  Sinuses look clear.  Axial view shows the presence of previous bone plates and screws.  Turbinates look fairly large and appear to block the airway.  Septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side.  
Panorex shows that the right condyle appears larger than the left one and appears to have some anterior beaking and some differences in trabeculation pattern.  There are four bone plates in the mandible, two on each side in the previous sagittal split area.  There is also a bone plate in the chin area.  There are four bone plates in the maxilla as well.  The four third molars are absent.  The rest of the teeth are present.  She has a root canal on the maxillary right central incisor.  
Left TMJ tomogram sagittal view shows condyle that appears large compared to the size of the fossa.  The anatomy in the bony part of the chin is unusual in the fact there is a significant depression in the roof of the fossa indicative of where the posterior band of the disc may be sitting.  It has a very unusual anatomy.  Condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is enlarged and it appears almost as though there could be an osteochondroma growing off the front of it.  There is a change in the trabecular pattern anteriorly.  Also, there is a very unusual formation in the fossa with a notch in the roof of the fossa.  The posterior joint space is decreased.  Articular eminence is unusual and fairly shallow on this side compared to the opposite side.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with relatively normal mediolateral width.  The condyle may be a little bit flattened across the top.  Joint space looks reasonably good.  
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears larger than the opposite side.  There is an unusual trabeculation pattern, and there appears to be a forward extension on the head of the condyle towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  There appears to be reasonably good vertical joint space.   
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a relationship high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  Maxilla appears a little bit AP deficient.  There is significant lip incompetence in the vertical space of about 11 mm.  There may be just a slight Class III skeletal tendency, but difficult to tell without the tracings.  There is a bone plate present in the chin and an implant present in the chin.  There are four bone plates, two on each side in the sagittal split area.  The vertical height of the mandible bone wise is elongated relatively to the length of the upper lip and the soft tissue thickness is also excessive in the chin area, possibly due to the repeated surgeries in the chin area.  The amount of lower lip ptosis is almost 9 mm in the lower lip from its ideal vertical position.  Oropharyngeal airway looks normal.  There are bone plates in the maxilla.  There is a Bolton’s difference of about 2 mm.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Upper incisors are over angulated.  Transverse width of both arches are somewhat constricted.  

Basic diagnoses for Kathy would be as follows:    

AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia. 
Anterior mandibular vertical hypoplasia.
AP macrogenia. 
Class I occlusion on the left, but Class III end-on occlusion on the right. 
Severe lower lip ptosis.
Crowding in the lower anterior arch. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.
Transverse facial asymmetry with the right side of the face being about 3 mm more prominent than the left side. 
Previous orthognathic surgery x2.
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs dislocations. 
Significant lip incompetence of 10-12 mm. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy and to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward.  
Surgery. 
Possible bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Maxillary osteotomies to expand the upper arch and upright the incisors. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies, reposition the mandible slightly posterior and to level transversely and also downward and backward rotation of the proximal segments to reestablish posterior facial contour.   
Removal of previously placed chin implant.
Vertical reduction genioplasty to reduce mandibular height 5 mm.  Consider possible recontouring of the chin to make it more narrow in a transverse dimension.
Re-suspension of mentalis muscle. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.