SHERRY IFFT										06-09-03

Sherry is 51 years old and referred by Dr. Sharon Ornstein, 1110 Cottonwood Lane, Irving, TX  75036. She is an oral and maxillofacial surgeon.

Patient History

Previous surgeries that Sherry has had include TMJ surgeries and she had a broken right ankle in June of 2002 from a parachuting accident. She had a steroid injection in the cervix on May 2, 2003, and surgery on her right thumb in 2000.

Sherry’s TMJ problems began when she was in her 20s. Her jaw would get stuck open periodically. It wasn’t until 1988 when she went to see an orthodontist about getting her teeth straightened that he identified that she had narrow joint spaces and probably displaced discs. She was placed on splint therapy and also went through orthodontics. Finally in 1989, she had bilateral TMJ disc repositioning procedures done. This was done in Pittsburgh, and the surgery was done by Dr. Patterson. She then moved to Dallas, and Dr. Navarro completed her orthodontics. Shortly after she completed her orthodontics, she swallowed a chicken bone, which required removal, and the discs may have become displaced again. She went back to see Dr. Patterson, and he at that time suggested instead of doing anything more to the joints that she have orthognathic surgery done, so in July of 1992, she had maxillary osteotomies and a chin procedure done. Her pain levels improved, and she did quite well until February of 2003 when she was involved in a motor vehicle accident, and she was hit broadside on the passenger side, and she was driving. Within 24 hours, she developed significant pain in her right ear, and then the following day, the pain shifted to the left side, and that has been the dominant pain side since. During that accident, she also sprained her neck and back. She was referred to Dr. Sharon Ornstein, who made splints for her. She also was referred for physical therapy with Mary Voth. These treatments did help her. Dr. Richard Vera, a pain specialist, injected her neck. This treatment did help her some. On May 9, 2003, she did have an arthrocentesis of the left TMJ, which is her worse side. She did get an MRI done before the arthrocentesis. She then took a three-week trip to Africa and to Italy. The first leg of the trip was fine. The second leg of her flight from London to Zambia, she had severe pain with nausea and vomiting. The first 10 days were really rough on her during her trip, but then things settled down, and she did feel better. She returned back home here about four days ago on the 5th of June.

She has had problems with vertigo, and she gets that about four or five times per week. She has had problems with nausea and went to see Dr. Mark Hedlund, who ordered an endoscopic examination, and it came back negative for her GI system. She does have a hiatal hernia and acid reflux problems. She does have nocturnal clenching problems. She has problems with getting tightness in her neck muscles, and she has migraine headache problems. She gets daily headaches and rates her average headaches at about a level of 8 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, overall pain at 7, jaw function at 4, diet and disability at 7. She does have a TENS unit that she uses as well. 

Current Medications

Skelaxin 800 mg b.i.d. 
Vioxx 25 mg, 1 per day
Darvocet-N 100. She takes from 0 to 4 tablets per day
Allegra 
Serotonin-controlling medication (she doesn’t know the name)
Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Sherry has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -3 mm. 

In profile view, Sherry has good facial balance.

Intraorally, Sherry has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has had previous gingival grafting in the lower anterior arch.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side, being Class II by at least 3 mm. Lower dental midline shifted a little bit to the left of the maxillary midline by about a millimeter of so. When Sherry takes out her splint that she wears at night in the mornings, she notices that she hits a little bit prematurely on the left first molar area. Oropharynx appears clear. 

Maximum incisal opening is 52 mm but only 40 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movements are about 6 mm in each direction. Sherry states that she is having a fairly good day today as compared to a lot of her days. 

To palpation, she has moderate pain to palpation over the masseters, TMJs, left temporalis area, and milder tenderness over the styloids, posterior neck, shoulders, left SCM, and left medial pterygoid. She does report some crepitus in the right joint at times, and she does experience that currently. Apparently Dr. Orenstein did identify a lot of particles that came out of the joint with the arthrocentesis.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four bone plates in the maxilla. There are three screws in the mandible. She has severe root resorption in the upper incisors and including the left cuspid and bicuspids. She said that the root resorption occurred after her orthognathic surgery when she went to Russia and did not get proper nutrition there. This caused bone loss. When she came back, she started taking calcium supplements, but then her roots started to resorb away. She has short roots also in her lower anterior teeth. She has a root canal on the right second bicuspid and left first molar. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the upper anterior arch. Condyles look okay with slightly greater degenerative change appearing to be present in the right joint as compared to the left joint. She has some areas of calcification around the anterior maxillary area. 

Right TMJ tomograms show a condyle that appears to have a hockey stick shape to it. Decreased posterior joint space and increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. May be some flattening on the posterior head of the condyle.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a significantly decreased posterior joint space. A little osteophytic formation on top of the condyle. Anterior joint space is relatively normal in appearance. Condyle appears wide anteroposteriorly for the size of the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Open views show restricted translation on the left condyle and a little bit greater translation on the right. There is a double image on the right joint that looks a little bit unusual. Could possibly be related to movement during taking of the x-ray. A wide osteophytic development on the head of the condyle in the left joint is seen probably indicative of a mild herniation through the bilaminar tissues.

Waters view shows the sinuses appear relatively clear. Nasal airway appears open. Maxillary dental midline appears to be a little bit off toward the right side.

Cephalometrically, Sherry has basically a slight Class II skeletal relationship and an anterior deep-bite of about 2 to 3 mm. Oropharyngeal airway looks adequate. Appears to have a Class II end-on occlusal relationship.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation 
Severe TMJ pain
Severe headaches 
Myofascial pain
Earaches 
Class II end-on occlusion on the left but Class I on the right 
Earaches and occasionally tinnitus and vertigo

Recommended Treatment

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Fat grafts to bilateral TMJs (harvested from the abdomen)
Application of arch bars

2.	Postsurgical physical therapy as necessary to rehabilitate the jaw structures