AMANDA JANETTE INMAN							11/28/2005

Amanda is 30 years old, referred by Dr. Ronald Phillips, 3315 64th St., Lubbock, TX 79413.  Telephone, 806-792-6323.  Amanda has had previous surgeries including a hysterectomy in March of 2005, C-section x1, knee arthroscopy x3, abdominal laparoscopies x3 and previous TMJ surgeries.  In approximately March of 2001 Amanda had bilateral TMJ surgery that consisted of left TMJ disc repositioning procedure and on the right side an arthroscopy. 

MEDICATIONS
Toprol XL 1 q.d. for tachycardia.
Aleve 2 tablets t.i.d. p.r.n. pain.
Ultracet 2 tablets q.h.s.
Vivelle patches 0.05 (hormone patch.)

PRIMARY CONCERNS
TMJ pain.
Locking and popping in the jaw joints.
Headaches.
Pain down to the jaws into the neck, shoulders and back area.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Teeth do not fit together.

Amanda has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  The only other joint that really bothers her is her left knee that she has had scoped x3.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. 

Her problems began with her joints in her teenage years when they would click and pop.  They got a lot worse though beginning in 1999.  Her joint problems are of unknown etiology.  In March of 2001, she did have the above stated surgical procedures that included left TMJ disc repositioning and a right TMJ arthroscopy.  After her first surgery in March of 2001, she did feel better.  However, this only lasted for about a year and her problems began to occur again.  Amanda did have splint therapy from 1999 until she had her surgery in March of 2001.  She has had no other treatment since that time except for the medications.  She continues to have numbness in her left cheek area since the surgery.  For about a year after surgery, she could not move her left eyebrow but this has returned to relatively normal function.  Amanda rates her daily headaches at about a level of 7 and involves the frontal, temporal and posterior head area.  They usually begin in the back of the head and work towards the front.  Her TMJ pain is at a 10 on a daily basis with the left side worse than the right side.  Her average daily pain overall is at 8.  She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 5, disability at 6.  She has 2 children, a son who is 10 years old and a daughter who is 3 years old.  There are times when she has significant difficulties managing her daily requirements.  Her husband, Jeb, has to help out quite a bit.  

In frontal view, Amanda has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 16 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm.  Maxilla, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much aligned to the facial midline.  In profile, Amanda has good facial balance.  

AMANDA INMAN				11/28/2005				Page 2


Amanda does appear deficient in maxillary and mandibular projection.  Chin-neckline is short and not well defined.  Intraorally, Amanda is missing the left first molar and has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch but has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she is missing the left second and third molars but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molar on the right side.  She has basically a Class II cuspid molar relationship and anterior deep bite by about 5 mm.  Oropharynx appears relatively clear.  Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear relatively normal.  She has no problems breathing through her nose.  Shen she sleeps, however, she does breathe a lot through her mouth according to her husband.  Intranasally, the septum does deviate a little bit off towards the right side particularly the superior aspect of the septum.  The right turbinate appears quite large and the left one appears more normal in size.  There seems to be some constricture of the airway on the right side.  On opening, there is a glitch in the right TMJ.  On excursive movements, there is more defined crepitus noise.  To palpation, her TMJs rate at a level of 6.  To palpation, her masseters on the left side are at 5 and right side at 3 and styloid areas are at 5.  Maximal incisal opening is 27 mm but opening without significant pain 15 mm.  Excursive movements are about 5 mm in each direction but this is painful for her to do this.  She does have some moderate snoring but it is not everyday.  She has mild daytime somnolence.  She is not aware of sleep apnea problems.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular right first molar and third molar and the mandibular left third molar.  She does have a cavity in both second molars.  She unfortunately cannot get open wide enough for the dentist to work on her teeth.  She is missing the mandibular right third molar and the left second and third molars.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  She has severe arthritis in both TMJs with significant deformation of the condylar heads and large anterior beaking present of both joints. 

Waters view show there is a little bit of bow in the bony nasal septum but the right turbinate is quite large.  It seems to obliterate the right nasal airway.  The left side appears to be open.  The sinuses do appear to be relatively clear.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a severely arthritic joint with large anterior beaking.  Significantly decreased vertical and posterior joint space is present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There could possibly be a perforation in this side.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a severely arthritic condyle with a hockey-stick shape to it and very poorly defined condylar head.  There is decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence may be a little bit steeper in this side as compared to other side.  This joint appears very arthritic.  On opening, there is moderate translation of the right condyle where it comes down almost underneath the articular eminence but there is restriction in translation in the left joint.  


AMANDA INMAN				11/28/2005				Page 3


Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows she has skeletal Class I jaw relationship and a Class I occlusion.  There is some narrowing of the oropharyngeal airway of about 4 mm at the base of the tongue but at the soft palate level it is closer to about 7 mm.  Upper lip thickness is only about 9 mm but at the chin area it is 14 mm.  The soft tissue chin is much more prominent than the bony chin.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES 
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Snoring.
Daytime somnolence.
Hypertrophied right turbinate.
Right nasal airway obstruction. 
Predominately mouth breather.
Severe headaches.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe myofascial pain.
Significant crowding of lower anterior arch.
Anterior deep bite of 4 to 5 mm. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to decrease the accentuated curve of Spee.  Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to aide in aligning the lower arch without flaring the teeth too far forward.
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol) of jaws and jaw joints.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Right partial inferior turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
