SUE IPPOLITO									08/06/2007

Sue is 46 years old, referred by Dr. Pushkar Mehra.  She is in good health except for her current TMJ problems.  She does have some exercise-induced asthma.  

PREVIOUS SURGERIES:
Appendix.
Gallbladder.
Ulna nerve transfer.
Two ACI revisions.
Four knee scopes.
Muscle release of lower right leg.
Two carpal tunnel procedures on the right hand.
Rib removal.
TMJ surgeries x2.

Sue's TMJ problems began in 1983 following an altercation from an ex-husband that struck her in the jaw.  It was presumed that her jaw was fractured.  She was told they could not do anything for her.  Her pain got worse and in 2003 she was treated by Dr. Pushkar Mehra with bilateral meniscectomies.  She did well after surgery until she was involved in a motor vehicle accident in June of 2004.  The pain got significantly worse, so in November of 2005 she underwent bilateral TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses with abdominal fat grafts to the prosthetic areas.  Initially after the procedure she got a staph infection on the left side that was treated with local measures as well as IV antibiotics.  She does have times when she does better than at other times when she does not do so well.  She goes through cycles of where the pain peaks and then settles down and then the cycle reoccurs.  In November of 2005 she had bilateral TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses placed with abdominal fat grafts.  In the mid 2006 she had Botox injections to the TMJs and neck area.  She had a second bout of Botox injections done towards the end of 2006.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo.  No other joints bother her at this time.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  She feels that she does sleep with her mouth open.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 9, jaw function at 3, diet at 4, disability at 6.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Lots of pain around the TMJ areas.
She itches really bad around the face and jaw areas.  The itching was instant after the surgery.  She was doing well prior to the surgery but then after the surgery she stopped the Demerol for awhile and then came back on it.  She has had the itching almost since the onset of surgery. 

She has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a severely decayed mandibular left first molar.  First molar on the mandibular right side has a fracture with missing lingual cusps.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class I cuspid relationship on the left side and just a slight Class III on the right side by maybe 2 to 3 mm.  She has about a 1 mm overbite relationship.  

SUE IPPOLITO				08/06/2007				Page 2

Sue is unable to wear any type of jewelry except gold and she has a significant reaction.  The fact that she has the itching over the prostheses area is a possible indicator as well.  She was taking Demerol prior to the placement of total joint prostheses and had no itching reaction at that time.  I therefore, believe that the itching is probably due to hypersensitivity.  The itching is directly over the TMJ prosthesis areas as is the pain factors also extend in the temporalis, masseter, SCMs, posterior neck muscles and directly over the TMJs.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Constant headaches.
Tinnitus and earaches.
Metal hypersensitivity to the TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Rule out heterotopic bone formation.
Rule out neuromas.
Rule out neuromuscular disorder.
Severe itching.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Referral to Environmental Center for testing for metal hypersensitivity to the materials in the prostheses. 
Consider possible placement of metal samples into the forearm if confirmed to be hypersensitive to the injection form of materials.
Consider removing current mandibular prostheses and replacing with appropriate materials to which she is nonreactive. 
