DIXIE IRWIN									10/21/2011

Dixie is 32 years old, birth date 07/04/1979.  Dixie had orthodontics from the age of 15 to 17 including extraction of four first bicuspids.  She also had her third molars removed.  She was treated by Dr. Duane Trammel in Carrollton, Texas.  She does remember having popping in her jaw joints when she was in grade school of unknown etiology.  She is not aware of any specific incidents, but she did play soccer and feels she probably got hit in the face a few times with the soccer ball.  She has worn splints for 12 years beginning with one she just bought in the pharmacy.  Dr. Charles Snow made 3 splints for Dixie through the years.  She wore Dr. Snow’s splints beginning about 5 years ago.  Prior to that, she just wore splints that she got from the pharmacy.  Basic concerns Dixie has include the following:

Muscle spasms she has in her face, neck and shoulders.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Ear pain.
Teeth and jaws did not line up.
Difficult to eat and chew.
Snoring.

Dixie gets headaches about 3 times per week that occur in the temporal and posterior head area bilaterally at about a level of 3.  Usual daily pain is 4, but up until more recently her pain could escalate to a 9.  Average daily pain apparently is about an 8.  Jaw function is 7, diet at 6, and disability at 5.  She is getting significant ear pain that she rates as severe with the right side greater than the left.  She has moderate to frequent occurrence of tinnitus and occasional vertigo but no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her wrists, hips, knees, ankle, and neck.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and sometimes she clenches during the day.  Sometimes she finds that it is hard to get her jaw closed during the day.  She is allergic to codeine, shellfish and she believes she is reactive to glutens.  She is not aware of any reaction to jewelry.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Dixie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline may be just slightly off to the right side and chin is fairly well aligned.  In profile view, Dixie has some maxillary AP deficiency of 5 to 6 mm.  The chin is retruded 18 to 20 mm.  There is no definable chin neckline or angle.  Intraorally, she actually has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present and there is some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she is missing first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  In centric relation, she has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being about 3 to 4 mm Class II.  She has an anterior open bite of about 1 mm.  She occludes on the left side on the maxillary first second molar, lower second bicuspid, first and second molar on the right side it appears to be more just the first and second molars.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the septum appears reasonably straight.  The left turbinate appears somewhat enlarged and the right side appears a little bit more normal.  Dixie does have a slight head forward postured neck position, although she could hear a little glitch in the left joint as she opened.  She has an overjet of 4 mm.  Maximum opening is 36 mm and excursion movement to the right 9 mm and to the left 10 mm.  To palpation, she has high moderate to severe pain over the TMJs, retromandibular area, neck muscles and shoulders.  She has moderate pain over the masseters, medial pterygoids and minor pain over the temporalis muscles.  The hottest muscles to palpation for her are the SCMs, particularly close to the mastoid area.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and maxillary first bicuspids, but the rest of the teeth are present.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  The condyles appear quite arthritic and particularly on the right side condyle appears quite small compared to the size of the fossa.  

Coronal x-ray shows that she has an extremely enlarged left turbinate.  The right side is relatively normal, but she has a large septal spur coming off the left septum.  She has a large hypertrophic turbinate that blocks off most of the airway on that side.  There is a large septal spur coming off the right side and actually impinging on the right turbinate.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has undergone significant condylar resorption.  There is loss of vertical height and some anterior beaking present.  There are some pseudocysts on the head of the condyle.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  Resorption pattern in the joints is probably compatible with AICR.  

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has undergone significant loss of vertical volume and is also narrow anteroposteriorly.  There appears to be a pesudocyst in the head of the condyle.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking towards the medial side of the condyle.  Imaging is compatible with AICR.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant condylar resorption with loss of vertical volume.  There is a lateral spur extending out beneath the lateral rim of the fossa.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 5 mm.  There is decreased vertical joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  There are some pseudocysts in the head of the condyle. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost considerable vertical volume and the condyle is also more narrow mediolaterally compared to the opposite side.  There is decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint, but not quite as significant as the opposite side.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 5 mm.  There is some lateral osteophytic formation present.  


Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Dixie has a retruded maxilla with posterior vertical hyperplasia.  The mandible is significantly retruded anteroposteriorly.  She has an oropharyngeal airway of about 2.5 mm at the soft palate level and about 3 mm at the narrowest aspect at the base of the tongue.  She has a high occlusal plane angle and high mandibular pain angle facial morphological type.   

Dixie underwent physical therapy for 1 year in 2009.  She also gets chiropractic treatment as well as acupuncture.  She finds that some of these are helpful in reducing her pain some.  Acupuncture seems to only be effective if she does it 3 times per week.  

Basic diagnoses for Dixie would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocations, severely deformed and degenerated as well as non-reducing.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Hypertrophied left turbinate.
Large septal spur obstructing right nasal airway.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2.5 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Missing maxillary first bicuspids.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior open bite.
Occluding predominantly only on the first and second molars with the other teeth basically out of occlusion. 
High occlusal plane angle facial morphology.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe myofascial pain.
Headaches.
Moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 			removing about 2 mm of tooth structure.
3.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
4.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a 				counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise 			direction.
	c.	Left turbinectomy.
	d.	Removal of nasal septal spur.
	e.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
	f.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  