
ALMAS ISMAIL								01/01/2011

Almas is from Karachi, Pakistan.  Birth date 05/05/1964, age 46 years.  The included history states that her problems began about 20 years ago following removal of the wisdom teeth.  The patient was told and believed that the jaw may have been fractured at the time.  She was eventually diagnosed with a TMJ problem.  She has seen many doctors over the years.  Her pain was apparently reasonably well controlled with changes in her lifestyle, eating habits, and some splint therapy.  She also had orthodontics for about a year to treat the situation.  Her pain has been increasing more recently.  She is in “miserable pain.”  

Records forwarded include clinical photographs of the face and teeth as well as a CT scan.  Facial assessment shows that the middle and upper third face are fairly symmetric, but there is significant asymmetry in the lower third of the face.  The chin is shifted towards the right side probably 8 to 10 mm.  The left side of the face is longer vertically than the right side by probably 8 mm.  The right angle of the mandible is more prominent than the left angle.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plan with the right side being probably 3 to 4 mm higher than the left side.  There is no apparent exposure of the upper teeth below the upper lip.  In profile view, her head is tipped up significantly, but it appears she has reasonably good AP facial balance.  Occlusally, she is in a Class I relationship.  She has a vertical deep bite on the right side, but the left side from the lateral incisor posteriorly is more normal.  There is an anterior deep bite of probably 4 to 5 mm on the left side and 5 to 6 mm on the right side.  She is missing maxillary right first bicuspid, first molar with remaining roots of the second molar.  There is decreased space between the alveolar ridge and the mandibular teeth.  She is missing mandibular right second and third molars.  On the left side, she appears to be missing the mandibular second and third molars.  The maxilla may not be as canted as the mandible because of the deep vertical over bite on the right side in the cuspid area compared to the left side.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  

CT scan, coronal view, shows that the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are enlarged and obstruct most of the airway.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the mandibular right side being about 3 mm higher than the left side.  The maxillary arch may be somewhat more level with a lesser cant.  Left mandibular condyle demonstrates exophytic growth off the condyle with lateral, superior and medial extensions.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  

Right TMJ shows that there appears to be some loss of vertical height of the condyle.  The joint space however looks good except slightly decreased at the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a superior and anterior exophytic growth off the condylar head.  The articular eminence is fairly steep.  Difficult to determine where the disc is, but it may be in reasonable position.  The fossa has a somewhat unusual architecture and there is decreased posterior joint space.  The exophytic growth of the condyle extends out beneath the articular eminence.  Radiographic evidence is compatible with an osteochondroma.  

3-D imaging shows that the maxilla is fairly level.  The mandible is significantly longer vertically on the left side than the right side.  There is a transverse cant in the mandibular occlusal plane of significant greater amount than the maxilla.  The patient is missing the mandibular left second molar and maxillary and mandibular left third molars as well as the right maxillary first bicuspid, first molar, third molar, and mandibular second and third molars.  The tumor is quite evident on the top of the condyle with exophytic growths extending superior, anterior, medial, and lateral as well as posterior.  Imaging is compatible with an osteochondroma of the left mandibular condyle.  There are some osteoarthritic changes in the right joint. 

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Left TMJ osteochondroma with articular disc that may be vertically oriented within the fossa.
Right TMJ arthritis with possible dislocation with a decreased lateral joint space.
Increased vertical height of mandibular ramus body on the left side.
Chin shifted 8 to 10 mm to the right.
Canted mandibular occlusal plane with the right side being probably 3 mm higher than the left side.
Anterior deep bite greater on the right side.
TMJ pain. 
Probable headaches and myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJs to evaluate position of articular discs and determine if they  
            are salvagable.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Place appliances on the maxillary arch.
	b.	Place appliances on the mandibular arch.

IF ARTICULAR DISCS ARE SALVAGEABLE
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Left TMJ low condylectomy and articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchor.
	b.	Right TMJ disc repositioning if disc is displaced.
	c.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies to level the mandibular arch.
	d.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to shift the chin back to the facial 			midline.
	e.	Left inferior border ostectomy to improve facial symmetry.
	f.	Possible maxillary osteotomies to level and align the maxilla. 

IF ARTICULAR DISCS ARE NOT SALVAGEABLE
3.	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
c.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to shift the chin back to the facial 			midline.
	d.	Left inferior border ostectomy to improve facial symmetry.
	e.	Possible maxillary osteotomies to level and align the maxilla. 

4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
5.	Dental reconstruction to replace missing teeth.