ARLENE JACKSON									03/10/2008

Arlene is 47 years old.  Arlene has been through many TMJ surgeries particularly involving the right side.  Her problems began on September 7, 1983, when she was involved in a motor vehicle accident sustaining injury to her jaws.  She subsequently has had numerous surgeries on the right joint including placement of Proplast/Teflon, rib graft and further debridement.  Arlene has severe pain problems.  She rates her TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain around the head and neck area at 10, jaw function at 10, diet at 9, disability at 10.  She gets headaches throughout her whole head at a level of 10.  She has some numbness in the right cheek area and extends down, and she does get some effects on her right lower lip and chin area.  She currently takes the following medications:

Morphine 50 mg t.i.d. 
Tramadol 60 mg t.i.d. 
Lotrel 10/20 mg per day.
Cymbalta 50 mg q.d.
Neurontin 300 mg t.i.d. 
Topamax.

Arlene has detailed information that is in her chart.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Arlene has fairly good balance in the middle and upper third face, but significant asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm on the left, 2 mm on the right.  Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm toward the right and the chin is probably 8 mm off to the right side.  In profile view, Arlene has fairly good balance with the upper lip, nose, and cheeks with little bimax factor.  Subnasale may be actually retruded slightly about 3 mm.  Upper lip supra labrale has fairly good projection.  Chin appears to be retruded about 10 to 12 mm.  Intraorally, Arlene has all of her teeth back to the second molars present.  Likewise, in the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars.  She is very close to being Class I cuspid relationship bilaterally.  She has probably at least a 4 mm cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 4 mm higher than left side in both upper and lower arch.  There may be a slight yaw to the maxilla with the posterior aspect being slightly off towards the left side maybe a couple of millimeters, however, in the right side, she may have some increased fullness in soft tissues.  She is fairly close to having a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues are enlarged with a hyperplastic uvula, increased soft palate length, and some significant constricture of the faucial pillars.  These factors are probably contributing significantly to her sleep apnea.  The nasal airway looks normal.  To palpation, she has severe pain over the medial pterygoids, TMJ, styloid areas, SCMs, posterior neck and shoulder area.  She has high moderate pain over the left masseter and moderate pain over the temporalis and right masseter muscle.  Maximal opening is 24 mm, but only about 14 mm without significant pain.  Excursion movements are basically nonexistent.   

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She  has some root canals in the maxillary left first bicuspid, maxillary left second bicuspid, first molar, and mandibular right first molar.  She has evidence of interosseus wires apparently supporting the rib graft placed on the right side of the mandible.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

Waters view shows that she has good nasal airway.  Facial asymmetry is seen with the right angle of the mandible being almost 1 cm higher than the left side.  Transverse cant in the occlusal plane can also be seen, probably a 3 to 4 mm vertical difference at the cuspid area.  Sinuses and nasal airway look clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows the presence of a rib graft.  There appears to be a lot of perhaps heterotopic bone formation up in the fossa area.  Articular eminence is not very evident.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows the condyle has a little flattening anteriorly and a little flattening posteriorly.  There appears to be a little bit of anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  Difficult to tell, but there may be some reactive bone on the articular eminence, but difficult to tell.  On opening, there is a little bit of translation of the left condyle but not too much, and the right condyle appears pretty much without any translatory abilities. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the significant vertical asymmetry to the inferior border of the mandible with her being almost 12 mm of vertical difference at the angles of the mandible.  The oropharyngeal airway is severely constricted with an airway of about 2 mm at the soft palate level and about 4 mm at the base of the tongue, probably accounting for her severe sleep apnea situation.  Occlusal plan looks moderately high.  

The basic diagnoses for Arlene would be as follows:

Right TMJ severe arthritic changes with previous Proplast/Teflon placement and a continued foreign body giant cell reaction. 
Left TMJ arthritis.
AP maxillary hypoplasia and asymmetry.
AP mandibular hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Severe headaches.
Severe myofascial pain.
Sleep apnea syndrome. 
High occlusal plane angle.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 3 to 4 mm higher than the left side.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Tests for metal hypersensitivity by placing implants into forearm.
Presurgical orthodontics.
a.   Align and level maxillary arch.  
b.   Align and level mandibular arch.  
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the maxilla posteriorly and level it transversely as well as upright the incisors.
Bilateral coronoidotomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP procedure).
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.