BETH JACKSON									06/08/2010

Beth is 55 years old.  Beth believes her jaw problems began about the age of 10 related predominantly to her bite relationship where her lower front teeth occluded with her palate creating a lot of irritation and roughness.  By the age of 16, she had developed a closed lock situation.  The etiology of her joint problems is basically unknown.  Eventually, she ended up having a number of open joint procedures and they are as follows:  1984 left TMJ PTIPI; 1986 bilateral PTIPI.  These surgeries were done by Dr. Barry Levine in Tampa, FL.  In 1984, she had bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies and multiple maxillary osteotomies.  In 1987, the bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies and maxillary osteotomies were re-performed.  In 1989, she had Vitek Kent total joint prostheses placed bilaterally.  In 2000, the bilateral Vitek Kent total joint prostheses were removed.  In 2001, she had her TMJ reconstructed with bilateral TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses by Dr. David Ash.  She is not aware of any fat grafts being used around the prostheses at the time of the surgery. 

She was diagnosed has having Ramsey-Hunt syndrome on March 4, 2007.  She has a bipolar disorder and a sleep disorder.  She has mild asthma and a seizure disorder.  Beth states that she has Prinzmetal angina.  

She has had some significant nerve injury with loss of sensation and taste on the right side of the tongue as well as decreased sensation to the upper lip, cheeks, lower lip, and chin areas.  She has significant facial nerve involvement with the frontal branch  being completely paralyzed and some decreased function to the right eyelids.  Also, the marginal mandibular branch on the right side also appears to be affected.  

She has no earaches but does get tinnitus and frequent vertigo but no hearing loss.  Other joints include right shoulder, hips occasionally, right knee, right ankle, feet and toes.  She takes the following medications:

Inderal 40 mg b.i.d. 
Seroquel 800 mg q.h.s.
Allegra 180 mg q.d.
Albuterol inhaler (p.r.n. asthma).
Tegretol 400 mg XR b.i.d. 
BuSpar 7.5 mg b.i.d. 
Singulair.
Restasis eye drops. 
Voltaren gel 1%.
OxyContin 10 mg p.r.n. 
She rates her headaches at a level of 6 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area bilaterally. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 7, diet at 6, and disability at 7.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  Upper lip length is 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -3 mm.  The maxillary midline is 1.5 mm off to the left side.  The mandibular dental midline and chin are on the facial midline.  In profile, the maxilla is probably 3 to 4 mm AP deficient and the mandible is 18 to 20 mm AP deficient.  There is no chin neckline nor chin neck angle.  In the lower arch, Beth has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has significant gingival cleft in the lower anterior teeth and has good exposure on almost all of her teeth from the first bicuspid on forward.  In the upper arch, she has had first bicuspids extracted and space is closed.  She has a slight deviation II occlusal relationship.  She has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship being probably 2 to 3 mm Class III on the left side and probably 3 to 4 mm Class III on the right side.  She has about a 1 mm anterior open bite.  She has an anterior and centric bilateral posterior cross bites.  She appears to occlude predominantly on the second molars and the cuspids bilaterally.  It is actually the upper cuspid and lower first bicuspid.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy and normal.  She is not aware of snoring but she does sleep by herself.  She has moderate daytime somnolence.  She does not believe she has sleep apnea.  She has a moderate sleep disorder and requires medication for that.  She does not believe that she is a mouth breather at night.  She does have flared nostrils likely from the previous maxillary surgeries.  The turbinates appear mild to moderate in size.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  She may have some mild nasal airway obstruction.  She does have multiple spacing in the lower arch extending from the first molars forward, although the incisors and cuspids are in fairy good approximation.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  She may have a little bit of heterotopic bone that is going up along the anterior aspect of the right prosthesis.  She may also have some bone in the left side as well.  She has a gold weight in the right eyelid.  She has residual wire in her chin area.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are fairly clear.  The turbinates are moderate in size. 

Axial view shows that she does have a deviated septum off towards the right side.  The turbinates are moderate in size, but it appears at least on the left side that there could be some obstruction there.  The sinuses appear reasonably clear.  

Sagittal views of the TMJ area shows the presence of TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a mandibular prosthesis that is a little bit tipped laterally.  On the right TMJ coronal view, there is significant lateral tipping of the mandibular component with the articulation being on the inside of the condylar head.  It appears there may be some bone formation on the medial side of the ramus, particularly right side.  

Right TMJ sagittal view likewise shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Beth has a retruded maxilla and significantly retruded mandible.  She has a Class III occlusal relationship but a Class II skeletal relationship.  She has two custom-made prostheses present.  She has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about almost 5 mm at the base of the tongue and 5 mm at the posterior aspect of the soft palate.  

To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the temporalis, TMJs left worse than the right, and shoulders.  She has moderate pain over the masseters and milder pain over the SCMs and posterior neck muscles.  The maximal incisal opening is 28 mm, opening without significant pain 9 mm.  The excursion movements are less than 1 mm in each direction.  

Basic diagnoses for Beth would be as follows:

Five previous left TMJ surgeries and four previous right TMJ surgeries including previous placement of Proplast Teflon interpositional implants and bilateral Vitek Kent total joint prostheses.
Currently bilateral TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
Heterotopic bone formation around the medial aspect of both prostheses.
Severe mandibular hypoplasia. 
Maxillary AP hypoplasia and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Class III end-on occlusion.
Anterior and bilateral posterior cross bite tendencies.  
High occlusal plane angle of 22 degrees, normal dimension is 8 degrees.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4.5 mm at the base of the tongue and about 5 mm at the soft palate level (normal AP dimension in these areas is 11 mm).
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
Missing maxillary first bicuspids from previous orthodontics and all four third molars.
Severe periodontal disease affecting particularly the lower anterior teeth with severe gingival retraction and generalized gingivitis with loss of most interdental papillae and root exposure on most of the teeth.
Probable sleep apnea syndrome. 
Ptosis of lower lip with malposition and dysfunction of the mentalis muscles with Facial Nerve injury.
Her additional medical conditions include:
	a.	Ramsey-Hunt syndrome. 
	b.	Bipolar disorder.
	c.	Sleep disorder.
	d.	Seizure disorder. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Periodontal evaluation of maxillary and mandibular teeth to determine salvageability and 	treat appropriately.  
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch. 
3.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
4.	Surgery.
	a.	Removal of previously placed TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Removal of heterotopic bone formation on the medial aspect of the rami.
	c.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise 			direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses advancing the mandible 				approximately 18 mm.  
	d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward about 6 mm and 			down graft it posteriorly 10 mm.
	e.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen and pack around the 				prostheses.
	f.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to vertically lengthen the anterior 			mandible.
	g.	Resuspension of the mentalis muscles and lower lip.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
5.	Restorative dentistry as necessary to reconstruct the occlusion.  