TERRY JACKSON									04/24/2006

Terry is 44 years old and referred by Dr. Boyd Whitlock, Springdale, AR.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: 
Levothyroxine 50 mcg.
Lexapro 10 mg daily.
Mircette. 
Claritin 10 mg.

Terry has had two C-sections previously but no other surgeries.  The primary concern Terry has is TMJ problems.  Terry is not sure when her TMJ problems began.  However, she developed pain within the past five years.  The etiology is unknown.  She has had splint therapy for six years and has had two splints during that time with some adjustments.  She has had physical therapy on and off for the past 20 years but specifically for the TMJs just for the past three weeks.  The most previous physical therapy was directed towards her neck, back and shoulder area.  

She has no problems with earaches but gets some tinnitus, occasional vertigo but has no hearing loss.  No other joints are involved.  She has allergies to pollens and molds but no drug allergies.  She is unaware of any food allergies.  She is not aware of any problems wearing jewelry. 

She does clench and grind her teeth at night and during the day she does find herself clenching.  She currently wears her splint 24 hours a day except for eating.  She rates her headaches at about a level of 4 when they do occur in the temple areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at about a level of 2, overall average daily pain around the head and neck area at a 6, jaw function at 4, diet at 4, disability at 4.  

In frontal view, Terry has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline.  In profile view, Terry has probably some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably 2 to 3 mm.  The chin appears to be sort of retruded by probably 8 to 10 mm.  Chin-neckline is extremely short.  She has quite a bit of fullness in the submental area.  Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids and also the maxillary first bicuspids.  She had previous orthodontics when she was a teenager.  She has crowns on the mandibular first molars.  She has about a 2 mm anterior deep bite relationship.  She is basically a slight Class II end-on by about 2 mm.  She has moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Terry has had her wisdom teeth removed.  Oropharyngeal airway is a little bit hard to visualize because of tongue activity but the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all look reasonably normal with maybe just some slight transverse constricture of the faucial pillars.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated significantly off to the right side.  It appears to touch against the turbinate.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Nostrils are quite narrow and constricted.  The columella is moderately wide.  She has no history of snoring.  She has some mild daytime somnolence but no sleep apnea symptoms.  To palpation she has some mild to moderate tenderness over the temporalis muscles, masseters, TMJs, moderate tenderness of the shoulders and mild tenderness of the SCMs.  Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm and opening without discomfort 30 mm.  
TERRY JACKSON				04/24/2006				Page 2


She has 10 mm of excursive movement in each direction.  She has crepitation in both TMJs with the left side being worse on the right side. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids.  She has a root canal in the maxillary right central incisor and mandibular right first molar.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The nasal septum is deviated off to the right side.  The condyles appear a little bit flattened.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the top and a little bit of sclerosis is present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is a little bit of calcification within the joint structures.  The condyle appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have a pseudocyst in the condylar head.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  Posterior joint space and superior joint space look a little bit better than the opposite side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows retrusion of the maxilla and mandible.  The oropharyngeal airway space at the soft palate level is about 2 mm, at the base of the tongue it is less than 3 mm.  The tongue fills a good portion of the oral cavity though it does not quite touch the roof of the palate.  Occlusal plane angulation is mildly increased.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has flattening on the anterior head.  Decreased posterior and superoposterior joint space.  There appears to be some deformity at the lateral aspect of the fossa.  Disc is deformed and sitting anterior.  Medially the condyle is quite narrow anteroposteriorly.  Articular eminence moderately steep but there are some areas in the fossa that appears that there are some degenerative changes particularly around the eminence area.  On opening there is moderately good translation of the condyle but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little sclerosis on the head.  The condyle is quite narrow anteroposteriorly.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The disc is anteriorly displaced.  It appears to be severely degenerated.  On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.  

Waters view shows significant deviation of the nasal septum off to the right side.  There may be some spurring off the left side as well posteriorly.  Turbinates appear larger on the left side than the right side though there does not appear to be clear airway on either side.  Terry has a tooth size discrepancy of Bolton’s difference of 1.2 mm.  




TERRY JACKSON				04/24/2006				Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc location with severe deformation and nonreducing.  
AP mandibular deficiency. 
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion (2-3 mm.)
Moderate crowding of lower anterior arch.
Mild crowding of upper anterior arch.
Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars.
Deviated nasal septum.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 1 to 2 mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing.
CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly. 
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Nasoseptoplasty.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
