MATTHEW KEVIN JACKSON							09-30-02

Kevin is 33 years old and referred by Dr. Al Bishop. 

Patient History

He has had previous knee surgery on his right knee. He smokes one pack of cigarettes per day and has done that for about 15 years. He has allergy problems during September and October only and feels it is probably due to ragweed allergies. He has had some fainting spells that one time occurred when his daughter was being born, another one when his son was getting an injection, and once when Kevin was getting a tattoo. No other particular problems with that. He apparently has been diagnosed as being manic depressive and is supposed to take medications, but he says he is getting along well without taking anything at this time. He has been previously diagnosed two or three years ago with a stomach ulcer. He feels it was related to taking aspirin. Apparently any time he takes aspirin he gets severe abdominal problems. 

Kevin has lost apparently a good portion of his hearing in his left ear and is losing it in his right ear. He has had hearing problems ever since he was little. He has been around loud music a lot during his life.

Current Medications

Allegra 180 mg per day.
Flonase 1 time per day.
Multiple vitamins once a day.
Ibuprofen once per day. Actually he probably doesn’t take that on a daily basis but just as needed for backache or headache or whatever.

Patient Concerns

Kevin’s primary concerns are as follows:

Teeth and jaws do not fit together well at all.
Cannot eat and chew properly.
Gets GI problems that are felt to be associated with inabilities to properly masticate and chew his food.
Difficulties breathing through his nose.
Predominantly a mouth breather.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Kevin has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about –2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is a little bit off to the left side about a millimeter. Chin is probably off to the left side about 3 or 4 mm. 

In profile view, some maxillary deficiency of probably only about 4 to 6 mm. Lower third face appears somewhat elongated. Chin might be just a little bit AP deficient as well. Chin-neckline appears a little bit short, and chin-neck angle is not really well defined.

Intraorally, Kevin is missing mandibular left third molar. Mandibular right cuspid is not erupted in, and the third molar is erupted in. Right first bicuspid is probably about 3 mm anterior to the left bicuspid. In the upper arch, Kevin has all his teeth erupted in back through the second molars. On the left side, the lateral incisor is blocked out lingually, and the cuspid is blocked out labially. On the right side, the lateral incisor is rotated to 90 degrees. Has significant transverse deficiency in the maxillary arch particularly on the right side. Kevin occludes only on the maxillary right first and second molar and mandibular second and third molars, and on the left side only on his second molars. He has a Class III occlusal relationship and an anterior open bite of probably about 4 mm. Kevin has severe bilateral posterior crossbites and an anterior crossbite. 

Intranasally, anteriorly the septum seems to shift off to the right side a little bit, but about a centimeter back in, it deviates significantly off toward the left side. The turbinates are moderately enlarged. On the left side, it seems like the turbinate almost touches against the septum. On the right side anteriorly, there is some constricture, although the airway may be a little more open a little bit further back. 

Intraorally, uvula is moderately hyperplastic. Posterior faucial pillars, however, are attached out laterally and somewhat anteriorly providing what should be good oropharyngeal airway. TMJ joints seem to function smoothly, and there is no myofascial pain to palpation.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of impacted maxillary third molars and an erupted mandibular right third molar. Right cuspid is unerupted and trapped beneath the right first bicuspid and lateral incisor. Sinuses appear reasonably clear. Difficult to identify the condylar morphology. Appears to be fairly large carious lesion in the maxillary right second molar. 

Waters view shows a huge septal spur going off from the left side. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Significant transverse deficiency of the maxilla is noted.

Left TMJ tomogram is not really clear, but it appears the condyle is fairly well centered in the fossa. Should be appropriate joint space around the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Appears to be adequate joint space, although the disc may be quite thin.

On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyles. 

Cephalometrically, Kevin has a high occlusal plane angle. Lower incisors are in lingual inclination. Upper incisors have slightly decreased inclination. Oropharyngeal airways is very good. He has a skeletal class III jaw relationship.

Basic Diagnoses

Severe transverse maxillary deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary excess.
Mandibular prognathism.
Anterior open bite of approximately 4 mm.
Bilateral posterior crossbites and an anterior crossbite.
Class III occlusion.
Impacted mandibular right cuspid.
Impacted maxillary left and right third molars and unerupted malaligned mandibular right third molar.
Accentuate curve of occlusion in the upper arch.
Significant crowding, maxillary anterior arch.
Significant crowding, lower anterior arch related to the impacted mandibular right cuspid.
Lower arch asymmetry with the right first bicuspid being about 3 mm anterior to the left first bicuspid.
Rule out tooth-size discrepancy (models were not available at the time of evaluation).
Periodontal concerns.
Slight vertical inclination of maxillary anterior teeth and severe lingual inclination of mandibular anterior teeth.
Reverse curve of Wilson, upper arch, and accentuated curve of Wilson, lower arch.
Deviated nasal septum.
Large nasal spur on the left side.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Significant nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended Treatment

Periodontal evaluation and appropriate treatment

Management of dental caries and identifying any nonsalvageable teeth

Extract mandibular right third molar and any other condemned teeth that are not salvageable (to be identified by Dr. Steven Newby)

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Try to set up the arch nonextraction. Can expand in the bicuspid/first molar area particularly on the right side.
Consider Class III elastics on the left side to try to distalize the mandibular left posterior teeth to try to improve lower arch symmetry.
Try to encourage the mandibular left unerupted cuspid tooth to erupt into position.

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla, advance it, and move the posterior aspect superiorly.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to properly reposition it into occlusion with the upper arch.
Partial turbinectomies.
Nasoseptoplasty.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion