DANIEL JACOBS								07/12/2011

Daniel is 20 years old, birth date 02/10/1991.  Daniel is referred by Dr. Michael Alpern, 3100 Port Charlotte Blvd., Port Charlotte, FL 33952.  

Daniel is good health.  He does have a history of asthma and uses an inhaler just periodically.  His jaw problems began when he was about 16 to 17 years of age of unknown etiology.  He has had no subsequent treatment.  He takes no medications.  He has no problems with headaches.  He rates periodic TMJ pain at a level of 4, but on the average day he does not have any pain.  He rates his jaw function at 6, diet at 2, disability at 0.  He does state he gets some popping noises in his jaws sometimes when chewing, although it is not consistent.  He has partial anesthesia to the lower lip and chin area on the right side related to third molar removal in July 2009.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo and questionable hearing loss.  Joints that bother him include his right shoulder, elbows where he has tendonitis, and his left knee which he has had surgery on.  He is aware of clenching at nighttime and some during the day, but it is not consistent.  Primary concern that Daniel has is facial asymmetry that is getting progressively worse.

In frontal view, Daniel has fairly good facial balance in the mid and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 2 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline may be about 1 mm to the left.  The chin is probably 6 to 8 mm to the right.  The left side of the mandible is probably 10 to 12 mm lower than the right side.  The chin is longer vertically on the left side than the right side by probably a good 6 mm.  The maxilla is retruded about 4 to 5 mm.  The lower lip is retruded about 4 to 5 mm and the chin is protrusive by probably 4 to 5 mm.  Intraorally, Daniel has all his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has malformed lower left first bicuspid and appears to have an extra cuspid tip on it towards the mesial side.  He has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has an increased curve of Wilson particularly on the right side.  He has an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch being a little bit more prominent on the left side as compared to the right side.  In the lower arch, the left cuspid is probably 1 to 2 mm ahead of the right cuspid.  The upper arch is fairly symmetric anteriorly and posteriorly.  He is basically a Class I cuspid on the left side and Class III end-on on the right side by probably about 3 mm.  He has about a 2 mm vertical over bite relationship.  He has about 2 to 3 mm open bite on the left side.  His occlusion is predominantly on the right side, but he can feel molar touching on the left side in the back.  He has bilateral posterior cross bites that are much greater on the left side as compared to the right side.  Intranasal evaluation is difficult to evaluate the septum and turbinates but radiographically the turbinates are quite large and seem to obstruct most of the airway.  He has a moderately wide columella and nostrils are moderately narrow.  To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the left TMJ, but nowhere else around the head and neck area.  On opening, he hears some crepitus kind of noises in the joints and some slight popping in the joints.  The popping is sometimes more significant when he chews and is present on both sides.  The maximum opening is 56 mm and excursion movement to the right is 5 mm and to the left 3 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Radiographic evaluation shows the patient has an osteochondroma of the left condyle with a significant extension of the growth process anterior to the articular eminence.  The head is increased in AP dimension as well as the condylar neck.  Right TMJ appears arthritic.  The patient is missing all four third molars, but has the rest of the teeth.  The mandibular body on the left side is significantly increased in vertical height, being at least 5 to 6 mm longer in vertical height on the left side as compared to the right side.  The inferior alveolar canal is low towards the inferior border of the mandible.  There is a left posterior open bite being greater in the bicuspid area than the molar area.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight.  The turbinates are hyperplastic and appear to obliterate most of the nasal airway.  He demonstrates bilateral posterior cross bites in the molar area being worse on the left side as compared to the right side.  The sinuses are clear.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  The turbinates appear quite large and appear to obliterate most of the airway.  The sinuses are clear. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that the condyle itself is quite large and significantly larger than the size of the fossa.  On top of that, there is an extension of the condyle anterior to the articular eminence.  The articular eminence is relatively flat.  The joint space appears a little bit decreased vertically between the anterior tumoral growth and the articular eminence.  The fossa is quite narrow anteroposteriorly compared to the width of the condyle.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows some flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of anterior beaking present.  The condyle may be a little bit posteriorly postured in the fossa.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows that the condyle is larger compared to the opposite side in vertical height.  The neck of the condyle is wider than the opposite side.  There is decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the fossa.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased medial joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the patient appears to have some AP maxillary deficiency, but has AP macrogenia.  Occlusal plane discrepancy exists with there being about a 4 mm vertical height difference between the left and right sides.  The left inferior border is about 9 mm longer than the right side.  Oropharyngeal airway looks normal.  There is some adenoid tissue still in the nasopharyngeal area.  He appears to have a rather low occlusal plane angle.  

Basic diagnoses for Dan would be as follows:

Left mandibular condylar osteochondroma.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced.
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia and transverse asymmetry.
Left mandibular body and ramus vertical hyperplasia.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plan with the left side being lower than the right side.
Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and Class III end-on cuspid relationship on the left side. 
Left posterior open bite extending from lateral incisor through first molar.
Bilateral posterior cross bites being worse on the left side than the right side. 
Partial paresthesia to right inferior alveolar nerve from previous third molar removal.
Hypertrophied turbinates creating nasal airway obstruction.
Macrogenia.
Measurement on the condyle is 3 cm x 2 cm x 2.7 cm.  
TMJ pain.
Mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.
Malformed mandibular left first bicuspid.
Transverse cant in the arches with the left maxillary cuspid being 4 mm lower than the right maxillary cuspid. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  The left 			side has adequate space, but the right side could be improved and space 			between the root tips.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider reshaping mandibular left 			bicuspid if indicated to make it a more normal size.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Left mandibular low condylectomy to remove the osteochondroma tumor.
	b.	Recontour mandibular condylar neck and reposition articular disc with a 			Mitek anchor.
	c.	Possible right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair.
	d.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back on the 			facial midline.
	e.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward approximately 6 			mm, move the posterior aspect superiorly, level transversely, and expand 			approximately 10 mm.
	f.	Left mandibular ramus and body inferior border ostectomy with 				preservation of the inferior alveolar nerve.
	g.	Bilateral partial turbinectomies.  
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
