JUDY JACOBSEN									07/24/2009

Judy is 63 years old.  Referred by Dr. Richard Harper in Corsicana, Texas.  Judy’s problems began at the age of 12 when she was hit in the side of the jaw with a croquet mallet.  This damaged her joints and led to loss of hearing in the left ear.  She was diagnosed eventually with having TMJ problems in 1987.  In 1987, Dr. Dean White treated her by placing bilateral Proplast Teflon interpositional implants.  In 1992, these implants were removed.  In 1992, she was diagnosed as having an ameloblastoma in the left mandible.  It was resected at that time and then repeat surgeries were performed in 1993, 2000, and 2009.  She has had a bone graft placed in the mandible.  

Judy rates her TMJ pain at a level of 8, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 10, diet at 5, disability at 8.  She gets headaches in the frontal and temporal area bilaterally at about a level of 2.  She gets earaches, tinnitus, some vertigo, and does have the significant hearing loss in the left ear.  She also has been diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis that affects her hands, fingers, knees, wrists, lower back, shoulders, and feet.  She does have some muscle dystonia particularly when she gets her dental work done and holding her jaw open will set off the muscle dystonia process.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  

She takes the following medications:

Cardizem for blood pressure. 
Motrin 2 tablets per day. 
Darvocet p.r.n. for pain.

Judy has some decreased sensation in her cheek area following her second TMJ surgery and she has complete numbness to the lower left lip and chin area because of the required surgery for the ameloblastoma tumor.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Judy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry with a little bit more fullness on the left side likely due to the grafting and multiple surgeries on that side.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -1 mm.  The maxillary dental midline is on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted about 4 to 5 mm to the left as is the chin.  In profile, Judy has good facial balance.  Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular left bicuspids and molars, but she has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars, except she is also missing the maxillary right first molar.  Oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal.  She has a Class I cuspid relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 to 5 mm.  Judy does state that fairly frequently she has problems with the glands underneath the side of her lower jaw swelling and then she gets some swelling in the submental area as well.  When these problems hit her, she has to manipulate her jaw around to relieve it.  It may be suprahyoid muscle spasms that she is experiencing.  Judy does have trouble letting her jaw just rest.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters, and posterior neck area.  she has moderate tenderness over the medial pterygoids, TMJs, retromandibular area, and shoulders.  Maximal incisal opening is 25 mm, opening without severe pain 14 mm.  Excursion movements were less than 10 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of a large reconstructed bone plate and a smaller bone plate on the left side of the mandible and there appears to be placed bone graft that has healed extremely well.  She is missing all four third molars, the maxillary right first molar, mandibular left bicuspids and molars.  Joints appear arthritic.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.    
Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear, but the turbinates appear quite large.  She has a septal spur off to the right side.    
Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates are fairly good size.    
Left TMJ sagittal tomograms shows severe arthritis and what appears to be bone-on-bone contact or very close to it.  The condyle appears significantly smaller than the opposite side. 
Right TMJ sagittal tomographic views shows severe arthritis with significant degenerative changes in the fossa as well as on the condyle.  Her articular eminence is moderate in height, but significant erosions are present.  There may be some heterotopic bone on the lateral aspect of the condyle.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows severe arthritis affecting the fossa as well as the condyle.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  Lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm with probably some additional heterotopic bone development on the lateral rim. 
Right TMJ coronal view shows severe degenerative changes and bone-on-bone contact.  There is heterotopic bone that has gone down along the lateral aspect of the condylar head.  The condylar head has a lot of erosive changes.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a slight skeletal Class II jaw relationship.  The oropharyngeal area looks somewhat narrow, although she does not really report any sleep apnea issues.   

Basic diagnoses for Judy would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
Bilateral temporomandibular foreign body giant cell reaction secondary to previous Proplast Teflon implants. 
Recurrence of ameloblastoma left mandibular body.
Severe TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
Missing all of her posterior teeth on the left side and maxillary right first molar.
Large reconstructed plate present in the left mandible. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Bilateral TMJ comprehensive debridement. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Resection of ameloblastoma left mandibular body area.
Bone graft to the left mandibular body area.
Removal of reconstructed bone plate from left mandible. 