THERESE (TERRI) JAKUBOWSKI							09-01-04

Terry is 36 years old and referred by Dr. Cliff Alexander.

Patient History

Terri’s primary concerns are that her teeth and jaws do not fit together. Terri has been to see Dr. Tony Viazis who also suggested that she needs orthodontics and jaw surgery. He actually referred her to Dr. Cliff Alexander for treatment. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Terri has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4.5 mm. Maxillary midline is slightly to the right side about 0.5 to 1 mm. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 to 3 mm to the left. Chin midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is slightly to the left of the chin midline by probably about 1 to 2 mm. Chin may be just slightly to the left. 

In profile view, she has a slight C-shaped curve to the upper lip. Upper lip supralabrale is perhaps just slightly posterior to subnasale. Upper lip in the midportion is probably 3 to 4 mm AP deficient. Terri has a very prominent labiomental fold and significant eversion of the lower lip. Chin-neckline is a little bit short, and chin-neck angle is moderately well-defined. Chin appears to be AP deficient by probably perhaps 8 to 10 mm. 

Intraorally, Terri has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has very small central incisors, and the laterals are probably smaller than normal. She has diasthemas round the incisors. Attached gingiva is relatively thin overlying the incisors particularly. She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch with the anterior teeth being probably 5 mm higher than the posterior teeth. Lower arch is fairly symmetrical anteroposteriorly. The right cuspid appears to be slightly larger than the left cuspid. In the upper arch, she is missing the maxillary right lateral incisor but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. The left maxillary lateral incisor is small in size, and there is a significantly large diasthema on the left side between the cuspid and the lateral incisor and a smaller diasthema between the left central and lateral. On the right side, there is a good size diasthema between the right central incisor and cuspid. Terri has a full Class II occlusal relationship. The lower teeth occlude into the roof of her mouth and probably are contributory to the overangulation of the upper incisors. She has a vertical overbite of approximately 9 mm. She has a buccal crossbite of the maxillary right cuspid/first bicuspid. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is moderately hyperplastic. Soft palate length is relatively normal. Faucial pillars are relatively normal in width. She is not aware of having any snoring problems. She reports no problems with daytime somnolence.

Intranasally, she has hypertrophied turbinates with what appears to be decreased airway. Turbinates appear inflamed. I classify them as moderate to severe in size. The septum appears reasonably straight. She does have moderate nasal airway obstruction. Columella appears wide and nostrils are narrow. Holding open the nostrils improved her airway.

To palpation, she has just some very mild tenderness around the right styloid and right TMJ area. All other areas appear pain-free to palpation. On opening, joints seem to function relatively smoothly. On excursive movements, however, she did have a click in the joint. However, this wasn’t consistent all the time. She has a transverse cant in the occlusion with the right maxillary cuspid being probably 2 mm higher than the left cuspid. In the lower arch, the cuspid is 2 mm lower on the left side than the right side. 
Dental model analysis shows that with the current teeth and accounting for the missing maxillary right lateral incisor which was measured equivocal to the left lateral incisor, there is about a 2-mm tooth-size discrepancy between the upper and lower anterior teeth. However, the lower anterior teeth are quite small in size and probably at least a total of 5 mm smaller in size than the normal tooth dimension. Lower incisors compared to the bicuspids are 5 mm above the posterior occlusal plane level. In a Class II position, there is bilateral posterior crossbites. Incisors do occlude into the palatal area with at least a 9-mm vertical overbite relationship. The right cuspid/first bicuspid are in total buccal crossbite as is the left cuspid. Shifting into a Class I cuspid relationship shows that there is some significant transverse maxillary deficiency, and the patient tends to go into bilateral posterior crossbites. Midline discrepancy is also noted to be between 4 to 5 mm in a Class I position. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear fairly large particularly on the left side. All four third molars are absent as well as the maxillary right lateral incisor. Lower incisors appear significantly hypererupted. Condyles appear quite broad anteroposteriorly. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear large. May be some deviation of the nasal septum but not too significant. Asymmetry in the maxillary dental midline is noted with it being off to the right side of the facial midline by 1 to 2 mm and the mandibular dental midline is off to the left of the facial midline by probably 4 mm and off to the left of the chin by probably 1 to 2 mm. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit broad anteroposteriorly but not too bad. Appears to be good joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology and perhaps a little bit wide. Appears to be adequate joint space superiorly and posteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Opening views show good translation of the condyles where they come down underneath the articular eminence. Appears to be joint space between the condyles and the articular eminences.

Cephalometric assessment shows that there is good oropharyngeal airway. Occlusal plane may be a little bit high. There is a significant Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship. There is a significant anterior deep bite of approximately 9 mm. Upper incisors appear overangulated. 

Basic Diagnoses

Severe AP mandibular deficiency
Transverse maxillary deficiency
Slight anterior vertical maxillary excess
Class II malocclusion
Significant accented curve of occlusion, lower arch
Anterior deep bite of 9 mm
Overangulation of maxillary incisors
Maxillary dental midline shifted to the right 1 mm
Mandibular dental midline shifted to the left 3 to 4 mm
Missing maxillary right lateral incisor
Large diasthema in the left maxilla between the lateral incisor and cuspid
Hypodontia, lower anterior arch and including the maxillary left lateral incisor
Multiple diasthemas around the lower anterior teeth
Lower dental midline shifted about 2 mm to the left of the chin midline
Total buccal crossbite of the maxillary left cuspid/first bicuspid
Bilateral hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Decrease the diasthema on the left side of the maxilla by retracting the lateral incisor approximately 2 mm but maintaining at least 1 mm of space between the left lateral incisor cuspid and a millimeter of space between the lateral incisor and central incisor. Open up space on the right side between the cuspid and central incisor of about a millimeter to set up for subsequent dental implant
Align and level mandibular arch. Maintain about a millimeter of spacing around each of the mandibular incisors. Consider having these teeth bonded early in the treatment process to help maintain the space and provide relatively normal-sized lower incisors 
Strongly consider using a splint to help level the accentuated curve of occlusion by having that splint occlude on the second molars and the incisors so that the midbuccal teeth including the bicuspids and mesial aspect of the first molar as well as the cuspids can be elevated vertically to level the accentuated curve of occlusion

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand it, advance it forward slightly, and complete the development of upper jaw symmetry and balance
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible approximately 10 mm
Consider placement of an osseointegrated implant to replace the maxillary right lateral incisor (to be done by Dr. Gil Triplett) or consider doing it as a separate secondary stage
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies 

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
 
Restorative dentistry as necessary to place a crown on the right osseointegrated implant, bonding, veneering, or crown on the maxillary left lateral incisor, and any additional restorative work necessary to complete Terri’s occlusion