JESSICA JAMES									01-30-03

Jessica is 19 years old and referred by Dr. Mark Ozier.

Patient History

She had some nose surgery in July of 2001. She had an external rhinoplasty done. Jessica does have a lot of headaches problems, and she does take Aleve quite a bit for those, and when they turn into migraines, she takes Imitrex. 

Patient Concerns

Her bite is continuing to change with the lower jaw becoming more retruded
Headaches 
TMJ pain

Jessica has no problems with earaches except occasionally, and she gets tinnitus occasionally but no problems with vertigo or hearing loss. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime as well as during the day. She gets daily headaches that range from 3 to 8 in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, and it is worse on the left side as compared to the right side, overall pain on an average day at 5, jaw function at 5, diet at 4, and disability at 2. Jessica has no other joint problems except she did have some problems in the past with her knees but not currently. She has some allergies to grasses, weeds, pollens, trees, etc. She is not aware of having any particular jewelry problem except she tried to wear a belly button ring for a while, but it kept getting infected, and she had to discontinue it. Her mother thinks that she may have had some difficulties wearing cheap earrings in the past. Jessica is not aware of having any airway breathing problems. She is not aware of any snoring problems.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, upper lip length is about 15 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin are all pretty much on the facial midline. Chin may be just a little bit off to the left side 1 or 2 mm. Nasal tip is off to the left side 1 to 2 mm. Mandibular dental midline is off to the left about a millimeter.

In profile, she has a slight C-shaped curve to the upper lip. Some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe 3 mm. Chin appears to be retruded by probably 10 to 15 mm. Chin-neckline is short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.

Intraorally, Jessica has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has an increased curve of Wilson in the lower arch. There is really thin attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch with a high labial frenulum. Roots of the teeth are very prominent underneath the gingiva.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally being a little bit worse on the left side as compared to the right side. She is probably 5 mm Class II on the left and 3 to 4 on the right. She has an anterior open bite of 2 mm. Just placing Jessica in a Class II centric relation position creates some significant pain and discomfort for her in the left TMJ. Oropharynx appears clear. She has a small mucocele on the left aspect of the soft palate that is probably 2 mm in diameter at the most. Turbinates are moderate in size, and it appears as though she has a reasonable airway intranasally. 

Jessica has a definite loud audible pop on the left side that occurs from 25 to 35 mm of opening, and then there is a closing click at probably about 15 mm of opening. Right side seems to function fairly smoothly on opening. However, on excursive movements, there is crepitus in the left joint, and there is a pop in the right joint on excursive movements. 

Dr. Pat Brady did Jessica’s initial orthodontic treatment. 

Radiographic Evaluation

X-rays from 1991 show basically a Class I skeletal relationship at that time and a little bit of a Class II occlusal relationship. A good airway is seen. Condyles looked relatively healthy at that time. X-ray taken in June of 2000 shows that the condyles still look fairly reasonable, although there could be some changes ongoing.

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. All other teeth are present, and currently all have orthodontic appliances on them. Sinuses look relatively clear. Nasal airway looks reasonably good. Condyles appear that they may be a little bit shorter than previous images. Appear to be good bone levels around the necks of the teeth. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is relatively small anteroposteriorly and may be a little bit short vertically. Articular eminence is quite steep. Decreased posterior joint space and increased anterior joint space. This is probably sitting in a vertical orientation anterior to the condyle. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows likewise a condyle that is narrow anteroposteriorly and perhaps a little bit short vertically. A little bit of anterior beaking is present. Articular eminence is moderately steep, although not quite as steep as the opposite side. Decreased posterior joint space and increased anterior joint space compatible with a disc displacement. 

Opening tomograms show good translation of the right condyle, and on the left side there is restricted translation. This may be due to basically a closed lock and non-reduced disc when the x-ray was taken. Obviously from the clinical examination, she has good opening and translatory abilities. 

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class II relationship, an anterior open bite, and a high occlusal plane angulation. Oropharyngeal airway looks fairly good with the distance from the posterior pharyngeal wall to the soft palate measuring about 8 mm and base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall 10 mm. Tongue sits down from the palate. Lower incisors appear slightly over-angulated.

Maximum incisor opening is 38 mm. Excursive movement to the right 5 mm and to the left 10 mm. Jessica has a lot of pain in her teeth and just got her braces put on this morning.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations 
Slight AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Class II occlusion (left side greater than right side)
Anterior open bite
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Mild crowding, upper anterior arch
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm indicating lower teeth are 2 mm larger than they should be to fit properly with the upper teeth

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure and retract

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand, advance, and downgraft the posterior aspect
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion