JULIA JAMES										06-23-03

Julia is 26 years old and referred by Dr. Ken Rotskoff (Missouri Baptist Medical Center, Bldg. C, Ste. 360, 3009 N. Ballas Road, St. Louis, MO  63131, 314-567-5522) and Dr. Peter Crump (24 S. Gore Ave., St. Louis, MO  63119).

Patient History

Her TMJ problems began about 10 years ago, and it was the first time that she developed a closed lock situation. She was able to tolerate things pretty well, but in the last three years, her problems have gotten a lot worse. She had previous orthodontics at the age of 10 to 12 years and had maxillary first bicuspids extracted. She has a low-grade headache most all the time at about a level of 4 on the average day in the frontal and temporal area, but about every week or two it gets as bad as a level of 8, and she becomes pretty much dysfunctional at that pain level. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, overall pain at 8, jaw function at 7, and diet and disability at 6. Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm. She can open reasonably comfortably after her pop at about 36 mm. Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction. 

Julie began her current round of orthodontics on 04/30/03. Prior to that, she had had three different splints. She had two soft splints by two previous dentists that didn’t seem to help very much. Dr. Rotskoff made her a splint that postured her mandible forward at night when she slept, and this did help with her headaches and with her jaw pain. Obviously it did not fix the problem, however.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Julia has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is fairly close to 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1.5 mm. Mandibular dental midline and chin are on the facial midline.

In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to the subnasale by probably about 3 mm. Maxilla appears AP deficient by probably at least 6 mm. Chin is probably 12 to 15 mm AP-deficient. Chin-neckline is short, although the chin-neck angle is well-defined.

Intraorally, Julia has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she is missing the upper first bicuspids. She has basically a Class I cuspid, Class II molar relationship. She has a little bit of spacing between the left maxillary central and lateral incisors.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2.5 mm. Oropharynx appears clear. Turbinates are moderate in size with the left one being a little bit larger than the right one. Right airway looks really good. Left side is a little bit compromised but not too significantly. Septum may be deviated just a little bit back and forth from side-to-side but not too significant. Luminal valves are just slightly constricted, but in opening the nose, it enabled her to breathe just a little bit better but not really significant differences. 

She has no pain to palpation around the head and neck area. She has a definite loud pop in the left TMJ at 35 mm and a closing click at 15. On the right side, she has an opening pop at less than 10 mm of opening and a closing pop at about 5 mm. She has no earaches, no tinnitus, no vertigo, and no hearing loss. She is aware of clenching at nighttime. 

The only medication she takes is Aleve. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows she has a little cloudiness in her left sinus as compared to the right one. Maxillary first bicuspids are absent as well as all four third molars. Condyles really don’t look in too bad of shape. Articular eminence looks much steeper on the left side as compared to the right side. Nasal airway looks reasonably good.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear in all areas. I do not see anything in the left sinus. Has a huge nasal spur on the septum extending into the right side that extends almost to the lateral wall of the nose. This is probably located posteriorly in the nasal septum. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly. Slightly decreased posterior joint space. Articular eminence is fairly steep although not very long in length. Increased anterior joint space. This could be compatible with an anteriorly displaced disc. No particular degenerative changes noted on the condylar head itself. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is quite steep and essentially perpendicular to the horizontal plane. Articular disc could be anteriorly positioned between the condyle and the articular eminence. Could be a little bit of a pseudocyst in the condylar head. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. Significant steepness in the articular eminence can be observed in both joints.

Cephalometrically, Julia has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship but has both a retruded maxilla and mandible. Some vertical discrepancy at the inferior border of the mandible with one side being significantly lower than the other side. Occlusal planes also look as though there is canting on one side compared to the opposite side. However, clinically the transverse occlusal plane appears fairly level.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with reductions
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Class I cuspid, Class II molar relationship
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
TMJ pain
Large nasal septal spur blocking a considerable portion of the right nasal airway

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch. Consider stripping lower anterior teeth to keep from flaring them any further forward, but be careful not to remove more than 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure maximum so as not to create a reverse tooth-size discrepancy 


Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward approximately 10 mm
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and downgraft it posteriorly
Removal of extremely large nasal septal spur from the right nasal airway

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
