LINDSEY JAMES									01/22/2007

Lindsey is 25 years old.  She has had previous surgery for an ACL repair in November of 2002.  Lindsey has had previous problems with thyroid imbalances as well as did her mother.  She went to an endocrinologist and that apparently has been corrected and controlled.  She takes Omega 3 vitamins to help keep it under control.  

MEDICATIONS: 
Yasmin (BCP), doxycycline 20 mg b.i.d.
Doxycycline 20 mg b.i.d.
Chondroitin 900 mg per day.

Her father-in-law is Dr. Jerry James in Lovington, NM.  He is a dentist there. 

Her problems began when she was about 23 years old in 2005 of unknown etiology.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism and she thought that this might have been contributory.  Lindsey gets headaches daily and they occur usually around 2 or 3 in the afternoon.  They occur in the top of her head and along the superior aspect of the insertion of the temporalis muscle at about a level of 3.  She rates her average TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 5, diet at 3, disability at 4.  She gets occasional earaches but no problems with tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  A little bit of problem with her wrists with the right one being worse than the left and she feels that it is just due to weakness in her wrists.  She has no known allergies and no problems wearing jewelry.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night.  She does sleep well at night but sometimes during the day she is tired.  She is not aware of any sleep apnea problems. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Active jaw degeneration.
Pain when chewing.
Bad bite.

She did wear a splint from October of 2006 until December of 2006.  It is called a MAGO splint.  This did improve her comfort and did take the pain away and did balance her bite, but once she removed the splint her bite would go out of alignment again.  

She has had previous orthodontics from 1992 to 1994 and then she failed to wear retainers and had orthodontics repeated again from 1996 to 1998.  She feels she has only ever occluded on one tooth at a time and that her teeth have never fit together properly even after having orthodontics done twice. 

In frontal view, Lindsey has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the right side.  Chin is slightly off to the right side as well.  Lower dental midline and chin midline are fairly close to being aligned with each other.  In profile view, Lindsey has fairly good facial balance.  The chin might be retruded just slightly, maybe 2 to 3 mm.  Chin-neckline looks good and chin-neck angle is well defined.  Overall, she has a beautiful profile.  Intraorally, 
LINDSEY JAMES				01/22/2007				Page 2

Lindsey has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth are nicely aligned and leveled.  She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth with a high labial frenulum.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.   She has a Class II occlusion on the right side by probably 5 to 6 mm and on the left side by probably 3 to 4 mm.  When she bites together in centric relation, she occludes only on the right second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.  She says that at night when she clenches and grinds her teeth that she can get a few more teeth together but still predominately her posterior teeth are the ones that touch.  She has about a 0 vertical overbite relationship.  She has about a 2 to 3 mm overjet.  Uvula and soft palates are all relatively normal as are the faucial pillars.  Tonsils are mildly enlarged but not too significant.  Intranasally, the septum appears to be deviated a little bit off to the right side.  Turbinate on the right side appears moderately enlarged as does the left one.  Airway on the right side appears a little bit constricted compared to the left one.  However, Lindsey is not aware of having any significant breathing problems.  Columella is wide and nostrils are somewhat constricted.  

Lindsey usually wakes up with pain on the right side for about an hour in the morning and then it sort of goes away until she eats and then it gets uncomfortable again.  

To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the TMJs and styloid areas but no other pain around the head and neck area.  To palpation, as she opens she has a click in the left joint probably about 10 mm of opening and a closing click about 5 mm.  On the right side she has more of a crepitus kind of noise factor.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars but all the rest of the teeth are there.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Both the condyles appear as though there are some arthritic changes but the right one is more marked than the left one.  Right condylar head and neck length appear short compared to the left side.

Waters view shows that the bony septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  Left nasal airway appears pretty much blocked.  The right side appears there is a little bit of an airway.  Sinuses appear relatively clear. 

Left TMJ shows the condyle appears a little bit arthritic.  There is decreased superior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  A little bit of osteophyte sticking up off the type of the condyle.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears smaller in size.  There is larger joint space in this side compared to the opposite side.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is moderate translation of the left TMJ.  On the right side, there is a little bit more constricted translatory movement.  



LINDSEY JAMES				01/22/2007				Page 3

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she does have a slight skeletal and occlusal Class II  occlusal relationship.  Most of the teeth appear to be out of occlusion. Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted with the base of the tongue being only about 6 mm but at the soft palate level it is 10 mm.  

Lindsey did have an i-CAT examination performed at Baylor College of Dentistry and I will have to get ahold of those images.  Just TMJs are shown here in a printout.  It shows on the left joint there is some flattening on the anterior head with a little osteophytic kind of projections superiorly.  Joint space actually looks reasonably good.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  In the right side on the sagittal view there are significant degenerative changes that appear to have occurred in some areas where there appears to be pitting of the condylar head.  Joint space appears increased in many of the views and there is some osteophyte development off the superior posterior aspect of the condylar head.  In the frontal view, the left condyle appears to have fairly good architecture and it may be a slight decreased joint space but not too significant.  On the right side, the condyle appears more arthritic with the areas of erosion on the condylar head.  Both joints show a relatively minimal downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa.  There appears to be decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint on the right side particularly towards the more anterior aspect of the joint.  As Lindsey holds her mandible forward in an almost end-on relationship, she is fairly close to being a Class I on the left side but still slightly a Class II on the right side by probably 1 mm or 2.  She may have a tooth size discrepancy.  Transversely, Lindsey is fairly level.  She has a slight accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch and just a slightly reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch.  She can posture her mandible so that her posterior teeth hit fairly simultaneously in the second molar.  This probably includes the posterior 4 teeth bilaterally but when she is in centric relation is when she hits only on the right second molars.  

OTHER SYSTEMS:  
Lindsey does have some problems with her wrists.  No urinary tract problems.  Her periods are regular when on birth control.  She has a history of ovarian cyst but has required no surgery.  She has been having problems with conjunctivitis for the past 8 months.  She has been wearing contacts ever since she was about 12 years old.  She gets itching and dryness of her eyes and needs drops which she uses daily.  No sinus problems.  She does get occasional earaches.  No upper respiratory problems or history.  She does have a history of irritable bowel syndrome that she gets occasionally and gets diarrhea about once a week.  No history of chlamydia.  She gets occasional fatigue problems but runs no temperature.  She does have hyperthyroidism.  She has not been around any pet birds or domesticated birds nor cats.  She grew up with dogs and some of them did kill birds.  Not around any hoofed animals.  She has no implants and she is not aware of any problems that her husband has relative to joints, urinary tract problems or ocular problems.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Right TMJ reactive arthritis with condylar resorption, articular disc dislocation with severe deformation and nonreducing.
Left TMJ reactive arthritis and articular disc dislocated but with early reduction.
LINDSEY JAMES				01/22/2007				Page 4

AP mandibular deficiency and asymmetry.
Maxillary transverse excess.
Class II end-on occlusion being worse on the right side than the left side.
Occluding in centric relation only on the right second molars.
Apertognathia. 
TMJ pain.
Headaches.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Laboratory tests to rule out connective tissue autoimmune disease.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth and retract.
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints if total joint prostheses are to be used.
Treatment option 1.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Possible maxillary osteotomies to achieve optimal occlusion.
Treatment option 2.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral ramus sagittal split osteotomies.  Shift the mandible back on midline and advance it.
Maxillary osteotomies to maximize occlusal fit.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

Surgical procedure will depend on additional workup including laboratory tests, dental model analysis (dental models not available at the consult) and additional factors.  