MARY ANN JAMES									04/27/2009

Mary Ann is now 48 years old.  I first treated her back in 1995 with bilateral TMJ Christensen prostheses and maxillary osteotomy.  The Christensen devices failed and in about 1998 the failed Christensen devices were removed and bilateral TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses were placed with bilateral TMJ fat grafts.  Mary Ann continues to have significant problems with headaches that are the migraine nature.  She continues to have TMJ pain at about level of 8.  Her average daily pain is at a level of 9.  She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 5, and disability at 5.  She gets headaches in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area at about a level of 9.  Incisal opening is 31, although I believe is restricted because of pain issues.  To palpation, she has severe pain over the TMJs, styloid areas, high moderate pain over the masseter muscles, and mild pain over the medial pterygoids and shoulders.  She does wear a splint at night.  She wakes in the morning feeling the best, but then the during the days headaches begin.  She has no significant problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her neck, hips, lower back, and left shoulder.  The pain is the worst over the TMJ area.  She is missing all of her molars, but does have partial dentures.  She does have a good Class I cuspid relationship with a 1 mm vertical over bite.   

Radiographic evaluation with I-CAT reveals no evidence of heterotopic bone around the prostheses.  There does not appear to be any significant wear of the polyethylene.  

She does have chronic right maxillary sinusitis and she says she has had this problem since 1995 and 1996.  She has had a significant problem on the left side initially, and we apparently went in and took out the maxillary bone plates and the synthetic bone grafts, and the right sinus now looks clear.  The left one, however, is full of stuff.  She has been on numerous antibiotics and been treated long term by ENT without resolution.  She obviously will need a right maxillary sinus debridement with probable removal of bone plates and synthetic bone grafts.  She is on numerous medications and these include the following:

Norvasc 5 mg 1 tablet q.d.
Cymbalta 60 mg 2 tablets per day. 
Wellbutrin XL 1 tablet q.d.
Topamax 50 mg 1 tablet 2 times per day. 
Ambien CR 12.5 mg q.h.s.
Seroquel 200 mg 2 at bedtime.
Imitrex injection p.r.n. 
Midrin tablets as needed.
Maxalt p.r.n. 
Percocet p.r.n. 
Antibiotics for chronic maxillary sinusitis. 

For her migraine headaches, she uses the following:

Imitrex STAT dose kit 
Midrin.
Maxalt.  
Lidocaine patches on neck, shoulders, and lower back. 

She has had a neck fusion since I last saw her in 2002, but she still continues to have significant neck pain related problems.  At this time, I believe her problems include the following:

Right maxillary severe chronic sinusitis.
Possible hypersensitivity to materials in the prostheses created by the previous failed Christensen prostheses.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Surgery to explore, debride, and hopefully eliminate the right maxillary sinusitis. 
Tests for hypersensitivity to materials in the prostheses to determine presence or absence of metal hypersensitivity.  

We are currently waiting for our kits to arrive from the Rush Hospital Medical Center research lab to test for hypersensitivity.  Mary Ann is to contact us in the next 1-2 weeks to see if the kits have arrived.  She is to keep me informed of her progress.  It is possible that if she is hypersensitive to the materials that the treatment options could include:

Desensitization to the materials. 
Change out the prostheses to replace with mandibular components that do not contain the hypersensitive materials. 
