STACIE JARAMILLO							07/05/2011

Stacie is 33 years old, birth date 12/04/1977.  Referred by Max Ebrahimian, DDS, 5 Erba Lane, Scotts Valley, CA 95066. 

Stacie believes that her TMJ problems began probably around the age of 14.  By the age of 16, she was receiving chiropractic treatments.  She has had sort of continuous treatments from the chiropractor through the years.  She has had physical therapy a few times on top of that.  She had orthodontics from the age of 9 to 10.  She takes no medications.  She gets headaches about 2 times per week at about a level of 6 in the frontal and temporal area bilaterally.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, although it can escalate to 9.  Average daily pain is at 6, jaw function at 7, diet at 5, disability at 5.  She gets no earaches, but occasional tinnitus and moderate vertigo but no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her right tennis elbow, wrists, fingers, and knees which are the result of previous injuries.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at nighttime and also clenching during the day.  Stacie does report that she has mild snoring and moderate to severe daytime somnolence.  She takes lots of naps.  She has some mild sleep apnea symptoms.  She is aware of mouth breathing at nighttime and also quite a bit during the day as well.  She says that one side of her nose is blocked off.  

In frontal view, Stacie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm. The maxillary and mandible and chin midline are fairly close to being on the facial midline. In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 4 mm and the chin is retruded about 10 to 12 mm.  As Stacie postures her mandible forward, it does improve her facial profile.  With the lips relaxed, she has about 4 mm of lip incompetence.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth through the second molars.  She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch and some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a lingual inclination of the maxillary central incisors.  She is fairly close to being a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  She has a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being more than 1.5 mm higher in the cuspid area than the left side.  The chin is actually 2 to 3 mm off to the right side, but the dental midlines are fairly well aligned with each other.  The dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other taking into consideration the transverse slope in the occlusal plane.  Oropharyngeal tissues look real normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderately enlarged with the left one appearing somewhat larger than the right one.  There is probably at least moderate nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, she has high moderate to low severe pain to palpation over the masseter muscles, TMJs, retromandibular area and shoulders.  Jaw function she has some occasional glitches in her joints.  The incisal opening is 38 mm and excursion movements are 8 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The rest of the teeth are present with good root structure and supportive bone structures.  She appears to have arthritis in both joints.  The turbinates are enlarged particularly on the left side causing significant airway blockage as seen on the coronal as well as the axial views.  There is a large cyst in the right maxillary sinus and along the posterior wall of the sinus.  The septum is deviated a little bit towards the left side.  

Tomographic x-rays demonstrate that the mandible is postured forward in an almost end-on incisor relationship which increases the joint space in both joints and also positions the condyle forward in the fossa on both sides.  There is some significant arthritis in the left TMJ and towards the medial side the condyle is quite narrow anteroposteriorly.  There is anterior beaking present.  Out laterally, the head of the condyle is quite flattened.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is significantly arthritic with anterior beaking present.  The condyle is postured forward in the fossa and is not in centric relation.  The roof of the fossa is extremely thin.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  The condyle looks small compared to the size of the fossa.  The condyle is narrow towards the medial side of the joint and wider at the lateral aspect, but there are degenerative changes at the lateral aspect.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone fairly significant condylar resorption and flattening of the head of the condyle.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves about 2 or 3 mm.  There is a lateral spur sticking out from the condyle.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with arthritis, but not quite as progressive as the opposite side.  There is some flattening of the lateral head of the condyle and there is erosion present.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  There is decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the mandible is postured forward in almost an end-on incisor relationship.  There is a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 8 mm at the base of the tongue, 9 mm at the soft palate level.  

Basic diagnoses for Stacie would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ osteoarthritis.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class I malocclusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Hypertrophied turbinates creating nasal airway obstruction.
Mucocele posterior aspect of maxillary right sinus.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise 			direction.
	c.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
	e.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	f.	Removal of mucocele maxillary right sinus.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.