TAMARA JEFFS			Telephone Conversation 			11-17-04

(208-409-2775):  She is currently 41 years, weighs 160 lb, and is 5’7” tall. She takes the following medications:
Ditropan for bladder problems
Tambocor
Estrogen
Synthroid
Darvocet 
Lodine
Soma
Toprol
Sonata
Guaifenesin which she has to take to control her sinus problems
Imuran
Prednisone
Plaquenil

Her TMJ problems began at the age of 15 or 16 when she was involved in a motor vehicle accident. They didn’t cause too much problem, but she was aware something was amiss in her joints. At age 24, she was in another motor vehicle accident, and after that fairly rapidly her bite began to open, but she is not aware of having any fractures of her joints. Dr. Lou Gallia has treated her since then. In 1987 at age 24, she had bilateral TMJ arthroplasties and had some type of tissue graft placed. In 1989, she then had orthognathic surgery and did okay for a while after that, and she thinks her bite remained relatively stable. In 1991, she was in another motor vehicle accident, and following that she had rapid condylar resorption according to her. In 11/1991, she had bilateral TMJ Christensen prostheses placed with acrylic heads. She began developing lupus-type syndrome with an increased ANA, but no other labs could prove anything. She developed severe headaches, itching and recurrent bronchitis types of problems. In 12/1998, the Christensen prostheses were removed. It was found that the acrylic heads had worn down, and she was functioning on the metal centering posts against the metal fossa. Nothing was placed in for a while, and she felt much better during that time. In 02/1999, she had bilateral TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses placed. She did okay for a while but then began developing symptoms after about a year. She has had severe symptoms at this time that she feels quite sick. She even has her skin affected where she gets rashes and becomes quite hypersensitivity to clothing and says a lot of time she runs around half naked because she feels better. She feels better wearing cotton as compared to wearing polyester or other synthetic kinds of materials. 

Other Systems

She has problems in numerous other joints including neck, back, shoulders, wrists, hands, fingers, hips, knees, ankles, feet and toes. She has almost constant urinary tract infections. She has frequent burning when she urinates, has polyuria, and nocturia x 2. She has difficulty getting started urinating and all the time has the feeling that she cannot empty her bladder. Her reproductive system has had significant problems also. Prior to her total hysterectomy in 1989, her periods were irregular, and she had a lot of bleeding. She had one miscarriage. She has two children, ages 21 and 20. She had endometriosis and ovarian cysts which were the reason that her ovaries were removed. She had no fibroid tumors, but she has significant problems with fibrocystic breast disease. She has not had an abnormal Pap smear. She has significant problems with vaginal yeast infections particularly when she is on antibiotics. She used to get yeast infections every one to two months, but since she has been put on Imuran, she has really not had an infection, and she started the Imuran in June or July of this year. She has a lot of problems with eye infections and occasionally gets pink eye and styes but gets these recurrent infections fairly frequently. She gets conjunctivitis. She has burning, itching, and dryness of her eyes. She has chronic sinus problems. There is no history of smoking. She does get earaches, almost continuous tinnitus, and frequent vertigo. In addition, she gets ear infections three to four times per year, and she has some loss of hearing. She does get frequent colds and viruses. 
TAMARA JEFFS			11-17-04				Page 2

Of significant interest is that in 1982 and 1983 she worked in a factory that worked with fiberglass bathtubs. She said she would feel pretty well going to work on Monday but by Thursday she would be so sick that she would sometimes have to go to the emergency room. She was diagnosed as having asthma at the age of 20 while she was pregnant with one of her kids and also working in this fiberglass factory area. She gets occasional coughing problems. She gets significant problems with sore throats and pharyngitis and has almost continuous hoarseness now. She gets bronchitis approximately six times per year. She has had pneumonia three to four times in the last 10 years. She is not aware of having any sexually transmitted diseases, although she had a very bad bladder infection after she got married. She is constantly fatigued. She runs a temperature four to five days during the week. She does have thyroid problems which were diagnosed in 2001 and takes Synthroid. She has memory loss. She has heart problems including mitral valve prolapse and an irregular heartbeat, both which were diagnosed sometime around 1995. She has been told that she has lupus-like syndrome, Sjogren’s like syndrome, and fibromyalgia. Her son had a parakeet for about six months. Growing up for about 10 to 12 years she was exposed significantly to chickens, 12 to 30 at a time, and ducks x 2. She played a lot with the chickens and actually taught them tricks. She had one cat for about three years that was primarily an outdoor cat. She has had dogs all of her life, and some of them may have eaten birds. In the past 10 years she has had two goats, one at a time. At the age of 24, she had mononucleosis. At the age of 18, she thinks she had scarlet fever but is not positive of that, but feels when she reviews her records that is probably what she had. Her mononucleosis significantly affected her liver. ADDENDUM:  GI systems reveals she claims to have nausea at times. She has been diagnosed with irritable bowel syndrome. She gets abdominal pain and cramping ever since she was a young girl, and this has been a continuous problem for her. She does get diarrhea and constipation and seems to jump back and forth between those two conditions. 

My current impression of Tamara is as follows:

Possible Chlamydia/Mycoplasma systemic infection
Possible multiple hypersensitivities
Possible severe immunodysfunctional problems
Rule out heterotopic bone formation around the joint prostheses (she has a CT scan that she will e-mail to me)
Multiple system problems

Treatment recommendations at this time include the following:

Evaluation of immune system
Test for Chlamydia group antibodies
Test for Mycoplasma group antibodies
Testing at the Environmental Center for hypersensitivities
Complete TMJ evaluation and workup

TAMARA JEFFS			Telephone Conversation 			11-18-04

I had recommended Levaquin for her, but she has a high probability of allergic reaction since she is allergic to Cipro. Discussed the possibility of taking Zithromax 600mg tablet, 1 tablet q.d., for a month to see if this improves her situation. In light of all of her symptoms, she very well could have some type of Chlamydia  or Mycoplasma kind of infection. 