ERIC JENSEN								06/24/2011

Eric is 19 years old, birth date 03/15/1992.  Referred by Dr. Moody Alexander, 840 W. Mitchell, Arlington, TX 76013.  

Eric was born with symptomatic cytomegaly virus.  I believe he also had left-sided hemifacial microsomia.  He also has been diagnosed with harlequin syndrome where one of the face will flush, but not the other side.  Eric has no headache problems, no TMJ pain, and no pain around the head and neck area.  He rates his jaw function at 2, diet at 5, disability at 3.  He takes no medications.  He has no problems with earaches.  He does get an ear infection about one time per year in the right ear.  He has no tinnitus, no vertigo.  Although he has a normal structure of the right ear, he has no hearing in that ear related to the CMV.  In his left ear, there is no ear canal, but the nerves are intact internally and he can hear out of that ear.  He has a bone conduction hearing aid on the left side.  He has had 3 surgeries to reconstruct the left ear hearing mechanism.  He has had a TE fistula (esophageal atresia).  He has had tubes x3 in the right ear.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Eric has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  A little bit of weakness in the left zygoma area compared to the right side as far as some transverse width.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 4 mm.  The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is 3.5 mm to the left and chin is about 10 mm to the left.  In profile, the maxilla is AP deficient by about 3 to 4 mm.  The chin is AP deficient by about 20 to 22 mm.  the lower third face appears somewhat elongated.  The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  The left ear has been nicely reconstructed by Dr. Steve Byrd.  The left ear is about 10 mm lower vertically compared to the right ear.  Intraorally, Eric has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has some spacing between the cuspids and first bicuspids.  He has adequate attached gingiva along the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, Eric has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has spacing around the upper anterior teeth.  He is fairly close to being Class I cuspid on the right side, but Class II end-on on the left side.  In centric relation, appears to occlude on the second molars and the rest of the teeth are pretty much out of occlusion.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 3 to 4 mm higher than the right side.  The inferior border of the mandible on the left side is 5 to 6 mm higher than the right side.  There is a transverse yaw with the posterior maxillary and mandibular teeth being shifted about 2 to 3 mm off towards the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the turbinates are fairly moderately enlarged and the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  His nostrils are somewhat narrowed.  There are times he is a mouth breather at night.  It appears he does have a tendency towards a buccal cross bite on the right side.  There is a 1 mm vertical over bite relationship.  To palpation, eric has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  An interesting fact is that if you rub on the left side of the face, Eric will develop hiccups.  The incisal opening is 43 mm and excursion movements are about 7 mm in each direction.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of impacted maxillary third molars, but the mandibular third molars are absent.  Spacing is present between the lower anterior teeth and upper anterior teeth.  Left condyle and ramus are shorter vertically compared to the right side demonstrating hypoplastic development.  

Coronal view shows that there is a mucous retention cyst in the maxillary right sinus.  The septum is deviated severely off towards the right side.  The right turbinate is relatively small, but the left one is excessively large and appears to obliterate most of the airway.  The left sinus is clear. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is small in size compared to the opposite side.  The articular eminence is relatively flat.  There appears to be adequate joint space.  There appears to be some anterior beaking on the condyle.  There is no internal auditory canal.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some slight anterior beaking.  There is reasonably good joint space except towards the medial side the condyle appears to be almost against the bony ear canal.  The articular eminence is relatively flat through most of the joint except at the lateral aspect it is a little more normal in contour.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has narrow compared to the opposite side.  There appears to be reasonable joint space vertically.  The fossa has an unusual morphology in that the roof of the fossa slants downward from its medial aspect to it most lateral aspect and is fairly flat in orientation.  The lateral rim is fairly flat.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width.  There appears to be good joint space vertically.  The lateral rim has a very minimal downward curvature. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Eric has a maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.  The mandible is AP deficient.  Oropharyngeal airway however looks reasonably good.  

Basic diagnoses for Eric would be as follows:

Left-sided facial microsomia.  
Harlequin syndrome.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia as well as asymmetry.  
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and asymmetry.  
High occlusal plane angulation.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 3 to 4 mm higher than the right side.  
Class II end-on occlusion on the left side.  
Occluding only on the second molars in centric occlusion. 
Impacted maxillary third molars.
Severely deviated septum off to the right side.  
Hypertrophied left turbinate.
Multiple diasthemas in the anterior maxillary and mandibular arches.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJs to be sure joints are healthy.  
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Maintain about 1 mm of spacing between 			the lateral incisors and cuspids.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to lose some of the posterior 				anchorage so that the lower incisors are not significantly retracted.  This 			may require moving one or two at a time in the lower arch or using TADs.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise rotation with pogonion coming forward approximately 			20 mm.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance in a counterclockwise 				direction and level transversely. 
	c.	Nasal septoplasty.
	d.	Left nasal turbinectomy.  
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 




















