ANDRES JARAMILLO								08/12/2009

Andres is 26 years old.  Referred by Dr. Brad Theriot.  Andres is in good health with no major medical problems.  He just takes proteins and vitamins.  His orthodontist is Dr. Brian Smith in Austin.  

Basic concerns that Andres has includes the following:

Teeth and jaws do not fit together properly.
Long cheek dimensions that causes breathing problems and affects appearance.

He has no other major medical conditions except currently he has an eye infection for which he is taking antibiotics.  His only previous surgery was in 1989 for a knee surgery.  Andres has been in orthodontic treatment for about 1-1/2 years.  He has been on in arch elastics, but this has not corrected the situation.  Andres has no problems with heads, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain.  He rates his jaw function at 2, diet at 0, disability at 3.  He has no earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  No other joints bother him.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Andres has some moderate facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm on the left, 0 on the right.  The nasal tip is off to the right side about 3-4 mm.  The maxillary midline is off to the right probably about 4 mm as is the mandibular midline.  The chin is off to the right side.  He has some increased fullness in the right side by about 3 mm at the angle and body of the ramus of the mandible.  In profile view, the chin may be just slightly strong.  There may be some slight AP deficiency at the base of the nose.  Infraorbitally, there may be just some slight AP deficiency but not too significant.  Intraorally, Andres has all of his teeth back through the second molars except he is missing mandibular left first molar, and the second and third molar have drifted with the remaining space about the size of a bicuspid.  He has adequate attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch.  The arches appear relatively nicely aligned and level.  In the upper arch, he is missing probably first bicuspid on the right side and he has the rest of his teeth back to the third molars.  He has an anterior open bite of about 1 mm.  He has a Class II occlusion on the right side by probably 5 mm and on the left side by probably 3 mm.  He has an anterior crossbite.  The lower arch appears fairly symmetric with maybe about a 1 mm retrusion of the right cuspid compared to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch, the right cuspid is 4 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  The maxillary arch has a cant of about 3-4 mm with the left side being higher than the right side.  The lower arch is fairly level. The lower arch might be elevated about 1 mm on the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy.  He has a moderate to severe elongation of the uvula.  Tonsils are moderately enlarged.  To palpation, Andres has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Incisal opening is 50 mm and excursion movements are 2 mm to the right and 7 mm to the left.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  To palpation, he has no tenderness or pain around the head and neck area.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular left first molar.  All other teeth are present except for the left mandibular third molar.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has some slight over angulation of the maxillary incisors.  He has a skeletal occlusal Class III jaw relationship.  There appears to be a significant curve of Spee in the lower arch.  Bilateral TMJs show relatively normal architecture.  Joint spaces appear reasonable for a Class III individual. 

Basic diagnoses for Andres would be as follows:    

AP maxillary hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Deviated mandibular prognathism off to the right side. 
Class III occlusion.
Anterior crossbite.
Anterior open bite of 1-2 mm. 
Missing maxillary right first bicuspid and mandibular first molars with the right second and third molar brought forward to the first and second molar position and on the left side the second and third molar are brought forward about half of the distance. 
Significant over angulation of the maxillary incisors. 
Hypertrophied turbinates creating nasal airway obstruction.
External nasal deformity with the nose rotated off towards the right side approximately 4 mm. 
Bilateral infraorbital and malar hypoplasia. 
Transverse cant in the maxillary occlusal plane with the right side being 3 mm higher than the left side. 
AP maxillary asymmetry with the right cuspid being 4 mm posterior to the left cuspid. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Extract maxillary left first bicuspid. 
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Close the left maxillary extraction space and try to hold posterior anchorage, retracting the incisors with the midline shifting towards the left side.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Maintain the residual first molar space in the mandibular posterior quadrant for future placement of an implant and bicuspid size crown.    
Surgery. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the arch transversely, advance it about 3-4 mm, and correct any transverse discrepancies. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible to the left onto the facial midline. 
Nasal osteotomies to shift the nose towards to the left approximately 4 mm at the nasal tip. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry with placement of an osteointegrated implant in the mandibular left residual first molar area and placement of a bicuspid size crown. 
Surgery Stage 2.  Bilateral infraorbital osteotomies to advance the orbital rims forward and upward. 
