HYE-YOON JEOUNG								8/24/05

Hye-Yoon is 19 years old and is referred by Dr. George Adams.  Hye-Yoon is in good health with no major medical problems.  She had orthodontics from the age of 11 to 14 and apparently had a good bite relationship with completion of the orthodontic treatment.  Starting in her sophomore year in high school she noticed that her lower jaw began to slowly shift off towards the left side causing her teeth and bite to get out of alignment.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Jaws asymmetric and getting progressively worse.
Difficulty eating and chewing.

She is not aware of any problems with nocturnal clenching or bruxism.

In frontal view, Hye-Yoon has fairly good facial balance in the middle and upper third face.  The lower jaw is a little bit asymmetric and off towards the left side.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm off to the left side and chin is probably 4 to 5 mm off to the left side.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance in the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  The chin may be just slightly AP deficient.  Chin-neckline is fairly well defined as is the chin-neck angle.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.  She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars.  On the right side, she has a Class III end-on occlusion by probably almost 4 mm.  On the left side, she has a Class I.  She has an anterior crossbite and a slight open bite tendency.  At the oropharynx, the tissue appears healthy.  The uvula is relatively normal in length as is the soft palate.  Some moderate constriction of the faucial pillars.  Nostrils are a little bit narrow but short vertically.  Intranasally, she appears to have fairly enlarged turbinates relative to the size of the airway with the right side being maybe just slightly larger than the left side.  Hye-Yoon does state that she has difficulty breathing through her nose and breathes predominately through her mouth particularly when sleeping.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the left posterior neck but no other pain to palpation around the head and neck area.  On opening, she appeared to have a little bit of a click on the right side about 35 mm of opening and closing click about 20 mm.  She does subluxate over the articular eminences.  Maximal incisal opening is about 53 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 9 mm, to the left 8 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of 4 impacted third molars.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  The left condylar head appears to be a little bit flattened.  The right condyle is off the x-ray.  It appears there could be a little calcification perhaps within the maxillary right sinus floor area. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the right side.  Some deviation of the nasal septum.  Cartilaginous septum cannot be seen.  Asymmetry is noted in the mandible.  


HYE-YOON JEOUNG
August 24, 2005
Page 2


Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly and superiorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  It possibly could be a vertically oriented articular disc in this joint. 

Right TMJ condyle appears larger than the left.  Difficult to identify the roundness of the condyle.  There appears to be decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is hypersubluxation of the condylar heads well beyond the articular eminences.  Cannot really see the right condyle very well on the open view.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows what appears to be a relatively high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  Airway is exceptionally large.  There appears to be some anterior mandibular vertical excess.  She has a Class III occlusal relationship but appears to be a Class I or perhaps a Class II skeletal relationship most likely related to the steep occlusal plane angle.  

Hye-Yoon and her mother would prefer to have the chin moved backwards and made not as prominent as it currently is.  Therefore, a design of treatment would be planned around doing no maxillary surgery if possibly or at least no significant changes in maxillary position relative to occlusal plane angulation and AP changes.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Right TMJ condylar hyperplasia versus osteochondroma/osteoma.
Possible bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations with reductions. 
Mandibular deviated prognathism. 
Over-angulation of lower incisors. 
High-occlusal plane angulation.
Slight anterior vertical excess and posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary excess in the posterior area.
Class III end-on occlusion on the right side, Class II cuspid relationship on the left side.
Anterior crossbite.
Open bite tendency.
Accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.
Mild crowding in the upper arch.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1.5 mm.
Fascial pain in the left posterior neck area. 
Impacted third molars x4.
HYE-YOON JEOUNG
August 24, 2005
Page 3


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
MRI of left and right TMJs.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level the maxillary arch.  Try to slightly decrease the accentuated curve of occlusion.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Remove 3 x 3 retainer and slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1.5 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing.
Surgery.
Right TMJ high condylectomy versus lower condylectomy depending on etiology of the overgrowth process.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair if it is confirmed on MRI that the discs are displaced.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to realign the mandible.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Post Surgical Orthodontics
Finish and retain 

