JERRY BOYLES									01/16/2006

Jerry is 52 years old, referred by Dr. Michael Steffen, Edmond, OK.  Jerry was born with a unilateral cleft lip and palate.  It was repaired early on in infancy and early on in the first decade.  He had orthodontics as a teenager.  At the age of 19, he had a maxillary partial placed that replaced the anterior teeth.  He has worn that partial from that time until the present.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Gum line and bone are eroding. 
He is getting some air escaped during speech. 
Pain.
Migraine headaches.
There is something that goes on in the jaw that he feels contributes to the migraine headaches.
Air leakage around the back of the soft palate during speech. 
Air leak in the alveolar cleft area.  

He has had some previous surgeries to try to help his hearing including bilateral mastoidectomies and bilateral ear repairs probably repairing the tympanic membrane.  However, Jerry does feel he has some hearing loss.  He has no earaches.  He gets some tinnitus but no vertigo.  He has some problems with his left knee.  He has allergies to Floxin and Biaxin.  He has allergies to grass, trees and dust.  Apparently there are some foods that he may have a little bit of a reaction to but nothing severe but tomatoes tend to bother him some.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Avapro.
Prilosec over-the-counter.
Zomig for headaches.

If he uses Polydent he can keep the alveolar cleft hole plugged up for the most part.

He gets headaches and sometimes they are on a daily basis and other times they occur less frequently.  They occur primarily in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area about a level of 7.  Periodically he will get migraines.  No particular pain around the head and neck area and he rates his TMJ pain at 0.  Jaw function is 0, diet at 1 and disability is 0.  

In frontal view, Jerry has good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 4 to -5 mm.  He appears to have very nice repair on his lip.  A little bit of nasal deformity of the right alar dome down lower vertically as well as anteroposteriorly on the right side.  In profile view, he has some fullness in the submental area.  When he bites down all the way, he demonstrates vertical maxillary deficiency and vertical overclosure.  As he opens up his jaws, he actually had fairly good balance between his lips and chin.  Intraorally, Jerry has all of his lower teeth actually all the way back to the third molar on the left side and back through the second molar on the right side.  Significant increased curve of Wilson in the lower arch with lingual inclination of the second bicuspids and molars.  
JERRY BOYLES				01/16/2006				Page 2

First bicuspids are a little bit blocked out of the arch.  He has a slight accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch with the lower incisors being probably 2 to 3 mm higher than a more ideal alignment.  In the upper arch, he is missing bicuspid on the right side.  He has probably first bicuspid and is missing the third molar.  On the left side, he is missing the third molar posteriorly but he is missing all 4 incisors.  He has crowns on the right cuspid, bicuspid on the left side and essentially all the posterior teeth.  The second molar on the left side appears to have lost its crown.  The maxillary is severely constricted transversely.  He has anterior bilateral posterior crossbites.  On the left side, the posterior teeth bite almost completely inside the lower teeth.  The soft palate repair looks fairly good and the muscles were reapproximated fairly nicely in the soft palate so that he has good elevation and a posterior positioned velar knee.  However, there is visible evidence of velopharyngeal incompetence.  Though it is hard to see, it appears that he does have an alveolar cleft present in the anterior maxillary area.  He has crowns on most of the teeth which are gold crowns designed to support his 33 year-old overlay partial that fits over the crowns that are on his teeth.  The only teeth without crowns at this time are the right first and second molar in the upper arch.   It is evident that he is missing both right bicuspids and he has a pontic.  The alveolar cleft is quite evident in the maxillary right alveolus.  On the right side, he has a Class II molar relationship.  On the left side, he has Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally.  He has a reverse overbite of about 2 to 3 mm.  TMJs seem to function smoothly.  He does not appear to have any tenderness around the head and neck area to palpation.  Maximal incisal opening is about 49 mm.  Excursive movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  Intranasally, the nasal septum is deviated significantly off towards the right side.  The right turbinate is hard to see but appear to be relatively normal in size.  The left turbinate is quite large, however, he has a better airway on that side because of the significant deviation of the nasal septum.  Apparently he snores occasionally.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of mandibular right third molar, maxillary right third molar, maxillary left third molar.  Mandibular left second molar is missing but he has had an implant and a crown placed to replace that tooth.  He is missing all 4 incisors in the maxillary arch and he is missing the right first and second bicuspids with the bicuspid area replaced by a pontic.  He has root canal on the maxillary left first and second molars.  He has crowns on practically all the maxillary teeth except the maxillary left second molar but it appears that was a previous crown that has come off.  Posterior teeth from the second bicuspids including the first and second molars bilaterally in the lower arch have crowns or at least large restorations in them.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  

Waters view shows severely constricted transverse maxillary arch.  The sinuses appear relatively clear though there could be a little mucocele in the right mesial side of the maxillary sinus. The septum is severely deviated off towards the right side in the bony aspect.  It is almost touching against the lateral nasal wall on that side.  The left turbinate appears quite large but the right turbinate appears fairly small.  



JERRY BOYLES				01/16/2006				Page 3


Right TMJ joint shows fairly good anatomy of the condyle.  There appears to be some decreased vertical and posterior joint space but the disc just may be thin.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  There appears to be a little better joint space on this side. Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is restricted translation of both condyles but clinically there is good mobility.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is severe AP maxillary deficiency and vertical maxillary deficiency.  The mandible appears to be in reasonable position.  Oropharyngeal airway appears quite good with AP dimension at the soft palate level of about 12 mm and at the base of the tongue approximately 12 to 13 mm.  Soft palate is short in length.  Jerry had his lip repaired at 3 months and had 2 operations on his palate at the age of 2 years.  He also had a hernia repair as a young child. Dr. John Burton is the doctor that did Jerry's cleft repairs.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Repaired unilateral right cleft lip and bilateral cleft palate. 
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Vertical maxillary deficiency.
Severe transverse maxillary deficiency. 
Class III end-on occlusion.
Anterior and bilateral posterior severe crossbites.
Maxillary right alveolar cleft and oronasal fistula.  
Missing all four maxillary central incisors, right first bicuspid, bilateral third molars and mandibular right third molar.
Mandibular left second molar replaced with an osseointegrated implant and crown.
Short soft palate but with good compensation to overcome potential for hypernasal speech. 
Articulation of speech problems.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
General dentistry to check crowns doing temporary respirations that are necessary. 
Periodontal evaluation and treatment.  Consider hard and soft tissue grafts as necessaryto salvage the remaining teeth.  Identify any teeth that are non-salvageable.
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Extract mandibular second bicuspids. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Loose posterior anchorage to  minimize retraction of the incisors.  
If possible, place some appliances on the upper arch and then try to level the arch somewhat better particularly on the right side by getting the first molar and bicuspid tipped labially 2 mm.
JERRY BOYLES 				01/16/2006				Page 4

Surgery.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward into a Class II cuspid relationship, and expand it as necessary.
Closure of right maxillary oronasal fistula.
Bone graft to anterior maxillary and alveolar cleft area (consider harvesting bone from iliac crest versus cranial bone versus mandibular bone.)
May require trapezoidal lip flap to cover the bone graft.
Surgery stage II.
Osseointegrated implants to the anterior maxilla.
      6.	Prosthetic reconstruction of the maxilla and mandible.

I discussed with Jerry, his girlfriend and his mother the numerous options that he does have.  The above stated plan would be the most ideal treatment.  However, with that advancement of the maxilla, he could end up developing velopharyngeal incompetency which would give him hypernasal speech quality.  We talked of all the options that he has that includes perhaps grafting the alveolar cleft first to eliminate the primary concern of his, then proceed on with the orthodontics and secondary procedures as he elects to do.  

Advancing the maxilla does increase the risk of developing hypernasal speech but if it only needs to come forward 4 or 5 mm, he may be able to compensate well speech-wise.  His speech currently is quite good relative to velopharyngeal competency.  On plosive, fricative and sibilant sounds, he exhibited good competency in those areas.  Other options that are suggested would be to expand the maxilla a little bit from its current position to get into solid bilateral cross-bites and graft the alveolar cleft.  Additional option would be just to graft the alveolar cleft and have prosthetic reconstruction to make a new prosthetic overlay that may still be in crossbite posteriorly and anteriorly but would look and function better than his current device.  

The only way I feasibly see to correct his posterior crossbite and anterior crossbite problems is to do the presurgical orthodontics as outlined in the initial treatment plan and then advance the maxilla and expand it as necessary.  This will then allow him to have reconstruction following the placement of 2 dental implants in the maxillary incisor area having a relatively normal bite relationship and crowns on the cuspids and posterior teeth instead of having to have additional implants and bridgework.  Again, the primary risk with this approach is that he could develop velopharyngeal incompetency.  However, if the advancements are no more than 4 to 5 mm I do believe he will be able to compensate with his speech mechanism to prevent that from occurring.  Advancements of 6 to 10 mm will significantly increase the risk of developing VPI.

 