CRYSTAL JOHNSON									08-18-03

Crystal is 29 years old and referred by Dr. Stephen Huber, 1300 Edgewood Drive, Jefferson City, MO  65109.

Patient History

Crystal has had two previous TMJ surgeries in May 2001. The first surgery involved what sounds like an eminectomy procedure and articular disc repositioning. In December of 2001, she had a discectomy done on the left joint. 

Crystal’s TMJ problems began when she was about 10 years of age. She was aware of clicking and popping in her jaw joints. She then began orthodontics and had a maxillary expander from about the age of 12 to 13. She had braces from the ages of 14 through 18. 

In 1999 or 2000, she developed some significant problems with stress and depression. In January of 2000, she fell and hit her head on a car bumper, and this caused her some neck and back problems as well as may have been a primary initiator of her current joint problems. She has worn bite splints since her teenage years. The problems got to the point that she did seek surgery. In May of 2001, she did have the left eminectomy and disc repositioning procedure. She did not do well after this, and in December of 2001 she had the discectomy performed. She has had physical therapy since May of 2001. She used to get it twice a week but now is down to one time per week. She says she fluctuates between her incisal opening from about 13 up to 27 mm but can’t get much beyond that and cannot maintain that. She has been told that she had a lot of scar tissue within her joint area.

She has adult-onset asthma and takes Qvar 80, 4 puffs daily. She also takes vitamins. She has had a reaction to CODEINE and to MORPHINE where it makes her heart race, and she has hot flashes, etc. She gets earaches on the left side but no tinnitus or vertigo. He has hearing loss on the left side. She is allergic to the codeine and morphine as previously mentioned but also she takes allergy shots weekly for environmental allergy problems. She has significant problems with jewelry and must wear high quality jewelry. Low quality ear posts will create infections for her in her ears. She can’t wear electric watches because she drains the batteries within a few weeks. At nighttime, she is aware that she occasionally clenches her teeth, usually when she is under a lot of stress. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Crystal has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary and mandibular midlines and chin midline all appear to be aligned with each other.

In profile, she does have some retrusion of the maxilla and mandible. Chin-neckline is full, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. 

Intraorally, Crystal has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth also back to the second molars. She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship and about a 2-mm anterior overbite relationship.

Crystal rates her headaches on the left side at a level of 8 and involves most of the areas, frontal, temporal, posterior head, and top of the head area. No headaches on the right side. 
Rates her left TMJ pain at a level of 9, overall pain on an average day at 6, jaw function 8, diet at 5, and disability at 3. Incisal opening is 27 mm maximally but only 20 mm with reasonable comfort. She has severe pain as she extends up to 27 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 1.5 mm and to the left 8 mm. Right joint functions smoothly. Left joint currently is functioning reasonably smoothly, but a lot of times she will hear significant crepitation in that left joint. 

To palpation, she has fairly severe pain over the left TMJ, high moderate pain over the right styloid, right shoulder, moderate pain over the left SCM and posterior neck, and mild to moderate discomfort over the masseter muscle and medial pterygoid. On the left side, at times something will occur on the left side that will make her left arm and hand tingle and her fingers go numb. It is probably related to muscle spasms affecting the cervical plexus. When that occurs, she has swelling. If she puts an ice pack on and takes the swelling away, she feels much better. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex evaluation reveals sinuses look clear. Turbinates look moderately enlarged particularly on the right side. All the teeth are present except missing four third molars. It is an unusual looking situation around the mandibular right first molar as it appears that there is a little calcification at the tip of the root. The distal roots on both mandibular first molars are quite short in length. I don’t know if this is an osteotoma or complex osteotoma. Right condyle appears a little bit larger in size than the left side. 

Waters view shows that the right turbinate is quite large and appears to block most of the airway. There is a double image of the septum which means there is probably some deviation there. Otherwise sinuses all look clear. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with good morphology and also good morphology of the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space is pretty well balanced throughout the joint. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows that there is a fuzziness of the space between the condyle and fossa. Appear to be some degenerative changes in the fossa as well as some minor changes visualized on the condylar head. Appears that the articular eminence has previously been recontoured. May be some areas of calcification within the joint space area. 

Opening shows moderate translation of the right TMJ but virtually no translation of the left joint. Appears that there may be calcifications within that joint space, more so on this view than the previous views. 

Cephalometrically, she has some slight retrusion of the maxilla and mandible. Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted down to about 6 to 7 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue about 5 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ severe arthritis and fibrous ankylosis
Severe TMJ pain
Severe headaches 
Right-sided myofascial pain
Left-sided earaches 
Recommended Treatment

Evaluation at the Environmental Center for hypersensitivities to the materials used in the joint prosthesis

CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Left TMJ condylectomy, debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis
Fat graft to left TMJ (harvested from abdomen)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
