DOUGLAS JOHNSON								10/26/2005

Doug is 53 years old, referred by Dr. Peter Crump, St. Louis, Missouri.  He has had previous surgeries including work on the left knee, left hernia repair and left testicle surgery as well.   The only medication he takes is Protonix 40 mg q.d.  Doug's TMJ problems began probably back in high school when he first became aware of clicking and popping in his joints and this was about 35 years ago.  He remembers one incident playing football where he caught a helmet in the chin.  He does not know if that was related or not.  The only treatment he has had to date is a bite plate which was made in 2004 with no improvement in the symptomatology. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Difficulty finding a bite.
Popping in the jaw joints.
Occasional locking.
Pain and discomfort in the jaws.
Difficulty breathing through the nose.
Chronic nocturnal and daytime clenching.
Constant tinnitus.  
Difficulty breathing through the nose.
Predominant mouth breathing. 
Lower front teeth are causing inflammation and irritation on the gums on the inside of the upper front teeth. 
When he lies on his back sometimes he will get a choking feeling.

He has no trouble with earaches but does have constant tinnitus and no vertigo but has significant hearing loss with about 60% on the left side and 40% on the right side.  He has been told that this is a genetic factor.  The only other joint that bothers him is his left knee.  He has an allergy to penicillin.  He does college football officiating and has difficulty holding a whistle in his mouth as it makes his jaws achy and sore and it usually takes him a day or so to get over that.  No problems with headaches.  He rates his TMJ pain and discomfort at a level of 6, average daily pain at a level of 3, jaw function 3, diet 2, disability at 2.  He does have problems with snoring.  He has mild to moderate tiredness during the day but is not sure if it is due moreso to sleep deprivation because of his work schedule.  He could have mild to moderate sleep apnea symptoms.  He says it is difficult for him to breathe through his nose and feels that if he could not breathe through his mouth he would have significant difficulties breathing.  Even when the MRI was done or if he has dental work done and he has his mouth held open he finds it very difficult to breathe.  On frontal view, Doug has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 to 2 mm off to the left side.  Chin is pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view Doug demonstrates some AP deficiency in the maxillary.  Upper lip supralabrale is probably about 3 to 4 mm posterior to subnasale.  The upper jaw is probably about 6 mm AP deficient.  The chin is probably 15 to 20 mm AP deficient.  Chin-neckline is extremely short and chin-neck angle is not well defined.
Intraorally, Doug has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  Some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  

DOUG JOHNSON				10/26/2005 				Page 2


Slight increased curve of occlusion of the lower arch.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has some significant transverse narrowness of the upper arch.  He has almost a division II alignment of the maxillary incisors.  He has a Class II end-on occlusion by about 5 mm on the right side and a Class II on the left side.  Doug has an anterior deep bite of probably around 6 to 7 mm.  Bicuspid and first molar areas are quite constricted in the upper arch and to a lesser extent in the lower arch.  There may be a slight reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch.  There is a reverse curve of Wilson involving the bicuspids.  Transversely, the upper arch is fairly flat.  In the lower arch the left occlusion is about 1 to 2 mm lower than the right side.  To palpation, Dough has some mild tenderness over the styloid area, shoulders, right TMJ and milder tenderness over the temporalis muscles.  On opening, he has a click about 10 mm on the left side and closing click at 5 mm.  The right joint is relatively smooth although he gives a strong history of a lot of clicking and popping in that joint a year prior to now.  The joints are functioning fairly smoothly but he does give a history of significant popping on that side previously.  Oropharyngeal airway tissues look healthy.  The uvula is moderately hyperplastic.  Soft palate is slightly elongated but not too significant.  Faucial pillars appear moderately constricted.  Intranasally, the luminal valves are moderately constricted.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged and hyperplastic.  They appear a little bit inflamed thus may swell more when lying down.  The septum looks reasonably straight.  Doug does give a history of having previous nasal fractures x8 from football and from ice hockey.  

RADIOGRAPH EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The rest of the teeth are present.  First bicuspid roots in the mandible are quite short in length.  I cannot evaluate condyles.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that actually has fairly good morphology.  Decreased posterior and superior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  A slight hockey stick shape to the condylar head.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Posterior joint space is mildly decreased.  Good translation of both condyles.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The left one appears more obstructive than the right one.  The septum appears somewhat wide and some deviations in the bony aspect.  Cannot evaluate the cartilaginous aspect.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Doug has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship.  He has moderately high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway is mildly constricted with an AP dimension of about 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 9 mm at the base of the tongue.  He has an anterior deep bite relationship and accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch and a slightly reverser curve of occlusion in the upper arch.  Both the maxilla and mandible appear AP deficient.  There is a Bolton's discrepancy with a difference of 1.5 mm. 

DOUG JOHNSON				10/26/2005 				Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Class II occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Sleep apnea symptoms.
Chronic lower anterior arch.
Chronic maxillary anterior arch.
Accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch.
Slight reverse curve of occlusion in upper arch.
Anterior deep bite of 6 to 7 mm. 
Occluding on mucosa.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1.5 mm.
Transverse constricture of both maxillary and mandibular arches in the bicuspid area. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Expand the bicuspid in the first molar area some.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing about 1.5 to 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward.  Try to expand the lower arch on some of the bicuspid area.  
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in counterclockwise direction approximately 18 to 20 mm.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it about 6 to 8 mm at the incisal edge and down graft it approximately 5 mm posterior to decrease the occlusal plane angle.  
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
