EVELYN BROWN JOHNSON							06-30-04

She is now 47 years old. She is 13 years post bilateral TMJ Techmedica total joint prostheses. Although she has had some headache and myofascial pain problems since the last time I saw her, the problems have gotten significantly worse since about February of 2004. In April of 2004, she was diagnosed as having rheumatoid arthritis affecting predominantly her hands, fingers, feet, and toes. She currently has a sleep disorder secondary to her pain. Other joints that bother her include her neck and back where she has disc problems, hands, fingers, feet, toes, and she has some heel spurs as well. No earaches, vertigo, or hearing loss, but she does get occasional tinnitus. Allergies include any medication that is a MYCIN and she is lactose intolerant. Earrings can bother her particularly her right ear. She is aware of clenching nocturnally and probably during the daytime. Her mother recently has had two operations, and she is under some increased stress taking care of her mother. She says she can’t take anything that will make her drowsy at night because she has to be available at night to help with her mother. She has two children, ages 8-1/2 years and 10 years. She currently takes Mobic and Extra Strength Tylenol x 2 at bedtime. It has been recommended that she take Plaquenil. She gets daily constant headaches, and this has been occurring since March of 2004. She rates her headaches on an average at about a level of 8 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. It feels like a tight band that won’t release. She rates pain in the jaw joint at 0. She has constant average daily pain at a level of 6, but it can easily escalate to 8. She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 4, and disability at 3. Occlusion is stable with a good Class I cuspid relationship and a 2-mm anterior overbite. She feels that her bite shifts and changes and doesn’t feel as stable as it used to. This possibly could be due to some muscle spasms that are contributing to her headaches and other factors. To palpation and using much lighter pressure than usual, she had high moderate to severe pain around the temporalis muscles, masseters, medial pterygoids, TMJs, and styloid areas. Maximal incisal opening is 24 mm, and excursive movements are about 1 mm in each direction. Incisal opening where she could hold it for a while is about 17 mm. 

Radiographic Evauation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear and nasal airway appears clear. She did have some sinus surgery last summer. There could be a little mucocele in the right maxillary sinus. Missing maxillary right third molar and left second bicuspid, third molar, mandibular left third molar, mandibular right second bicuspid and third molar. She has bilateral TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Images are a little bit cloudy because of the metal interferences. There possibly could be some reactive bone around the prostheses but difficult to tell in this radiograph.

Right TMJ tomogram shows the prosthesis appears to be in good position. On this tomogram it is difficult to tell if there is any bone that has developed over medially, but that area is a little bit cloudy.

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows the prosthesis in good position and seems to be functioning well. Again, there is some cloudiness between the ramus and the articular eminence area and difficult to tell if there is reactive bone there or not, but there are some suspicions for that.

Cephalometrically, she appears to have a good occlusal relationship. Airway looks adequate.

Basis Diagnoses

Rule out bilateral TMJ heterotopic bone formation
Severe headaches
Severe myofascial pain
Severe TMJ pain
Significant limitation of jaw function (incisal opening 24 mm)
Nocturnal and daytime clenching and bruxism
EVELYN BROWN JOHNSON			06-30-04				Page 2


Recommended Treatment

Medications
Klonopin disp. 15 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s.
Parafon Forte DSC, disp. 30 tablets, 1 tablet 3 to 4 times per day

CT scan of bilateral TMJs

Bilateral TMJ debridement and placement of fat grafts if it is confirmed heterotopic bone is present

I gave her a prescription for a CAT scan of the TMJs including axial, coronal, and sagittal views. She is to call next week and let me know how she is progressing with the medications, and then she is to let me know as soon as she has the CAT scan completed. I requested that she have them send me copies of the films for evaluation.