JOYCE JOHNSON									01/12/2011

Joyce is 58 years old.  Her TMJ problems began immediately following an MVA at the age of 43.  She has had daily headaches since the injury.  The migraines occur predominantly in the back of head but come forward through the head and temple area and seem to exit out through her left eyeball.  She has the same problems on the right side, but they occur less frequently there.  She does get daily headaches and usually wakes up with them in the morning indicative of probable nocturnal clenching and bruxism.  She rates her headaches at 8, TMJ pain at 0, average daily pain around the head and neck area at a level of 8.  She rates her jaw function and diet at 0 and disability at 6.  Her headaches get so severe that she occasionally has to go the emergency room and she has been to the emergency room three times in the last five weeks.  She takes the following medications:

Excedrin Migraine.
Butalbital.
Hydrocodone.
Relpax.

She is aware of clenching at nighttime.  She has a Class II end-on occlusion and an over jet of 3 mm and an overbite of about 2 mm.  She did have orthodontics for 2-1/2 years beginning about the age of 10.  She wore head gear for some time trying to retrude her relatively normal maxilla back to her deficient mandible.  She has pain to palpation over her shoulders, posterior neck, and over her SCMs.  She has no significant pain directly over the TMJ area.  She does have bilateral TMJ crepitus.  Upper lip length is 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 3 mm.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded 3 mm and the mandible is retruded 15 mm.  There were no x-rays available as this was the first time she had seen Dr. Crump as well.  I however suspect that she has a high occlusal plane angle and decreased oropharyngeal airway and possible hypertrophied turbinates and nasal airway obstruction.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated with severe deformation and nonsalvageable.  
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia. 
High occlusal plane angle.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Severe headaches.  
Myofascial pain affecting predominantly the neck and shoulders. 
Rule out osteoarthritis and cervical neuropathy.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
2.	When the patient has a headache, do bilateral TMJ blocks with Marcaine to see if this 	eliminates the headaches to help confirm the relationship to TMJ pathology.
3.	Head and neck evaluated for cervical pathology.
4.	Orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
5.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise 			direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
	d.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	e.	Consider possible genioplasty.
6.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  