JULIE JOHNSON									04-23-04

Julie is 20 years old.

Patient History

Previous surgery that Julie has had includes an appendectomy, and she has had also had her tonsils removed. Otherwise she is in good health except for her joint problems and some back problems. Julie’s problems began in about 11/2002 of unknown etiology. Her jaws started to lock up at that time. They also started to click and pop some as well. She went to see Dr. Robert Talley in 01/2003. She started off working with one of his associates, and then Dr. Talley took over. She has had approximately 7 to 10 splints constructed through that office. For a while, she was receiving injections into the muscles and perhaps into the TMJ to try to strengthen the ligaments. One of the medications given each time was Novocain, but there was something else usually given that she doesn’t know the name of. She had probably about 15 injections. She also had laser light therapy and electrophoresis. She said she finally stopped wearing the splints about six weeks ago and has really noticed no different except that now her back teeth don’t fit together at all. 

She has fairly constant earaches that wax and wane, and they are worse on the left side. She has tinnitus which also is worse on the left side. About one year ago while she was wearing her splints, she developed vertigo, and now that occurs fairly frequently for her. Other joints that bother her include her sacroiliac area, which she was told is cracked. She has a lot of popping in her neck. Her shoulders began to bother her about two weeks ago, and particularly the left one will pop a lot when she gets up in the morning and starts to move it. She has some problems with the bones in her right hand, but she had a previous fractured hand. Her knees also bother her. Apparently at one time it was recommended that she wear lifts in her shoes, but they didn’t look so pretty, so she didn’t wear them. 

She has no known allergies. She cannot wear cheap earrings. When she used to wear a splint, she would clench a fair amount, but she can’t clench now because none of her posterior teeth touch. Julie states that two summers ago she had some ingrown toenails. They had to keep giving her repeated injections to get her numb before they could treat her. She was told she got second degree burns, which sounds like ulcerations maybe from some avascular changes perhaps. She was told that she got burns from the injections.

Current Medications

Caltrate 600 Plus D
Vitamin E 400
Neurontin 300 mg 2 to 3 per day. She is currently on 2 per day but will soon be going to 3 per day
EPA-DHA complex
Balanced B100
Acidophilus 
Vitamin C
Flexeril
Yasmin
Aleve
She has been on apparently Naprosyn before. She also has taken Skelexin. She also has taken doxycycline in the past. In addition, she has been on Midrol and Relpax. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Julie has really good facial symmetry and balance. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned with each other.

In profile view, Julie has fairly good facial symmetry and balance. Chin might be just slightly strong. Chin-neckline is pretty much normal. Chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, Julie has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth are fairly well-aligned and leveled. Has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. They also look well-aligned. It appears she may have some small upper lateral incisors. In centric occlusion as best as she can bite, she occludes only on her incisors, and all other teeth are out of occlusion. She has probably a 2 to 3-mm posterior open bite being just slightly greater perhaps on the left side than the right side. Julie is fairly close to being in a Class I occlusion. 

Julie reports fairly constant headaches that occur predominantly in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area at about a level of 8. She has TMJ pain at a level of 9 on the left side and 5 on the right side. Overall facial pain and headaches, she hits a 10 daily. Through most of the day, however, her pain level is at a 7 but does escalate to a 10. She rates her jaw function at 9, diet at 8, and disability at 7. To palpation, she has severe pain over the styloid areas, posterior neck areas, high moderate pain over the temporalis muscles, TMJs, SCMs, shoulders, and right pterygoid area. Left pterygoid area is in a more severe pain level to palpation. 

Maximum incisal opening that Julie could voluntarily open to was 25 mm, and she could open to about 13 mm without significant pain. Interestingly, though, on excursive movements, she has about 9 mm of movement in each direction. She does have excellent protrusion of about a good 8 mm. As she does posture her mandible forward, she does get pain in the submental/submandibular area. She appears to have clicking and popping in both joints, and she says the right side is beginning to start for her. During the exercises, she was able to get up to about 35 mm of opening. During that, though, there were some multiple clicking and crepitus kinds of sounds in her joints. It appears that she has an opening click and closing click on the left side at about 10 mm. On the second go around trying to palpate her clicks, the right side was not quite as evident as it was a few minutes ago. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows sinuses are clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Septum appears straight. Missing all four third molars, but all of the rest of the teeth are present. Right TMJ shows a little bit of anterior beaking on the condyle; otherwise can’t make much comment about it. Left joint looks a little bit more normal. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle is postured downward and forward in the fossa with an increased superior joint space probably due to the long-term splint therapy. Increased posterior and superior joint spaces. Teeth are apart by probably a 3-mm posterior open bite in the mandible. A little anterior beaking but not too bad in the cuts we have. A little flattening of the anterior head of the condyle but not too significant there either.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is also postured downward and slightly forward in the fossa. Increased vertical joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle appears as though it has some anterior beaking and a little flattened on top.

On opening, the flatness on the head of the condyle on the right side is quite obvious with a little bit of peaking superiorly on the condyle. On the left side, likewise the anterior flattening is more evident in the open views with some peaking at the top of the condyle. Translation is slightly better on the left side than the right side but slightly restricted in both joints. 

Waters view shows that there is an enlarged turbinate on the right side. Septum a little bit deviated off to the left side. Sinuses appear clear. Does appear fairly symmetrical. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a slight skeletal Class III jaw relationship with almost an end-on incisor relationship. She has an open bite that extends from the lateral incisors all the way through the first molars that is 2 to 3 mm in dimension. Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good. 

Tomograms from Dr. Robert Talley’s office taken 01/09/03:  Right tomograms show anterior beaking and flattening of the anterior head of the condyle on the right side. There is good translation. On the left side, there is some flattening of the anterior head but not as significantly as the left side. Translation is very good in this joint. I assume that she is in splint therapy because there is another set of x-rays from the same date that show her condyles postured forward in the fossa. There is continued evidence of arthritis in that right joint and anterior beaking. The trabecular bone pattern looks a little bit different than what we would expect to be normal. In addition, in the left condyle, there is definite irregularity in the cortical bone on the top of the condyle. Another radiograph was taken 06/30/03 that shows the condyle even further positioned forward in the fossa bilaterally. Flattening and anterior beaking remain on the right side, and on the left side the irregularity is not quite as obvious. There are additional x-rays also dated 01/20/03 and 04/22/03 that show the condyles postured forward indicative of probable splint therapy.

Other Systems

Julie has some problems with the bones in her neck, back, shoulders (left worse than right), right hand, and knees. No urinary tract problems. She does take birth control pills, but without those her periods are irregular and quite painful. No children. No miscarriages. No other reproductive system problems. She has had just one vaginal yeast infection, and that just began a while ago. She had pink eye two or three times, and the last one was about a year-and-a-half ago, and she got a fairly good infection. She gets earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo. She gets nauseated with her migraines. She has a lot of problems with fatigue. She does have a sleep disorder and does not fall into a deep sleep. She had a sleep study done, but it showed she doesn’t have any sleep apnea problems. Probably from about the age of 8 to 12, she and her family had about 20 chickens, and she would daily be out in the chicken coup. Almost every year they would get ducks for Easter that they would play with quite a bit. They also had a lot of rabbits. No cats, but she has had one dog for about 18 years and is predominantly an inside dog. Where they live they have 2 horses, usually about 12 cattle, usually about 2 pigs, and for one year they have 4 sheep. She has no implants of any type.
Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with reduction
Periodic closed lock
Severe TMJ pain, worse on the left side than the right side
Severe headaches 
Moderate and severe myofascial pain around the head and neck area
Mandibular hyperplasia
Bilateral posterior open bites
Slight Class III occlusal tendency
Occludes only on the four incisors, and all other teeth are out of occlusion
Constant earaches 
Tinnitus
Frequent vertigo
Significant masticatory dysfunction

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Apply appliances to upper arch
Apply appliance to mandibular arch

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors and removal of hypertrophied bilaminar tissue
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to provide optimal occlusal relationship

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

I gave Julie the following prescriptions:  
Celebrex 200 mg tablets, disp. 20, 1 tablet q.d., refill x 5
Klonopin 1 mg tablets, disp. 20, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x 2