MARGARET JOHNSON								10-27-03

Margaret is 23 years old and referred by Dr. Len Doles, 2320 Cosgrove Ave., Charleston, SC  29405.

Patient History

She has had problems with cervical dysplasia. She had her wisdom teeth taken out in 2001. She has some seasonal allergy problems. She has been told she has arthritis in her jaw joints. Her ankles bother her a little bit but otherwise no other joints are of any problem for her. She takes the following medications:

Mircette (BCP)
Daryx which is a doxycyline which is an antibiotic she takes for her face

She did have some mild depression problems in the past, but that is apparently all straightened out now.

Patient Concerns

Teeth don’t fit together
Her bite is continuing to get worse
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints
Has been informed the jaw joints are degenerating

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Margaret has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline may be shifted just a touch to the right by probably less than 0.5 mm. Chin is fairly well on the facial midline. 

In profile view, she has fairly good balance between her upper lip, cheeks, and nose. Chin appears a little bit AP deficient. Chin-neckline is a little bit short, although chin-neck angle is reasonably well-defined. A little fullness in the submental area. 

Intraorally, she has appliances on back through the lower first molars. Teeth appear nicely aligned and leveled. She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. In centric relation, she has a Class II end-on cuspid-molar relationship and probably a good 4 mm Class II. She has an overjet of about 3 to 4 mm. She has an open bite of about 1 mm. It appears that she occludes only on the first and second molars bilaterally with a little bit better occlusion on the left side as compared to the right side. 

Intranasally, the turbinates look relatively normal in size and shape. She has an adequate nasal airway. 

Intraorally, the oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is a little bit hyperplastic. She has her tonsils present, but they look relatively normal in size. She does snore when she sleeps which could be related to the hyperplastic uvula perhaps. Dental model analysis shows she has a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm in the anterior six teeth.
To palpation, Margaret has no tenderness around the head and neck area. She does have significantly loud audible crepitation though in both joints. Maximal incisal opening is 45 mm, and she can open about 36 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movements are about 8 mm in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. All the rest of the teeth are present. Bone levels appear good. Turbinates appears relatively normal in size. Sinuses appear relatively equal in opacification. Condyles appear as though they have undergone some significant degenerative changes with loss of vertical height. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are all clear. Septum is relatively straight, and turbinates are moderate in size, but it appears there is an adequate airway. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows that there is significant destruction of the condylar head and appear to be some significant erosions in the fossa as well. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. Appears that there is some kind of erosive progress going on in the joint. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a joint that appears to have very little joint space. Condyle has an odd shape to it. It appears that there is significant degeneration in the condylar head. Actually, it appears that there are some major erosions on the condylar head itself. May be some degenerative changes in the fossa as well. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. 

Opening view shows reasonably good translation of the condyles bilaterally. However, the severe degenerative changes are easily observed. There is some significant anterior beaking particularly in the right joint.

Cephalometrically, Margaret has a skeletal Class II relationship and a high occlusal plane angle. Upper incisors may be a little bit vertically oriented. Lower incisors appear to have a relatively normal angulation. She has a good oropharyngeal airway measuring at the soft palate it is at 10 mm and at the base of the tongue it is about 13 mm. Ridges of the molars extend above the hard palatal plane indicative of posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

Previous X-Rays

X-rays from 09/26/93 show the presence of the four third molars. Condyles look reasonably good as best they can be seen on that particular film. Film from about the same time shows that she had about a 2-mm over bite. She did have a high occlusal plane angle at that time, high mandibular plane angle, and a little bit of a Class II molar relationship. These are x-rays from Dr. Frederick Gunter.

Early x-rays from Dr. Stephen Ray, a general dentist, in the mixed dentition show that the condyles look reasonably normal. Even up into 03/06/00 as best can be seen the condyles look as though they are reasonably well intact. On 07/28/03, there is significant deterioration of the condyles. This destruction has occurred over the last three years.

CT scan from 05/05/03:  Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has undergone significant erosive degenerative changes. Fossa also appears to have erosions in it. There appears to be reactive bone that has developed off the posterior head/neck of the condyle. Articular eminence appears extremely flat. Appears there is some reactive bone within the joint area. Decreased joint space is present. 
Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle that has undergone significant resorptive degenerative changes. Appears to be reactive bone extending off the posterior head/neck of the condyle. Decreased vertical joint space. In some areas there appears to be virtually no joint space present. Appear to be some erosions in the fossa area. Articular eminence is extremely flat. 

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has severe degenerative changes and actually osteophyte extensions up from the top of the condyle. A lot of erosions in the fossa. Significant downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa. In some areas there appears to be virtually no joint space. Condyle appears narrow mediolaterally. Appears to be some reactive osteophytic bone in the fossa area on the medial side.

Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that shows significant resorptive degenerative changes. The fossa also shows degenerative changes present. In some areas, there is significantly decreased joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa has much less downward curvature as compared to the opposite side. Condyle appears narrow mediolaterally. In some areas, there appears that there is no joint space. Sinuses appear clear, and turbinates appear moderately enlarged, although there does appear to be some airway. Septum has a little bit of deviation to it but not too significant. 

IMPRESSION:
Bilateral TMJ severe resorptive arthritis affecting both the condyle and the fossa

Other Systems

Margaret has problems with her ankles. No history of urinary tract infections, but she does have polyuria. No reproductive system problems that she is aware of. She gets lots of problems with pink eye and used to get it more often but now gets it about one time per year, and it occurs about the same time every year. She has worn contacts for 10 years. She gets sinusitis about one time per year, but it used to be more often. She smokes four to five cigarettes per day and has done this since the age of 17. She gets sore throats about once or twice per year. She gets bronchitis about one time per year but used to get it more often. No history of pneumonia. No GI problems. No history of Chlamydia. She has a sister who has thyroid problems, but Margaret is not aware of any problems herself. She got shingles at the age of 5. From first grade through ninth grade, she went to a camp for two weeks every summer where they had horses, pigs, cows, llamas, goats, and chickens. Also, when she was in college, she had a boyfriend she dated for 1-1/2 years. His family had a parrot, and she would handle this bird. No implants. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ reactive arthritis versus connective tissue autoimmune disease with significant condylar and fossa resorption
AP mandibular deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Anterior open bite
Occluding only on the first and second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion
Class II occlusion
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm

Recommended Treatment

MRI of bilateral TMJs

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Will need to use fixed appliances. Tip upper maxillary lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 1.5 mm of tooth structure to help compensation for the significant tooth-size discrepancy 

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomy, debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla slightly, downgraft it posteriorly, and correct vertical discrepancies
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
