MELYNN JOHNSON									05-19-03

Melynn was referred by Dr. Al Bishop. She is 47 years old. 

Patient History

I apparently previously saw her back in the early 80s for TMJ problems. Her TMJ problems may have begun back in 1976 when she had a fall and sustained a fractured maxilla. She went to see a doctor, and he told her it was fine but apparently had a malunion on it. In 1976, she was taken back to surgery, and a maxillary LeFort I osteotomy was performed by Dr. R.V. Walker to reposition it. She then began seeing Dr. Danny Dugan. Dr. Dugan is the one that took her to see me back in the early ‘80s and also took her to see Dr. Doug Sinn. In 1984, Dr. Sinn did TMJ surgery probably in an attempt to reposition the articular discs. She then had orthodontics done, and then in 1986 she had a mandibular advancement by Dr. Danny Dugan. She does have a splint. She has had the splint probably for a couple of years, and Dr. Louis Miller constructed it for her. She wears the splint just at night. 

She currently takes Flexeril 10 mg q.h.s., Mobic 15 mg 1 q.d. p.r.n., Lanoxin 125 mg, birth control pills, Allegra p.r.n., and Celexa 40 mg q.d. 

She has problems with earaches and vertigo but no tinnitus. She feels she has some hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her neck, back, elbows, hands, fingers, and knees. She has an allergy to PENICILLIN. She is not aware of any significant jewelry allergies. She does have a lot of sinus problems. Her right second and third toes are numb, and this started only about six days ago. She gets headaches and severe migraine attacks at least once a week that she rates at a level of 10, and they occur in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area bilaterally. She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 10, and this occurs only on a daily basis. Average facial pain and headaches during the day are 3, jaw function is 6, diet is 5, and disability is 8. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Melynn has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm. Maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are fairly close to being aligned with each other as is the chin with just maybe a slight chin deviation to the right.

In profile, Melynn has fairly good AP and vertical facial balance.

Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth. Has adequate attached gingival. Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class I cuspid, Class III molar relationship. She has some slight transverse asymmetry with the right side being about a millimeter to 1.5 mm higher than the left side in both the upper and lower arch. She has about a 3-mm anterior deep-bite.

To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles, right masseter, and right posterior neck area. She has moderate pain to palpation over the TMJ areas. Maximal incisal opening is 33 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 4 mm and to the left 5 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex reveals sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear moderate size. Interosseous wires are present on the right side in the zygomatic body area. Third molars are absent as well as the mandibular third bicuspids. Interosseous wires are present in the left maxilla. TMJs look significantly arthritis with each one having an area of erosion. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Significantly increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep and fairly long in length. Appears on one view to be almost bone on bone contact with the condyle against the fossa. Posterior joint space is significantly reduced. There are three screws in the ascending ramus from the previous mandibular ramus osteotomies.
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle  that has significant osteoarthritic changes associated with it. Appears to be anterior beaking present. Sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Articular eminence is fairly steep and quite elongated. Increased anterior joint space, and there appear to be a lot of degenerative changes within this joint. Three screws are present in the mandible from previous mandibular ramus osteotomies. 

Open views show severely limited translation in both joints. 

Waters view shows that she has a significantly enlarged turbinate on the left side. Septum appears to be deviated off toward the right side a little bit. Sinuses for the most part appear pretty much open. Frontal sinus is extremely large.

Cephalometrically, she has a good Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship. Some bone wires are present. Apparently she must have had a zygomatic fracture perhaps as there appears to be wire in the zygomatic frontal suture on the right side and two other interosseous wires. It does not appear to be a LeFort I,but it is probably a left zygomatic orbital complex fracture. Apparently Melynn actually fractured her right zygomatic orbital complex and not the maxilla per se on that side. Dr. Walker refractured the zygomatic orbital complex and repositioned it and stabilized it with interosseous wires. 

Other Systems

Melynn does have problems with her hands, fingers, knees, toes, and questionable problems with the bones in her neck, back, and elbows. She has had occasional urinary tract infections in the past but not very often. Occasionally she will have some difficulties getting started urinating, but that is infrequent. She has three children, ages 21, 15, and 7. She has had no miscarriages. She may have some female hormone imbalances. She has had her tubes tied but is on birth control pills to help control multiple periods that she would have, one following the other one. She does get some vaginal  yeast infections but usually associated with being placed on antibiotics. She does wear contacts but has no eye problems. Has chronic sinus problems. Gets earaches, vertigo, and has some loss of hearing. She gets some hoarseness. She has had bronchitis x 2 and pneumonia as an infant. She gets nauseated when she gets her severe migraine headache problems. She does have some chronic fatigue problems but feels that may be related to the medications that she is on. She has an irregular heartbeat and has SVT. She may have some short-term memory loss. As a child, she had a myna bird for about one year but no other exposure to birds. She has had a cat now for about three years but no exposure to cats much before then. She has had dogs most of her life, and she did have one dog when she was younger that used to catch birds. She grew up around horses, and her father at one time had up to 30 horses. She had three of them that she rode fairly extensively. She had breast implants placed in 1990 of the MIMS variety that were silicone-filled. She has had no significant problem with those. She had mononucleosis when she was in high school.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis
AP maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Missing mandibular first bicuspids
Class I cuspid relationship, Class III molar relationship
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch
Align and level mandibular arch 
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)
Bilateral coronoidectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 


