CAROL JOHNSON									10/20/2006

Carol is 55 years old, referred by Dr. Petre Schubert.  She has had problems with hypertension.  She had an angioplasty in January of 1990.  She is in good health with no major medical problems.  She has a list of medications that she takes that is in her chart.  Carol really does not really have any concerns problems.  She is here at Dr. Schubert's request.  Dr. Schubert is aware that Carol has an anterior open bite and is concerned as to whether it would be stable to close that orthodontically or whether a surgical approach would provide the best result for Carol.  Carol has also had an open bite.  She had orthodontics at the age of 12 to try and close it and it was unsuccessful.  She believes her bite is closed more now than it was prior to orthodontic treatment.  She had gum surgery about four years ago.  She has no trouble with earaches or tinnitus but gets occasional vertigo.  She does have some problems with her right hip joint but no other joints cause any problems.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime.  She has no history of headaches or TMJ pain or pain around the head and neck area.  While Carol was having orthodontics done the first time as a teenager, she would occasionally get a closed lock situation and would have to go to the orthodontist and get massaged in order to get her jaw open.  Therefore, she has had displaced disc in her joints at least since the age of 12 to 14.  She has no clicking or popping in her joints currently.  

In frontal view, Carol has fairy good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about –1.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Carol has good facial balance.  She has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe 3 mm in AP mandibular deficiency of maybe 5 to 6 mm but not real significant.  Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  A little bit of spacing between the cuspids and the second bicuspids.  In the upper arch she is also missing first bicuspids.  She has small upper lateral incisors.  It appears that she occludes only on the first and second molars on the left side and perhaps the same on the right side.  The rest of the teeth appear to be out of occlusion.  She has about 1 mm of vertical open bite.  She has about 1 to 2 mm overjet.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship by about 2 to 3 mm.  Carol rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 0, TMJ pain and headaches at 0.  To palpation she has no pain around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Transverse occlusal plane is level.  Oropharyngeal areas look normal.  Soft palate, uvula and faucial pillars all appear within normal limits.  She has no problems with snoring or sleep apnea symptoms.  Intranasally, the right turbinate is moderately enlarged.  The left turbinate is relatively normal.  There is a little septal spurring off to the left side at the base.  There does not appear to be any significant nasal airway obstruction.  The columella is wide and nostrils are somewhat narrow.  Luminal valves look relatively normal.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows that she has some arthritic changes in the condyles.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Turbinates appear relatively normal.  She is missing all four third molars and all four first bicuspids.  Roots may be a little bit short in the bicuspid area, cuspid and lower incisor areas. 

Waters view shows the sinuses appear clear.  The bony septum appears reasonably straight.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  There could be a septal spur off to the left side but difficult to tell.
CAROL JOHNSON				10/20/2006				Page 2


Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has arthritic changes with anterior beaking and some loss of vertical height.  Decreased posterior and posterosuperior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows decreased superior and posterior joint space and there are some arthritic changes on the condyle.  There is anterior beaking and there appears to be loss of height.  On opening, there is some restricted translation but the condyles do come beneath the articular eminences.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency.  She has a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship.  Occlusal plane angle is moderately steep.  Oropharyngeal airway is difficult to evaluate because the soft palate was functioning when the x-ray was taken.  At the base of the tongue there appears to be adequate airway of probably about 7 mm.  On the Panorex she actually has good space between the lateral incisors and cuspids but diminished space between the roots of the cuspid and second bicuspids.  Dental model analysis shows that she does have a fair amount of wear on her posterior teeth.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship.  She has increased curve of Wilson and a significantly accentuated curve of Spee with the incisors being probably 2 mm above the occlusal plane level.  Cuspids are also elevated at least 2 mm above the occlusal plane area.  Occlusion is all in the lingual cusps on a flat plane including the second bicuspids, first and second molars.  Buccal cusps are up and out of occlusion by probably almost 2 mm.  Clinical incisal opening is about 40 mm.  Excursive movements are 11 mm in each direction.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
AP maxillary deficiency.
Vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior open bite.
Occluding only on first and second molars.
Increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch.
Increased curve of Spee in the upper arch.
Missing all four first bicuspids extracted for previous orthodontic reasons.
 Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction.
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Place step in the maxillary archwire to align the four incisors and elevate plane level and extrude each of the cuspids 1 to 2 mm to get them in better vertical alignment with the posterior teeth.  
Continue to align and level the lower arch.

CAROL JOHNSON 				10/20/2006				Page 3


Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the posterior aspect of the maxilla superiorly, expand the palatal level to decrease the curve of Wilson and segments to decrease the curve of Spee.
Post-surgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
