GEORGE KARAM									05/04/2007

George is 51 years old.  He takes Altace 2.5 mg and Lipitor 10 mg.  The primary concern for George being here involves a nerve problem affecting the right side of the tongue.  About 3 months ago he was having some dental work done and had a mandibular block given.  He felt a small electrical shock as the injection was being given.  Since that time he has continued to have problems with that right lingual nerve.  He was having a root canal done on a lower right bicuspid tooth.  The injection was three months ago.  He continues to have problems and the sensations vary from burning, numbness, cold sensation and hurting to just a strange unusual feeling to the tongue where he feels something is on the tongue but cannot scrape it off.  

Other concerns that George has involve difficulties breathing through his nose at night.  During the day he can breathe well through his nose but at night when he lays down sometimes around 10 o'clock to 11 o'clock his nasal airway becomes obstructed.  

When George was in his 20s he got headaches every day.  He was in Lebanon at the time during the war and began giving blood about every three to four months.  The doctor told him that his blood was too thick.  After he started giving blood every three to four months his headaches went away.  Now if he drinks a cup of coffee in the morning he does not have headache problems.  He has a moderately enlarged uvula and soft palate.  Faucial pillars are moderately constricted.  Tonsils appear relatively normal.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the left side and the turbinates appear relatively normal in size at least anteriorly but I could not see the posterior aspect.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of maxillary right first and second bicuspid, first and third molars, maxillary left first and second bicuspids, first and third molars, mandibular left first bicuspid, first and third molar, mandibular left first bicuspid and all three molars.  He has root canal in maxillary left cuspid, mandibular right second bicuspid.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Condyles appear relatively normal.  

Waters view shows that the bony septum at least is fairly straight and the turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  I cannot evaluate the cartilaginous septum.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has reasonable morphology for his age.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be adequate joint space.  

Left TMJ tomogram is a little bit more difficult to read.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle appears to have reasonable morphology and it appears there appears to be reasonable space.  The head may be rotated slightly the wrong way.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints. 




GEORGE KARAM 				05/04/2007				Page 2

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows there appears to be decreased oropharyngeal airway.  There is airway dimension at the soft palate level of only about 5 mm and at the base of the tongue at about 8 to 9 mm.  There is a moderately high occlusal plane angle and mandibular plane angle.  George does not complain of any sleep apnea issues, however.  He snores only if he sleeps on his back but almost always sleeps on his left side and sleeps well with no snoring in that position.  He is unaware of any sleep apnea issues.  However, he does end up with breathing difficulties through his nose that occur somewhere around 10 to 11 o'clock at night after he goes to bed.  He ends up breathing through his mouth if he does not use his medications.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Right mandibular lingual nerve injection injury.
Paresthesia to distribution of right lingual nerve.

