JAMES KASTEN									03/03/2008

James is 19 years old, referred by Dr. Gary Wolf, 137 Benedict Avenue, Norwalk, Ohio 44857, and indirectly referred by Dr. Peter Sinclair from USC in Los Angeles.  James had previous surgery for a right leg osteotomy in 1990.  James is in good health with no major medical problems.  James had orthodontics in about the second grade through the ninth grade with all different kinds of devices and expanders.  He finished his orthodontics when he was a freshman in high school and had a good bite at that time.  He has been a faithful wearer of his retainers since then, but in spite of this his bite has shifted and changed.  He has no problems with headaches, no TMJ pain or pain around the head and neck area.  He rates his jaw function at 7, diet at 5, disability at 4.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss and no other joints bother him.  He is not aware of any significant problems with clenching or bruxism.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, James has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third part of  the face.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 5.5  mm to 6 mm.  Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The nasal tip is just a little bit off towards the right side.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 3 mm off to the left.  Chin is shifted about 6 mm to the left.  Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other.  In the profile view, the maxilla and upper lip are retruded about 3 to 4 mm.  Chin is retruded about 12 mm.  Chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  James has a lip incompetence of approximately 15 mm.  Back in the frontal view, with the lips relaxed, James shows probably about 5 to 6 mm of his lower teeth as well.  James has about a 4 mm anterior open bite.  He has a Class III end-on occlusion on the right side and slightly Class II on the left side, each about 2 to 3 mm in each direction.  James has had first bicuspids extracted in all four quadrants, but does have his third molars in position.  He has a crossbite tendency on the right side.  As James bites, he occludes only on the left second and third molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.  With a little bit more force, he can get the right posterior teeth to touch.  On the right side, it is predominantly the third molars that touch.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  Uvula is probably mildly elongated.  Soft palate looks relatively normal.  Faucial pillars are constricted; particularly the posterior pillars show some significant constricture.  Tonsils are mildly to moderately enlarged.  Intranasally, James has moderately enlarged turbinates.  Columella is moderately wide causing the nostrils to be a little bit narrow.  He has a significant constricture, however, of the luminal valves bilaterally.  Holding those nasal valves open enabled him to breathe easier through his nose.  Transverse occlusal plane appears relatively level.  AP position of the teeth in the arches appears fairly symmetric.  To palpation, James had some mild tenderness over the styloid areas, but no other tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  Incisal opening is 51 mm.  Excursion movements are about 7 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars, but the absence of probably all four first bicuspids.  Left sinus appears a little bit cloudy and it appears there could be a mucous retention cyst there.  No other significant findings noted.  Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  I do not see evidence of mucoceles in the left sinus in this view.  Bony septum is reasonably straight.  Turbinates are moderately large.  Particularly on the left side, it appears he that has some significant obstruction. Asymmetry of the mandible is noted with the lower dental midline and chin being shifted off towards the left side.  Frontal sinus is quite large.  Left TMJ shows a condyle that looks reasonably good.  Joint space is thin, but may be due to thin articular discs.  Left TMJ tomogram is a little bit more difficult to read.  The condyle appears to have relatively normal configuration.  On opening, there is moderate  translation of both condyles.  Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that James has a vertical maxillary excess and an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.  The mandible appears to be in grossly a Class I position.  There is slightly reversed curve of Spee in the lower arch.  Oropharyngeal airway is very good.  He appears to have relatively short roots on the maxillary incisors.  Tooth size analysis shows a Bolton’s difference of 1 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for James would be as follows:

1.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations with early reduction. 
2.	Right mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
3.	Anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia.
4.	AP maxillary hypoplasia.
5.	Transverse maxillary hypoplasia. 
6.  	AP mandibular hypoplasia.
7.	Class III end-on occlusion on the right side, Class II end-on occlusion on the left side.
8.	Anterior overbite of 4 mm.
9.  	Left posterior crossbite.  
10.	Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. 
11.	Slightly reversed curve of Spee in the lower arch.
12.	Hypertrophied nasal turbinates.
13.	Constricture of bilateral nasal luminal valves.
14.  	Lip incompetence of 15 mm.
15.	Maligned third molars.
16.  	Short roots on maxillary incisors.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

	1.  	Presurgical orthodontics.
a.  Align and level the maxillary arch at two different occlusal plane levels. Align the cuspids, second bicuspids, first molars, and second molars.  Place a step in the arch wires so that the four incisors are aligned at a higher occlusal plane level than the cuspids and posterior teeth. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally.  
b.  Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to extrude the lower four incisors about 1 mm to decrease the reverse curve of Spee.
2.  	Surgery.  
a.  Right TMJ high condylectomy to arrest the condylar hyperplasia.
b.  Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. 
c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly, expand, and   level the occlusal plane. 
d.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance and superiorly reposition the mandible as well as align it to the facial midline.  
e.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
f.  Reconstruct nasal luminal valves.
g.  Extract maxillary and mandibular third molars if the orthodontist agrees.  
3.  	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion and retain. 