LINDA KEATING									10-28-04

Linda is 55 years old and referred by Dr. R. Lynn White, 7800 Mopac, #270, Austin, TX  78759, and Dr. Mark White, 4807 Spicewood Springs Road, Bldg. 1, Ste. 1235, Austin, TX  78759.

Patient History

Linda apparently has some heart problems, some blood pressure problems, has a history of asthma and allergies, some right knee problems, and right and left TMJ problems. She has irritable bowel syndrome. She has had gallbladder problems and has had that removed. She has had laparoscopy treatments. She has been treated for hemorrhoids, ganglion cysts in the right and left hands, and she has had two stents placed in the heart vessels. She has osteoarthritis in multiple joints. She has asthma and apparently has significant problems with developing bronchitis. She has some nervous problems basically associated with pain and living with the multiple problems that she does have. She does have the irritable bowel syndrome. She has had thyroid problems in the past which she was medicated for but doesn’t seem to have a problem now. She has had problems with anemia in the past, but that is doing a little bit better. She has had a reaction to PLAVIX and to INDOMETHACIN. Linda has provided a list of 20 medications that she is taking. On this list, she has stopped the Relafen and the aspirin but is taking the rest of the medications. She also included names of her doctors. She does have degenerative changes in her neck with narrowing of the neural foramen at C5-C6, and at C6-C7, there is a minor diffuse disc bulge. The CT scan of the neck was done on 12/31/2001. She also had a CT of the brain with no contrast on 08/15/2002, and it showed normal noncontrast CT of the brain. She had a CT of the sinuses performed on 02/04/2003 which showed the right maxillary sinus with obstruction of the right ostium, but Linda reports that situation cleared itself up. She has a septal deviation to the right. She has aplasia of the right frontal sinus. 

Linda’s problems began in 1976 follow an MVA accident. Her pain increased, and by 1978 she underwent bilateral TMJ Proplast Teflon implants to the TMJs. She had problems almost immediately after they were placed, and these were removed in 1979. In 1981, she had a mandibular advancement performed. In 1988, she had alloplastic implants placed again in her joints bilaterally. In 1983, the right Christensen total joint prosthesis was placed, and in 1994, a left Christensen total joint prosthesis was placed. That was the end of her jaw-related surgeries. She is taking numerous medications, and these are written on the attached information. She has continuous headache problems at an average of about 8, and they occur predominantly in the temporal and posterior head area. The right side is worse than the left side. She takes Midrin daily for these. Eating generally makes the pain get worse. The pain in the joints that are a level of 8 in the temporal and posterior head area can escalate easily to a 10. She takes Vicodin for pain. She has had tried lidocaine patches, but they don’t seem to help her very much. She has known allergies to PLAVIX and INDOMETHACIN. She, of course, has irritable bowel problems as previously mentioned. She is not aware of having any problems wearing jewelry except that the jewelry sets off unfavorable sensations in the facial and jaw area. 

She rates her TMJ pain at 6, overall facial pain at 8, jaw function at 7, diet at 8, and disability at 7. 

Patient Concerns

Severe headaches
TMJ pain
Muscle pain
Difficulties eating and chewing
Vision problems and decreased tearing
Decreased hearing
Roaring in ears
Talking increases the pain levels
Noises such as crepitus in the joints
Snoring
Moderate to severe tiredness during the day
Difficulty sleeping
Evidence of apneic occurrences

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Linda has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 1.5 mm to 2 mm off to the left as is the chin. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much aligned with each other.

In profile view, she has a little bit of AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 mm. Mandible is probably about 8 to 10 mm AP deficient.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some teeth that need some dental restorations particularly on the mandibular right first molar where she has a fairly large cervical cavity. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. By history, she has had all four first molars extracted and has the second and third molars in the first and molar positions. Occlusion is actually fairly good with a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She does suffer from dry mouth from some of the medications she is taking. Intranasally, the septum is deviated just a little bit off to the left side. Turbinates are moderate in size. Uvula is relatively normal. Soft palate appears a little bit long, and the distance from the posterior pharyngeal wall to the back of the soft palate appears a little bit constricted. The lateral aspects of the oropharynx appear to be more anteriorly positioned in the depth of the oropharyngeal area, thus, causing the available airway to be a little bit constricted transversely. She does report a moderate amount of snoring. She has moderate to severe daytime somnolence. She has moderate sleep apnea syndrome likely, and she does have the associated sleep disorder. She feels as though she only sleeps about four or five hours a night. If Linda tries to open and close, she feels it on the right side particularly in the masseter muscle area that feels extremely tight. 

To palpation, she has high moderate to low severe pain over the right TMJ, high moderate over the right temporalis, moderate pain over the left temporalis, styloid areas, and milder tenderness over the SCMs, left TMJ, and right masseter area. Maximal incisal opening is about 34 mm but only about 22 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movement to the right is about 1.5 mm and to the left 1 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Waters view shows the presence of a Christensen prosthesis with acrylic heads. It appears as though we may have metal function. Screws appear to be in position with the fossa component as well as the mandibular component. I can’t identify any specific fractures through the fossa components, but there is virtually no space between the supportive metal pins that hold the acrylic and the fossa. Sinuses look fairly clear. The septum is deviated, and turbinates are moderately enlarged. Left side appears more obstructed than the right side. 

In 1997, Linda was in another vehicle accident where she was hit from behind and struck the car in front of her, then struck the car behind her, struck the car in front of her, and then the one behind her again. The airbag didn’t deploy. 
Left tomograms show the presence of the Christensen prosthesis with an acrylic head and metal pin to support it. There does not appear to be any space between the pin and the fossa. She may have metal on metal contact in this joint. 

Right tomogram likewise shows an acrylic headed prosthesis with a pin up the center of the condyle. There appears to be very minimal or just essentially absence of room between the metal pin of the condylar component and the metal of the fossa. 

On opening, there are very little translatory movements if any at all.

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class I relationship. Oropharyngeal airway at the tongue level is about 8 mm and at the soft palate level it appears to be approximately 4 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ failed Christensen total joint prostheses
AP mandibular deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
High occlusal plane angulation
Basically a Class I cuspid-molar occlusion
Mandibular dental midline and chin shifted 0.5 to 2 mm to the left
Severe headaches
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Swelling on the right side of face over the joint, zygoma, and cheek area
Limited incisal opening 
Masticatory dysfunction
Medically compromised patient taking approximately 20 medications
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Sleep disorder with sleep apnea symptoms including snoring, daytime somnolence, and apneic episodes
Tinnitus
Vertigo

Recommended Treatment

CAT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Presurgical orthodontics (Patient may elect not to have this done in which case arch bars will be required during surgery)
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch 

Surgery
Removal of failed bilateral Christensen total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it posteriorly
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)
Placement of maxillary and mandibular arch bars (if patient elects this technique over orthodontics)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion and retain