GEORGIA KEITH									05/03/2006

Georgia is 13 years old.  She had previous surgery that was an adenoidectomy.  Otherwise, she is in good health.  She takes minocycline for acne.  No apparent allergies.  Georgia’s problems began to the best of the patient’s knowledge about three years ago of unknown etiology.  In 2003/2004 she had a maxillary expansion appliance placed.  About nine months ago she had a hypo headgear placed but this did not seem to do any good according to the orthodontist.  She received full upper and lower braces in December of 2005.  

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She used to grind her teeth at night but now her father says that usually when she is sleeping her mouth is open.  She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain or myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function at 1, diet at 3, disability at 0.  

In frontal view, Georgia has fairly good left to right facial symmetry with just a slight asymmetry in the mandible.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 
3 mm.  Maxillary midline and mandibular dental midlines are about 1 mm off to the right side.  Chin is probably about 2 mm off to the right side.  In profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 2 to 3 mm.  Chin is retruded about 20 mm.  Chin-neckline is not well defined.  Georgia has a head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molar present.  Teeth are actually fairly well aligned and leveled.  She has fairly good attached gingiva.  She has a high labial frenulum.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has bands on the first molars that might be interfering with the MRI.  Upper teeth appear fairly well aligned and leveled.  She has an anterior open bite a little bit greater on the right side than the left side.  She hits prematurely on the posterior left side.  The first and second molars on the left side may hit first followed by the right side but from the bicuspids forward she appears to have an open bite.  Her bite seems to have closed up by history since the orthodontic appliances were placed.  She has about a 0 overbite relationship.  She has a 1 mm overjet relationship.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated just slightly off to the left side.  The left turbinate is a little bit enlarged and there is slight decreased airway space on that side compared to the opposite side which has a relatively normal airway space.  To palpation, Georgia has no pain around the head and neck area.  The left joint seems to function relatively smoothly.  She did have a little glitch in the right joint about 25 mm of opening.  Maximal incisal opening is 40 mm.  Excursive movement is about 5 mm in each direction.  There could be just a slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being maybe 1 mm higher than the left side but difficult to tell.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presences of all four third molars.  All other teeth are present and accounted for.  Sinuses appear clear.  Nasal airway appears adequate.  She demonstrates severe condylar resorption being just slightly greater on the right side than the left side.  Condyles are almost to the level of the sigmoid notch particularly on the right side.  




GEORGIA KEITH 				05/03/2006				Page 2


Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Nasal septum is deviated just slightly to the left.  Turbinates appear moderate in size with a little bit decreased airway in the left side compared to the right side.  There is some very mild asymmetry with the dental midlines and chin being shifted just slightly off to the right side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows severe condylar resorption.  The condyle is actually functioning beneath the articular eminence.  Definition in the fossa is somewhat obscured.   The condyle is definitely functioning anterior to the fossa.  It appears there is almost some form of calcification in the fossa.  It could be that the articular eminence is severely resorbed as well and perhaps some reactive bone in the base of the fossa. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle functioning slightly forward in the fossa and the articular eminence is very shallows.  Some increased posterior joint space.  Condyle is extremely resorbed and moreso than the opposite side. 

Open view shows moderately good translation of the condyles with a little bit greater translation on the right side as compared to the left side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a reverse curvature in the neck.  She has a significant Class II skeletal relationship and a slight Class II occlusal relationship.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  She has decreased oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate and also at the base of the tongue measuring less than 5 mm at the soft palate level and 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  

REVIEW OF PREVIOUS RADIOGRAPHS:
Previous Panorex radiographs begin on 06/25/2003.  In this view, there is already evidence of degenerative changes occurring in the right TMJ although the left one appears in better condition.  Acceptable length of condylar head and neck is present.  Articular eminences appear reasonable at that time.  She is in the mixed dentition.  She would have been 9 years old at the time.  

Panorex 03/23/2004, shows presence of significant osseous changes during that time period with flattening of the condylar heads and loss of condylar volume and shortening of the condylar head and neck dimension.  

Panorex 05/25/2005, shows that there is considerable loss of vertical height and volume of the condyles.  She only has one retained primary crown at this time and the permanent teeth are erupted through back to the first molars and the second molars are almost erupted through.  Age 11.




GEORGIA KEITH				05/03/2006				Page 3


Panorex 03/20/2006, shows severe condylar resorption with the condyles almost to the sigmoid notch level.  She has an anterior open bite occluding only on what appears to be the maxillary first and second molars, mandibular second molar on the left and similar occlusion on the right side with all other teeth out of occlusion. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph 04/29/2002, demonstrates that she has actually an anterior deep bite of probably about 4 mm.  Relatively normal occlusal plane angle and basically fairly close to a Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship.  She has a large adenoid mass in the nasopharynx.  Airway looks reasonably adequate.  

Comparison with lateral cephalometric tracings of 04/29/2002 with 05/24/2005 shows that she has had significant vertical growth and downward and backwards rotation of the mandible.  She went from about a 4 mm deep bite relationship anteriorly to 1 mm open bite and a 3 mm overjet relationship.  It was after the 05/24/2005 radiograph that she did have the hypo headgear placed with probable superior displacement of the posterior teeth that did allow the bite to rotate up and forward some to close the open bite.  It appears that there might be just a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of maybe 1 to 2 mm. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ severe condylar resorption and degenerative of articular disc with a reactive pannus. 
Severe AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Slight Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior open bite.
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Impacted maxillary mandibular third molars.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
MRI of left and right TMJs.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Rotate mesial aspect of lateral incisor labially to improve alignment.    
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing to correct for the tooth size discrepancy as well as slightly decrease the over-angulated lower incisors.
Surgical removal of mandibular third molars x2. 
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.  (TMJ Concepts protocol.)


GEORGIA KEITH 				05/03/2006				Page 4


Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect and slightly advance it.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts. (Harvest from the abdomen.)
Removal of impacted maxillary third molars x2. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
