MICHELE KELK									   01-17-05

Michele is 48 years old and referred by Dr. Duane Keller, 3929 Bayless Avenue, St. Louis, MO  63125.
 
Patient History

She has problems with severe migraine headaches. Previous surgeries include right and left knee surgery with two surgeries on the right knee, one on the left knee. She has had her tonsils and adenoids removed, and she has had her sinuses re-canaled. Except for her current problems, she is in fairly good health. She does have problems with arthritis in her knees. Previous history of stomach ulcers. She also has a previous history of anemia.

Her migraines were diagnosed approximately 23 years ago, but she has had headaches for about 25 years. Etiology is unknown. She had been treated for many years for migraines, but no one has been able to come up with a method to control them or eliminate them. When she gets her headaches, they can last as long as 3 to 10 days, and the intensity ranges from 4 to 8. They occur predominantly on the right side with the main focus of pain in the frontal area, although it also affects the temporal and particularly the posterior head area. She rates the pain levels at a level of 8. She rates her TMJ pain again relative to the migraine pain at a level of 2. Her average daily pain is at 4, jaw function at 5, diet at 3, and disability at 5. She has had a tremendous amount of treatment through the years. She had orthodontics at the age of approximately 12 to 13 through 15 and had four first bicuspids extracted. Since the onset of her headaches, she has been treated with numerous medications, none of which has been effective in controlling her pain for any significant time period. In addition, she has had the following types of treatment:

Biofeedback
Environmental health specialist treatment
Wellness therapy
Acupuncture
Chiropractic adjustment
Massage therapy (for 10 years)
Chiropractic treatments for over 15 years, and she has been with the same therapist for the past 10 years
Splint therapy for the past four months with a splint made by Dr. Duane Keller
Aroma therapy

Michele’s problems actually got worse on the splint therapy even after three adjustments.

She has had long-term earaches particularly on the right side, long-term tinnitus right side greater than left side, and long-term vertigo. She is not aware of any hearing loss problems. Other joints that bother her include her neck at around T2-T3 where that particular vertebra apparently jumps out of position and has to be manipulated back into position by her chiropractor. She has had multiple operations on her knees, two on the right side, one on the left side. She does have allergies. Particularly odors can set off her migraine headaches, but she is not aware of any problems wearing jewelry. Pain is usually worse about 1 o’clock in the afternoon. She is aware that she does clench at nighttime and during the day.

Michele keeps almost constant ice packs on her face and jaws as this is helpful for her controlling her pain.

Current Medications

Relpax 40 mg p.r.n. 
Prometrium 100 mg 2 per day
Nystatin 500,000 mg 2 tablets 4 times a day, and she has been on and off this for the past year, thinking this is causing her migraine headaches
Armour Thyroid probably 1.5 mg per day
Vivelle Dot (hormone)
Alpha Lipoic
Glutiathoine
Vitamin C powder 1000 mg, and she takes ¼ tsp. in the morning and evening
MSM powder
Magnesium
Potassium

Patient Concerns

Severe migraines
Pain through the neck, shoulders, and back
Language inadequacy secondary to severe migraines
Deficiency in mental acuity with the migraines

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Michele has good facial symmetry and balance. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.

In profile view, she has fairly good AP balance between the jaw structures, cheeks, and nose. 

Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids. In the upper arch, she is also missing the first bicuspids. She has basically a Class II end-on cuspid relationship of about 4 to 5 mm. She has a tendency toward a division II malocclusion. Oropharynx appears clear with soft palate, uvula, and transverse width of the faucial pillars all within normal range.

Intranasally, however, the turbinates are moderately enlarged, and she has septal spurs extending off of both sides of the septum and almost touch against the turbinates.

To palpation, Michele has some high moderate to low severe pain over the styloid areas, moderate pain over the posterior neck and shoulder areas, milder pain over the left TMJ, bilateral temporalis and masseter areas. 

On opening, the right joint functions reasonably smoothly. However, the left side has an opening click at about 20 to 25 mm and a closing click at 5 mm. Michele is aware that her right side does pop particularly when she goes in side-to-side movement, so the right side does click in left excursive movements. Maximal incisal opening is 42 mm and about 35 mm with reasonable comfort. Excursive movements are 12 mm in each direction, but both joints do pop with the left side being more prominent than the right side. Michele is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day particularly when she gets her migraine headaches.
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. Sinuses appear relatively clear but difficult to tell in this image. Difficult to determine the position of the turbinates. She has a crown on the mandibular left first molar. Left condyle appears flattened along the anterior aspect of the condyle as does the right side with the right side actually appearing to have a little bit more flattening than the left side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows there appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep, and there is an increased joint space anteriorly. Styloid process appears to come down and overlap the posterior border of the mandible. 

Right TMJ likewise shows a condyle that appears posteriorly positioned in the fossa with fairly minimal room along the posterior wall. Slightly decreased superior space as well. Articular eminence is moderately steep, and there is a slightly increased anterior joint space. Condyle could be a little sclerotic on this side. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles down onto the articular eminence with the left side having slightly greater amount of translation as compared to the right side. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates are of moderate size. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a slight skeletal Class II jaw relationship. Head is postured up and forward a little bit, and oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction
Mandibular hypoplasia
Class II occlusion, division II
Anterior deep bite
TMJ pain
Severe myofascial pain
Severe headaches (migraines)
Earaches
Tinnitus
Vertigo
Missing four first bicuspids and all four third molars
Hypertrophied turbinates 
Bilateral nasal septal spurs
Nasal airway obstruction

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch. Consider stripping lower anterior teeth to keep from flaring them any further forward

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to establish proper jaw and occlusal relationship
Partial inferior turbinectomies
Removal of bilateral nasal septal spurs

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
