MARY JORDAN-SMITH								09-08-03

Mary is 49 years old. She was referred by Dr. Mark Piper, 111 Second Ave. NE, Ste. 1006, St. Petersburg, FL 33701.

Patient History

Mary had undergone double-jaw surgery in 1987. Her jaws ended up being more retruded than desired. She had veneers put on her anterior teeth to try to build them out a little bit, but this did not correct the problem. Her original doctor told her that he could fix it if he did hip grafts. She finally had the surgery redone in 11/2001, and an attempt was made to advance the jaws forward using bone plates and apparently hydroxyapatite grafts. The results ended up even worse than they were before the surgery.

About six months after her second surgery, she did develop some TMJ pain on the right side, but it subsequently resolved, and she has had no problem since then. She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain, earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, hearing loss, and other joint problems. She has no known allergies and no known problems with jewelry. She is not aware of clenching and bruxing at night. She does get some tingling occasionally in the maxillary left teeth around the cuspid/bicuspid area. She rates her TMJ pain at 0, overall pain at 0, jaw function at 2, diet at 2, and disability at 0. She has a little bit of decreased sensation perhaps in the lower lip and chin area but not too significantly. 

Patient Concerns

The primary concerns that Mary has at this time include the following:

The jaws are retruded too far
Too long vertically with the upper jaw being down-grafted too far at the last surgery
Front teeth are hitting prematurely
Snoring

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, the papillary plane and earlobes are fairly parallel with each other. Nasal tip is deviated off to the left side about 2 to 3 mm. Maxillary dental midline is off to the right probably about 1 mm. Mandibular dental midline is also off to the right about 1 mm. Relative to the mandibular dental midline, the chin is off to the left about 3 mm. Upper lip length is 25 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. 

In profile view, she may have a little bit of increased vertical height in the lower third face. Upper lip supralabrale is about 1 mm or 2 posterior to subnasale. Maxilla is probably about 6 mm AP deficient. Chin is probably about 15 to 18 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is short, and the submental area is quite full, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. As Mary postures her mandible forward, and the upper lip is filled out, it does improve her profile, although she probably has a high occlusal plane angle, and it increased the vertical height of the face as she pushes forward.

Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids. The rest of the teeth are present. Teeth are fairly well-aligned and leveled. A little gingival retraction around the necks of the teeth in the lower arch. Seems to have adequate attached gingiva, however. In the upper arch, she is also missing the first bicuspids. She has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with about 1.5 mm anterior open bite. 
There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being at least 2 mm lower than the left side in both the upper and lower arches. As Mary opens, the mandible deviates a little bit off to the right side by about 2 to 3 mm. Oropharynx appears clear. She has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. Maximal incisal opening is 44 mm. Excursive movements in each direction are about 9 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Radiographic evaluation indicates that she has a little cloudiness in her sinuses. There are bone plates in position with two plates on each side and four bone screws in each plate. I see no evidence of any HA grafts. There is actually a little radiolucency in the maxillary right sinus area. Has a bone screw in the chin and two stainless steel wires in the chin area as well. Mental foramina are quite large, particularly on the right side. She has three bone screws in the right mandibular ramus area, and on the left side she has three to four screws and perhaps a remnant of another screw. The right TMJ looks a little bit arthritic compared to the left TMJ. Roots of the upper bicuspid teeth and perhaps the molars to some extent as well as the lateral incisors and central incisors appear shorter than normal. Crown root length of the maxillary incisors seems a little bit out of balance. It appears that there is a significant amount of vertical buildup of the incisal tips of all four incisors and the cuspids. Crowns may have been elongated a couple of millimeters. She has loss of definition of the gonial angles with perhaps some slight excessive rotation of the proximal segments. 

The buildup of the anterior teeth is actually back through the second bicuspids.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly. Some anterior beaking is present. Condyle may be slightly posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Increased anterior joint space present. Condyle has somewhat of a hockey stick shape associated with it. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be slightly superiorly and posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is a little bit longer on this side as compared to the opposite side. Some significant anterior beaking present. Anteroposterior width of the condyle appears quite narrow. Condylar head and neck length appears a little bit longer than what would be considered normal. 

On opening, there is reasonably good translation of both condyles, although the vertical joint space on the right side between the condyle and articular eminence appears decreased as compared to the left side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. The vertical asymmetry is seen with the left side of the face being significantly shorter than the right side with it being probably about a 4 or 5-mm vertical difference at the angles of the mandible. Septum appears reasonably straight, and turbinates appear moderately enlarged. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Mary has a high occlusal plane angle and skeletal Class II relationship. Vertical imbalance at the occlusal area as well as the inferior border is noted. Oropharyngeal airway appears a little bit decreased at the soft palate level with a distance of 5 mm, but at the base of the tongue, she has about 8.5 mm of airway space. The soft palate may be a little bit long in length. 
Basic Diagnoses
Right TMJ significant arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and significant deformation
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction
AP maxillary hypoplasia
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia
AP mandibular hypoplasia
Transverse asymmetry with the left side of the face being shorter than the right side and the occlusal plane being 2 mm shorter vertically on the left side as compared to the right side
Class I occlusion
Previously placed veneers on the anterior eight teeth (although a couple of them have chipped off)
Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars
High occlusal plane angle of 25 degrees (normal 8 degrees)
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Snoring

Recommended Treatment

Re-evaluate aesthetic facings on the anterior teeth and replace those that are missing or damaged with temporary facings

Presurgical orthodontics 
Place appliances on the upper arch (can use bonded brackets)
 Align and level mandibular arch (can use bonded brackets)

Surgery
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor versus possible sternoclavicular disc graft for reconstruction
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, downgraft it posteriorly, and level is transversely
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise rotation

Presurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

Restorative dentistry to finalize the veneers on the maxillary teeth

