JENNIFER JUIF									01/10/2011

I evaluated Jen at Dr. Al Bishop’s office in Edwards, CO.  Jen is 40 years old, birth date 03/11/1970.  She reports the onset of her TMJ problems at the age of 18 years old when she was eating and developed an open lock situation in 1988.  She had one year of intense pain.  She has had 8 to 9 splints during these years.  For a long time, she had chiropractic treatment at least 5 days per month.  She also has had extensive physical therapy.  She gets headaches in the temporal area 3 to 4 times per month at a level of 5.  She rates her average TMJ pain at 4, facial pain at 3, jaw function at 7, diet at 5, and disability to 2.  Trigeminal nerves and facial nerves are all okay.  Medications she takes include ibuprofen and Synthroid.  She was diagnosed as hypothyroid 12 years ago.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area except for over the TMJs at a level of 2.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, hearing loss, or other joint problems.  She is aware of clenching her jaws at nighttime and also during the day  she drinks 2 diet Pepsis and one regular Pepsi per day.  Her occlusion is Class I with an over bite of about 1 mm and zero over jet.  On opening, she has an audible click at 10 mm of opening and about 10 mm on closing.  On the left side, she has an open click at 20 mm and closing click at 15 mm.  On excursion, she has an audible click in the right TMJ.  

Based on clinical evaluation, Jen‘s diagnoses are as follows:

Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation and arthritis (for 22 years).
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJs.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
3.	Surgery Option 1.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to maintain the occlusion 			and allow the condyle to move inferiorly to make room to accommodate the 			articular discs.  
4.	Surgery Option 2.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.

I explained the treatment options to Jen.  At this time, she feels she can tolerate her pain but does understand the surgical options.  Putting the discs back in position after being displaced for 22 years would give an unpredictable prognosis.  The treatment option with the highest predictability would be the bilateral total joint prostheses, but it is possible she could do okay with the disc repositioning and sagittal split osteotomies.  She understands.  She appreciated the information.  