CANDY JULIAN								04-17-03

Candy is 39 years old and referred by Dr. William Hang, 101 N. Westlake Blvd, Ste. 202, Westlake Village, CA  91362.

Patient History

Candy is in good health except she states that she does have sinus problems. She did have hepatitis in the past but says it wasn’t the infectious type. She does have a history of anemia but not currently. She also has some high anxiety, and this is a common trait in her family. She has been diagnosed with mitral valve prolapse. The diagnosis was made in her 20s and recently was confirmed that it is still there. She has had some bone spurs removed from her feet. She has had some small tumors, perhaps cysts or something like that, removed from her toes. She has breast implants in she has had for 13 years, and they are silicone-filled implants. 

Patient Concerns

Pain in her neck
Headaches 
TMJ problems
Snoring problems
Sleep disorder
Significant burning in the trapezius muscles
Retruded jaws
Teeth don’t fit together well
Fairly significant pain in the left mastoid area

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Candy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Minimal vermilion show of only probably 2 to 3 mm at the very most in the upper lip. Tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline may be just slightly off to the right side about a millimeter. Chin may be just off to the right a millimeter as well. Upper lip is retruded probably a good 8 to 10 mm. Chin is retruded at least 20 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short, and chin-neck angle is extremely obtuse and not well-formed. Lower third face appears to be slightly elongated. She has a very obtuse nasolabial angle. Upper lip supralabrale is probably almost 8 mm posterior to subnasale. 

Intraorally, she is missing the lower third bicuspids. She has crowns on the right second bicuspid, first molar, left first molar, and possibly second molar. There is some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. Has good attached gingival around most of the teeth. In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids. She has some crowns on her first and second molars on the left side and probably first and second molar on the right side as well. She has just a slight Class II end-on occlusion of about 2 mm. She has an overbite of about 3 to 4 mm. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is enlarged somewhat in length and also breadth. Arches are fairly symmetric anteroposteriorly.

Intranasally, turbinates are of moderate size, but there seems to be adequate airway around them. The right turbinate may be a little bit larger than the left turbinate. Columella base is a little bit wide, and her nostrils are narrow. She has constricture of her luminal valves. In fact, holding the nostrils open significantly improves the functional airway. Maximum incisal opening is 42 mm. Excursive movements are 10 mm in each direction. As she went through her maximum incisal opening and excursive movements, she felt pain in her neck. Candy does feel that she does breathe through her mouth at times, particularly when her allergies act up. Usually when she is snoring, she is breathing through her mouth.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of a mucous retention cyst in the right sinus. Left sinus is clear. Has root canals in the maxillary left first and second molar and mandibular left second molar. Third molars are absent as are the four bicuspids. She has crowns in the lower arch from the second bicuspid through the molars and on all the maxillary molars. Condyles look a little bit flattened posteriorly. Turbinates appear moderately large with the right one appearing larger than the left one.

Waters view looks good, and sinuses appear relatively clear. The mucous retention cyst appears to be seen in the right maxillary sinus.  The mandible appears relatively level. Nasal airway looks reasonably good with it being better on the left side than the right side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is flattened posteriorly. Decreased supero-posterior joint space but increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is quite steep and almost perpendicular to the Frankfort horizontal plane. Increased anterior joint space may indicate that the articular disc is positioned in a vertical orientation between the condylar head and the articular eminence. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite flattened posteriorly with some anterior beaking. Significantly decreased superior and posterior joint space much greater than the opposite side. Condyle on this side looks a little bit more arthritic than the opposite side. Difficult to tell on spacing where the articular disc may be in this joint. 

On opening, there is fairly good translation of both joints and appears to be adequate space, which means that the disc possibly could be reduced on opening but difficult to tell. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are both severely retruded. Maxillary incisors are in extreme retroinclination. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate measures about 5 to 6 mm, and the airway space space at the base of the tongue measures about 5 mm. Tongue fills almost the whole oral cavity. Has a moderately high occlusal plane angle. 

Tooth-size analysis reveals a tooth-size discrepancy of about 2.5 to 3 mm. Dental model analysis shows that Candy has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch of approximately 5 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations
Severe AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Severe AP mandibular deficiency
Class II end-on occlusion by approximately 2 mm
Vertical inclination of maxillary incisors
Moderate crowding, lower anterior arch
Missing first bicuspids from previous orthodontic extractions
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Cervical vertebral pathology
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3.5 mm	 
High occlusal plane angle
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Stricture of intranasal luminal valves
Mucous retention cyst, right maxillary sinus


Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJs

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up a little bit of space (0.5 to 1 mm) around each upper lateral incisor, particularly on the left side, of at least a millimeter
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure to help keep from flaring them too far forward

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction (will depend on MRI evaluation) to involve one of the following methods:
TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Reconstruct new discs with sternoclavicular disc grafts
Bilateral total joint prostheses
Mandibular advancement of approximately 20 mm in a counterclockwise direction by one of the following methods;
Sagittal split osteotomies of Mitek anchors or disc reconstruction can be done
Total joint prostheses if discs are non-salvageable
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 12 mm and downgraft it 6 mm posteriorly
Bilateral coronoidectomies if total joint prostheses are performed
Fat grafts to bilateral TMJs (harvested from the abdomen) if total joint prostheses are required
Removal of mucous retention cyst, right maxillary sinus

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
