ELIZABETH JUNG									08/12/2010

She is referred her by Mark Strickland, a physical therapist in Austin.  Elizabeth’s problems began when she was about 16 when she had received a whiplash injury in a motor vehicle accident.  Her bite may have changed some and she had orthodontics performed in the early 20s.  She also had her wisdom teeth removed in her 20s.  In her middle 30s, she had developed increased TMJ problems.  On the left side, the joint was reconstructed with a dermal graft and on the right side the disc was repositioned.  A year later, she had bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies with rigid fixation.  Within a couple of weeks after surgery, Mr. Strickland identified that Elizabeth had a displaced disc on the right side.  The bone screws in the right side were removed and the mandible apparently manipulated and the disc “was put back in place”.  She was wired together for 2 or 3 weeks.  She did have physical therapy after she had her joint surgeries and then after the orthognathic surgery for probably 3 months after each.  Her tinnitus started 4 years post surgery on the left side.  She has a pulsatile tinnitus in the left joint since that time.  In March 2010, the tinnitus also went over towards the right side.  She has been to see a  number of doctors in reference to this problem.  She has had various diagnoses but nothing absolute.  She takes the following medications:

Atenolol.
Omnaris nasal spray.
Astepro nasal spray p.r.n. 
Zyrtec.

She does not have any significant problems at all with headaches, but rates her TMJ pain at 8 and daily pain therefore would be about an 8.  She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 5, disability at 8.  After eating, her ears feel very stuffy and sometimes she has to stop eating because of the feeling and discomfort that she has.  She gets earaches occasionally, has severe tinnitus and it is pulsatile on the left.  She gets occasional vertigo.  She has a hearing loss in both ears with the left side being worse than the right side.  No other joints bother her.  She has allergies to weeds, trees and grasses.  She has been diagnosed with Eustachian tube blockage.  She is aware of bruxing perhaps at nighttime.  When Elizabeth chews on her left side, she gets a throbbing burning kind of feeling.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Elizabeth has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandible dental midline.  The chin is just off to the left side about 2 mm.  In profile, she has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Elizabeth has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch but has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she is missing the right first and second molars and she is missing all four third molars.  She is basically a Class I cuspid relationship.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 2 mm higher than the right side.  Elizabeth has an anterior vertical overbite of about 2 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear relatively normal.  Septum may have just a slight deviation to the right side, but there does not appear to be any significant nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, Elizabeth has no pain around the head and neck area.  Maximum opening is 36 mm.  Excursion movement to the right is 3 mm and to the left 4 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the maxillary left first and second molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Right turbinate appears moderately enlarged, but the septum appears reasonably straight.  She appears to have some sclerosis in the right condyle and severe condylar resorption in the left condyle.  She has 3 bone screws in the left mandibular ramus area.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows severe loss of condylar volume with almost complete loss of the condylar head.  There is an osteophytic projection medially.  Joint space actually looks fairly reasonable.  There appears to be an ossified body between the condyle and lateral rim of the fossa.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  There is sort of an exophytic in-growth from the lateral rim of the fossa.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good height and width.  There is decreased vertical joint space, particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint where there could be bone-on-bone contact.  There is some sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows almost complete absence of the condylar head.  Even the articular eminence is quite flattened, however, there is joint space present.  The condyle is positioned forward in the fossa by probably 3 to 4 mm.  

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has significant arthritis.  There is anterior beaking present and there appears to be decreased vertical joint space, more so at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow.  

Coronal view shows that the turbinates appear moderately enlarged and the sinuses appear clear. 

Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged, but the sinuses are clear.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she is basically a Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship with some decreased angulation of the incisors.  Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good with an AP dimension of about 8 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnoses for Elizabeth would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis, being much worse on the left side. 
TMJ pain.
Severe tinnitus.
Eustachian tube dysfunction. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints. 
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	c.	Application and removal of arch bars. 










