HANNAH KAHLER								03/24/2011

Hannah was referred by Dr. Robert Patton, 2167 West Orange Grove, Tucson, AZ, 85741.  The orthodontist is Daniel J. Grob, DDS, MS, 1751 W. Orange Grove, Suite 111, Tucson, AZ 85704.  

Hannah’s TMJ problems she believes began when she was about 16, but became symptomatic at 17.  She had some clicking and popping in her joints at that time.  She would have some pain if she would try to open wide to eat for instance a big sandwich.  She would also develop some open lock situations at that time.  She had orthodontics from 2003 to 2005.  She saw Dr. Steve Harkins, TMJ specialist in Tucson, in 2007 and he gave her a splint that she wore from 2007 to 2008, but it did not help very much so she went back to her orthodontic retainers.  She has an Essix type retainer for the upper arch that she had worn for about four years before she finally wore through it.  The reason she stopped wearing the splint in 2008 was that the clicking sort of went away and she became less symptomatic.  

Hannah gets periodic headaches at about a level of 5 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area, but these are fairly infrequent.  She rates her TMJ pain that on an average day her discomfort to a little of 3.  Her jaw function is at 2, diet at 2, disability at 1.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  The only other joint that really bothers her currently is her right wrist.  She is on a Frisbee team and throws with her right hand which could contribute to that problem.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day.  

She takes the following medications:

Natazia (BCP).
Celebrex 200 mg b.i.d. (for her wrist).
Omnaris nasal spray.

She has been on nasal sprays for allergies, nasal airway congestion, etc., for about 5 years now.  

In frontal view, upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline.  Her chin may be just slightly to the right a couple of millimeters.  Nasal tip is off to the right about 4 mm.  In profile view, the maxilla is retruded by probably 4 to 5 mm.  Chin is retruded about 15 mm.  The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is relatively defined.  She does have a head postured forward neck position.  Intraorrally, Hannah has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  The teeth are nicely aligned and leveled.  She has adequate attached gingiva of the lower anterior arch and she has a high labial frenulum.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has about a 2 mm anterior open bite, and she is probably 3 mm Class III.  The open bite extends almost from her second molar on the left and first and second molar on the right.  When she does bite together, she can only feel touching on the right side.  In a centric relation position, she only felt her first molars touch.  When she bites in her centric occlusion, her teeth touch from the second molars up through the second bicuspids.  Uvula is a little bit elongated, although quite thin.  The soft palate appears relatively normal in length.  The fascial pillars are normal.  The tonsils are moderately enlarged.  She had a bad bout of tonsillitis in May 2010 and had two rounds of antibiotics at that time.  She has had no further problems since then.  Intranasally, there is evidence of a previous septal fracture and about a centimeter posterior there is significant deviation of the septum off towards the left side and appears to butt against the moderately sized turbinate on that size blocking most of the airway on the left side.  The right side turbinate may be slightly enlarged, but at least anteriorly the airway looks reasonably good.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 1.5 mm higher than the left side.  

Hannah is not aware of problems of snoring and has no significant daytime somnolence.  She does sleep about 8 to 10 hours at night, but also enjoys a nap during the day if the time provides.  She is not aware of sleep apnea problems.  She sleeps well at night.  She does breathe through her mouth some at nighttime.  She is an oboe player and does have a slight yaw in the maxilla and mandible but it shifts off towards the left side probably 2 to 3 mm.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the masseter muscles, TMJs, styloid areas.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  The incisal opening is 48 mm.  Excursion movements are 11 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged particularly on the left side which appears to almost touch against the septum.  There appears to be some significant arthritic changes in the temporomandibular joints.  

Coronal view shows that the bony septum is deviated just a little bit off towards the left side.  The left turbinate is quite large and obliterates most of the airway on that side.  The left turbinate appears more normal in size.  The sinuses are clear. 

Axial view shows that the left turbinate is quite large and appears to obliterate the airway.  Nasal septum beginning from posterior leans a little bit towards the left side and then off towards the right side.  The right turbinate is relatively normal in size.  The sinuses are clear.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone condylar resorption.  There is some significant loss of vertical volume.  There is decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone condylar resorption to a slightly greater extent than the left side.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is fairly small with loss of significant volume vertically as well as anteroposteriorly.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking tendency present.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  The condyle is reasonably centered in the fossa.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite small in size with evidence of loss of vertical volume and some AP volume as well.  There is some anterior beaking present.  The joint space actually is fairly well balance.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II relationship and just a very mild Class II occlusal relationship.  There is a high occlusal plane angle.  There is an anterior open bite of about 2 mm.  There is a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  Oropharyngeal airway actually looks pretty good with an AP dimension of about 7.5 mm at the soft palate level and at about 10 mm at the base of the tongue.  The maxillary incisor crown comes off of the root at a slightly accentuated angle with the facial line being somewhat retruded.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph taken by her orthodontist, Daniel Grob, shows she has an oropharyngeal airway of about 5 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue.  Her head is in a little bit more vertical position on this radiograph as compared to the one that we took today.  

Basic diagnoses for Hannah would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis with condylar resorption and articular disc dislocation without reduction (compatible with AICR).
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Anterior open bite of 2 mm.
Posterior yaw with maxilla and mandible rotated towards the left 2 to 3 mm.
Transverse cant in the cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1.5 mm higher than the right side. 
External nasal deformity with the nose shifted off to the right side about 4 mm.
Nasal septal deviation.
Hypertrophied left inferior turbinate creating nasal airway obstruction.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

Recommended treatment options are as follows:

OPTION 1:  Reconstruct TMJs and advance the mandible with total joint prostheses.

1.	Tests for hypersensitivities:
	a.	Environmental Center in Dallas, Texas, for skin testing.
	b.	Rush Research Center in Chicago for blood testing.
	c.	Placement of samples of prosthetic materials into forearm at Dr. 
                       Wolford’s office.  
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
2.	CT scans of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise 			direction.
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
	e.	Nasal septoplasty.
	f.	Left inferior turbinectomy. 
	g.	External rhinoplasty.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

This treatment plan would be the best relative to TMJ and jaw repositioning and stability.  It would also provide the best option for eliminating pain.  The joints would be extremely strong and stable long term.

OPTION 2:  Bilateral TMJ disc repositioning with Mitek anchor and orthognathic surgery. 

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.  
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a 					counterclockwise direction. 
	d.	Nasal septoplasty.
	e.	Left inferior turbinectomy. 
	f.	External rhinoplasty.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

This treatment approach would use her own discs in the joints.  Because they are so degenerated already, the prognosis would be guarded.  

OPTION 3:  Staging the Mitek anchor surgery separate from the orthognathic surgery. 

1.	Surgery stage 1:  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair 	with Mitek anchors. 
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially 				and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
3.	Surgery Stage 2.
	a.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction. 
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a 					counterclockwise direction.  
	c.	Nasal septoplasty.
	d.	Left inferior turbinectomy. 
	e.	External rhinoplasty.

This would allow the joints to be corrected and then allow time to see if the joints would hold up before the orthognathic surgery is performed.  If the joints do not hold up then, the total joint prostheses could be done at the same time as the orthognathic surgery.  If the joints do hold up with the disc repositioning, then the orthognathic surgery could be performed at the second operation.  This approach would also be guarded because of the degenerative changes within the jaw joints.  








