RAJ KAKAR, MD									02/04/2010

Raj is 36 years old and referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich.  The only other previous surgery he has had was an adenoidectomy at age 5.  He is in good health except he has some sleep apnea issues.  Raj apparently has some popping in his jaw joints, but is not clear as to the onset or the cause.  He had orthodontics from the age of 11 to 16.  He gets headaches on top of his head about one time per month, but has no TMJ pain or pain around the head and neck area.  He rates his jaw function at 5, diet at 2, disability at 1.  His primary concerns are:

Bite dysfunction.
Cross bite.

He has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss and no other joints bother him.  He is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time and also during the day.  He takes the following medications:

Aspirin 81 mg q.d.
MVI one per day.
Singulair 2 mg per day. 
Propecia 1 mg per day.
Lovaza (fish oil).

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Raj has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship appears to be about -2.  The maxillary dental midline is shifted off to the right side about 2 mm and the mandibular dental midline is shifted to the left about 2 mm.  The chin may be shifted just slightly to the left side 1 to 2 mm.  In profile, Raj appears to have some AP maxillary deficiency particularly at subnasale area.  He appears to have perhaps some slight AP deficiency in chin projection as well.  He has an acute nasolabial angle.  Chin neckline appears to have reasonably good dimension and chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  There is some fullness in the submental area.  Intraorally, Raj is missing the mandibular first bicuspids which were likely extracted for orthodontics.  He has spacing in the left side between the cuspid and the sec bicuspid and has a malrotated right cuspid.  He has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars present.  There is some buccal tipping of the molars with an increased curve of Wilson.  In the upper arch, he is missing what appears to be a left lateral incisor and that space is closed up accounting for the asymmetry in the upper arch.   The upper cuspids are actually fairly well aligned with each other in the anteroposterior position.  The tongue looks as though it might be somewhat enlarged.  Raj has fairly wide arches, particularly in the lower jaw.  Raj has an anterior and bilateral right cross bites and probably has 10 to 15 mm of transverse deficiency in the maxilla compared to the width of the mandibular arch.  Transversely, the maxilla is fairly level, but in the lower arch the right side is down 1 to 1.5 mm.  Raj has a reversed deep bite of about 2 mm.  He has a Class II cuspid relationship by about 3 mm on the left side and on the right side he is a little bit closer to Class I cuspid.  This is also the side that is missing the lateral incisor.  Raj has had his wisdom teeth removed.  To palpation, Raj has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  He does appear to have a click in the right joint at about 40 mm of opening on the right side and at about 35 mm of closing and the closing click is a little bit more obvious than the opening.  On the left side, he may also have a similar kind of problem with a soft pop at about 35 and maybe a closing one at about 30 mm.  Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm and he has about 7 mm of excursion movement to the right and 8 mm to the left.  Intraorally, the oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Uvula is mildly enlarged.  The soft palate may be mildly elongated.  Fascial pillars are moderately constricted.  Tonsils are probably moderate in size.  He does have a large tongue that actually made the exam a little bit more difficult than anticipated.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit towards the left side particularly at the base and appears to be almost touching against the left turbinate.  The turbinates are probably moderate in size.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary right lateral incisor and the mandibular first bicuspids.  He has root canals on the mandibular right first and second molars and has a crown on those same molars as well as a crown on the right cuspid.  He also has a crown on the maxillary left first molar.  He has spacing in the lower arch between the cuspids and second bicuspid particularly on the right side.  

Coronal view shows that he has a slight deviation of the septum off towards to the left side and he does have a septal spur off to the left side.  Turbinates are quite large and hyperplastic.  They appear to block a good portion of the airway.  There is a small mucous retention cyst in the medial wall of the right maxillary sinus.  Otherwise, the sinuses all appear clear.  In the left sinus, there appears to be thickening, a mucous retention cyst, or fluid level at the inferior aspect of the sinus. 

Axial view shows that the sinuses appear clear except for a small mucous retention cyst on the medial wall of the right maxillary sinus.  Turbinates appear quite large and appear to block a good portion of the airway.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that is quite narrow mediolaterally particularly towards the medial side of the joint.  There is some anterior beaking.  The condyle may be posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  There appears to be actually increased vertical joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic with some anterior beaking.  There may be decreased vertical joint space.  The articular eminence is a little bit more shallow than the opposite side.  There is decreased posterior joint space as well particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint. 

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle with a little bit of an odd shape to it.  There is a lateral extension of the lateral pole of the condyle that extends down below the lateral rim of the fossa.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 5 or 6 mm.  There is decreased lateral joint space, but the vertical joint space looks reasonably good.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows decreased superior and significantly decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 4 or 5 mm, just slightly less then the other side, but appears to be closer bone contact.  There is a little extension of the lateral pole of the condyle on this side as well, but not to the extent of the opposite side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Raj appears to have AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency, although he is in a skeletal Class III and occlusal Class III relationship.  The tongue appears quite large and fills the oral cavity.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm from the posterior pharyngeal wall to the soft palate and at the base of the tongue it measures about 9 mm.  The lower anterior teeth appear to be slightly over angulated.  

Dental model analysis shows that Raj is missing the mandibular first bicuspids.  He has an increased curve of Wilson in the lower arch and an accentuated curve of Spee present.  There is spacing on the left side between the cuspid and second bicuspid, and, with the corrected rotation of the mandibular left cuspid, he would still have 1 to 2 mm of space left.  In the upper arch, he is missing the right lateral incisor and the right cuspid is partially blocked out of the arch.  He has an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and also has an increased curve of Wilson.  He has a significant periodontal defect around the maxillary right cuspid.  This may be due to the fact that maybe the cuspid did not erupt in all the way and the crown was made to lengthen it and get it into a reasonable occlusal relationship.  He has anterior bilateral cross bites.  His transverse maxillary deficiency is probably about 15 minutes.  The curves of Wilson are affecting the arches and will have significant interferences with the lingual cusps bilaterally.  Raj has a tooth size discrepancy of 4.5 mm. 

Raj is on a CPAP machine and has been using it for 6 years now.  

Basic diagnosis for Raj would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and probable articular disc dislocations (need MRI for confirmation).  
Maxillary AP, transverse, and vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side, Class I on the right. 
Anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites.
Missing maxillary left lateral incisor.
Over angulation of maxillary anterior teeth.
Maxillary dental midline shifted 2 mm to the right and mandibular dental midline shifted 1-2 mm to the left. 
Missing mandibular first bicuspids previously extracted for orthodontic reasons.
Spacing in the lower arch particularly between the right cuspid and second bicuspid. 
Macroglossia.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm (normal 11 mm).
Severe sleep apnea (Raj has been on CPAP for 6 years).
Increased curve of Wilson in maxillary arch.
Reversed curve of Wilson in mandibular arch. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJs.
2.	Surgery Stage 1:  Reduction glossectomy.  
3.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Extract maxillary left first or second bicuspid.
	b.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Shift maxillary dental midline 2 mm to the left.  			Close the extraction space.  
	c.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Close the lower arch spacing.  Try to 				transversely narrow the lower arch to correct the reverse curve of Wilson.
4.	Surgery Stage 2.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 			(if disc displacement confirmed by MRI).
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and expand. 
	c.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a slight counterclockwise 			direction. 
	d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
6.	Periodontal treatment around maxillary right cuspid to try to improve.