BRENDAN KAMPFE								09-20-02

Brendan is 14 years, 11 months of age. He has a birthday coming up in a month. His birth date is 10/21/87. 

Patient Concerns

Primary concerns that Brendan has are as follows:

His teeth hurt a lot particularly when he has to wear elastics.
When he lies down, his nose gets stopped up.
When he lies down, he feels like the back of his throat closes off.
Difficulties keeping his lips together when he chews because the lower jaw is so far back.
Lower jaw is retruded.

Brendan has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, no problems with headaches or TMJ pain.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Brendan has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 3.5 to 4 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and dental midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline.

In profile view, he may have a little bit of AP deficiency in the maxilla. He has sort of a C-shaped curve to the upper lip. Mandible appears retruded by probably 10 to 12 mm. Lower lip is everted and quite prominent compared to the chin projection. Labiomental fold is very prominent as well. Chin-neckline is short, and chin-neck angle is moderately well defined.

Intraorally, Brendan is missing lower first bicuspids. He has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch with lower incisors being probably 2 to 3 mm higher than the posterior teeth. In the upper arch, he also is missing first bicuspids. He has a reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch. In centric relation, he has an end-on Class II cuspid relationship and anterior deep-bite of probably about 6 or 7 mm. 

Brendan states that he almost never breathes through his nose because of probably apparent obstruction in that area. 

Intraorally, oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is moderately hyperplastic. Faucial pillars appear to be anteriorly positioned. Turbinates appear fairly large. Septum appears relatively straight. Turbinates are not particularly inflamed, however. TMJs seem to function very smoothly. Appears to have angular cheilitis. He apparently gets this condition about twice a year. It lasts about three to four months each time that he gets an episode.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. Actually it may be the maxillary second bicuspids that are missing and the mandibular first bicuspids. 

Right TMJ tomograms seem to show reasonable joint morphology and space. The quality of the joint aspects is not really clear.

Left TMJ tomograms show good joint morphology, good joint space, and moderately steep articular eminences.

Open views show good translation of both joints.

Waters view shows the turbinates appear moderately large. There are relatively large frontal sinuses. Sinuses all appear clear. Bony septum appears relatively straight.
Cephalometrically, he has a skeletal Class II relationship. Has relatively high occlusal plane angulation. Some inversion of the lower lip. Has some moderate adenoidal tissue remaining up in the nasopharynx area. Oropharyngeal airway, however, actually is pretty much normal in dimension. Tooth-size analysis reveals a tooth-size difference of approximately 2 mm.

Basic Diagnoses
Vertical maxillary excess.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II occlusion.
Missing maxillary second bicuspids and mandibular first bicuspids as well as all four third molars. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.

Recommended Treatment
Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure. Try to lose posterior anchorage in the lower arch. Continue to level the curve of Spee.

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly and advance it.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance it.
Partial turbinectomies.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion