SUZANNE SIEGEL-KANGAS							06/27/2007

Suzanne was here back in 1994 after the total joint prostheses were taken off the market and the only option we had at that time was to reconstruct Suzanne with sternoclavicular grafts and cranial bone grafts.  She has had significant pain problems through the years.  It has gotten considerably worse during the past year. 

The main concerns she has currently are:
Severe pain problems. 
Significant difficulties eating and chewing.

CLINICAL EVALUATION
Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandible is a little bit off to the left side as is the chin by about 1 mm to midline.  In profile she has good facial balance.  Intraorally, she is missing mandibular right second bicuspid and maxillary right second bicuspid.  On the left side she is missing the mandibular second bicuspid, the maxillary first and second bicuspids.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm but she is fairly close to a Class I occlusion on the right side and just a slight Class II end-on on the left side.  

Suzanne has had previous TMJ surgeries.  Her problems began when she was about somewhere between 14 and 17 years of age.  She had surgery in the bilateral TMJs in 1985, 1986, 1987 and 1990 and then I performed my surgery in 1994.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS
Morphine 50 mg q.4h. 
Morphine 60 mg 1 tablet q8h.
Lisinopril 20 mg for high blood pressure.  It is possible her high blood pressure could be related to her pain factors.

She gets headaches at a level of 9 in the frontal, temporal area and top of the head.  She rates her TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain at 9, jaw function 4, diet at 5, disability at 9.  Maximal incisal opening is 30 mm.  Excursive movements are about 1 mm in each direction.  Opening as little as 10 mm can create significant pain for Suzanne.  To palpation, she has severe pain over the TMJs, styloid areas, high moderate pain over the SCMs, masseters, medial pterygoids and moderate pain over the posterior neck and shoulder areas well as temporalis areas.  Suzanne does not snore and she is not aware of having any sleep apnea problems.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of 4 bone plates in the maxilla and some synthetic bone up in that area.  In the mandible there is the presence of bilateral sternoclavicular grafts as well as cranial bone grafts up in the fossa.  There are wires present holding the cranial bone grafts in place.  There may be some heterotopic bone around the joint particularly in the right side.  There are 2 bone plates in each ramus that were placed there to support the sternoclavicular grafts.  She is missing mandibular second bicuspids and both third molars.  

SUZANNE SIEGEL-KANGAS		06/27/2007				Page 2

In the upper arch, she is missing the third molars, maxillary right second bicuspid, left second bicuspid and the crown on the first bicuspid where there are 2 roots left with root canals on them.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear as though they may be relatively clear.  There is some septal deviation off towards the left side.  There is some facial asymmetry with the left side being a little bit shorter vertically as compared to the right side.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows the presence of a sternoclavicular graft.  It seems to be sitting in the fossa with joint space around it although the joint space may be decreased anterior.  Two bone plates are in place.  Articular eminence is moderate steep.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows this joint appears to have more bone resorption present which may account for the shifting in the occlusion.  Articular eminence is more shallow.  On opening there is very minimal translation.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is some vertical difference at the inferior border of the mandible but only about 2 to 3 mm.  Oropharyngeal airway is slightly constricted but not too significant at all.  She appears to have a skeletal Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She does have a chin implant in.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Difficulties eating and chewing.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies and thorough joint debridement.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Removal of 4 previously placed bone plates and 20 bone screws.
Application of arch bars.
Postsurgical physical therapy and pain management as necessary.

She said that she has had a reaction to the generic morphine and she does have a rash that is on her arms, legs, back, chest and abdomen.  It gives her severe itching.  She was told it was likely a reaction to the difference in chemicals that they use in the generic form of morphine as compared to MS Contin.  She asked if I would give her prescription.  I did give a prescription for MS Contin 60 mg tablets, dispensing #90, 1 tablet q.8h.  She will need to have her pain managed back home as I am not going to take the risk of managing her long distance and longterm. 


SUZANNE SIEGEL-KANGAS		06/27/2007				Page 3

She needs total joint prostheses and understands the necessity for it.  She is to contact me if she has any questions or concerns.  She is anxious to proceed on.  She understands that there are no guarantees that we can relieve her pain but this is the best option that she has to gain improvement.  Interestingly, when I first saw Suzanne in July 1993, we had planned to do the Techmedica total joint prostheses but they were taken off the market a few months after I saw her and prior to when her surgery could be done.  At that time she weighed only about 90 pounds and was on a feeding tube because she was so sick from TMJ problems.  She has actually done reasonably well for this last almost 13 years.  However, at this time the total joint prostheses will by far be the best option she has.   