MI-KYONG (MEGAN) KANG							07/24/2008

Megan is 14 years old.  Referred by Dr. Michael Steffen, 1601 South Boulevard, Edmond, OK 73013.  Megan is in good health. Primary concerns that she has are as follows:

Pain in the jaw joints. 
Headaches.
Difficulties eating and chewing. 
Mouth breathing at night with drooling.

Megan believes that her joints began popping as young as the age of 6 to 7 of unknown etiology.  Megan was in splint therapy from 2006 to 2007 with Dr. Robert Talley.  In 2008, Dr. John Polkinghorne made her a different splint.  She began orthodontic treatment in June 2008 with Dr. Mike Steffen.  She takes no medications.  She gets headaches predominantly on the left side in the frontal and perhaps the anterior part of the temporal area at about a level of 7.  She rates her average TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 4, diet at 4, disability at 6.  She gets occasional earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching and grinding her teeth at night, and she also clenches during the day.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, she has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline.  The chin may be shifted just slightly to the right about 2 mm.  In profile view, she has some prominence to the nasal dorsum.  Upper lip subnasale is posterior to supralabrale.  There may be some slight deficiency in the subnasale area.  The chin appears retruded about 10 mm.  Chin neckline is a somewhat shorter and chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  She has some lip incompetence of probably about 6 to 7 mm.  Intraorally, Megan has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth are actually fairly well aligned and leveled with just some mild crowding in the lower arch that needs to be corrected yet.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth also back through the second molars present.  She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship by maybe 1 mm or so and has maybe a 1 mm overjet.  She has about a 1 mm anterior overbite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  Facial pillars may be moderately constricted particularly the posterior.  Tonsils may be mildly enlarged.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The nasal septum at the base is deviated a little bit off to the left side anteriorly and then off to the right side a little bit posteriorly.  There may be some moderate nasal airway obstruction.  Columella is moderately wide, although the nostrils are fairly normal in size.  To palpation, she has high moderate to low severe pain over the TMJs, retromandibular area, left medial pterygoid, and left masseter area.  She had moderate pain over the temporalis muscles, right masseter, and the retromandibular areas.  On opening, she has clicking of both joints at about 10 mm of opening and 5 mm of closing.  Maximal opening is 41 mm with opening without significant discomfort 21 mm.  Excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.   
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four developing and unerupted third molars.  The rest of the teeth of all present.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  It is difficult to evaluate the TMJs.  
Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  Nasal septum appears reasonably straight in the bony area.  Turbinates are fairly large, particularly on the right side with not much airway remaining.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  Joint space  is significantly reduced vertically and posteriorly.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.    
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with good morphology.  The superior and posterior joint space appears to be decreased.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a high occlusal plane angle skeletal Class II jaw relationship.  The oropharyngeal airway actually looks reasonably good with a distance from the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall of about 8 mm and the base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall of 10 to 11 mm.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 mm higher than the left side. 

Basic diagnoses for Megan would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR).
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side and slight Class II on the left side. 
High occlusal plane angle.  
Transverse asymmetry with the right side being higher than the left side.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Impacted third molars x4.  
Snoring. 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
Clenching and bruxism.
Impacted third molars x4.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Medications:  Klonopin 0.5 mg 1 tablet q.h.s.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider slenderizing the lower anterior arch removing 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to decrease the slightly over angulated lower anterior teeth.  
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the posterior aspect inferiorly, level it transversely, and upright the incisors.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.  
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Removal of impacted third molars x4.
4.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
