VICTORIA JONES									12/23/2005

Vicki is 55 years old, referred by Daniel Dugan, DDS, 613 Harwood, Bedford, TX 76054.  She has had previous surgeries for hysterectomy, gallbladder removal and multiple knee surgeries.  She has had arthritis, allergies and a fractured jaw.  Vicki is in fairly good health except for problems she is having with her jaws.  

MEDICATIONS
Estradiol 2 mg.
Prilosec 20 mg.
Zyrtec.
Prozac 20 mg.
Glucosamine/chondroitin 750 mg.
Indomethacin 75 mg.
Phendimetraz 105 mg
Phendimetrazine 35 mg. 

Very recently Vicki has stopped taking the indomethacin and has begun a new arthritis medicine but she cannot remember what it is at this time.  Vicki's problems began in September of 2004 when she fell on the driveway at a Wendy's parking lot where she struck her chin and sustained bilateral subcondylar fractures and also two teeth were fractured.  She has had the following treatments to try and manage her pain problems:
Medications, to include pain medications and anti-inflammatories.
Splint therapy.
Iontophoresis (this may her pain worse.)
Bilateral TMJ injections x2 to each joint.

After the injections, Vicki did get a little bit better and then the problems got worse once the injections wore off.  Vicki gets occasional earaches, rarely gets tinnitus, gets occasional but frequent vertigo.  No significant hearing loss.  The other joints that bother her are her neck where she has been told she has osteoarthritis, shoulders occasionally, wrists, hands, fingers, particularly the thumbs, hips, long time problems with the knees, and toes.  She has some allergies but the specifics of identification are unknown.  She has some difficulties wearing earrings.  She believes she does clench her teeth sometimes at night and sometimes during the day.  Vicki rates her headaches she gets daily on an average of about 6 and they occur predominately in the temple area.  She sometimes wakes up with them and also with TMJ pain.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average facial pain at 5, jaw function 6, diet at 5 and disability at 6.  

In frontal view, Vicki has good facial symmetry and balance.  In profile view, she has good facial balance.  Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids removed for orthodontic reasons.  She has adequate attached gingiva although the labial frenulum is high but the papilla is still intact.  She has crowns on her molars on the lower right side and left side.  In the upper arch she is missing first bicuspids.  She has some residual spacing in the first bicuspid extraction area.  She is basically a Class I cuspid relationship.  She has a crossbite in the right first molar area.  She has an anterior deep bite relationship of about 3 mm.  Vicki has a fairly large uvula.  

VICTORIA JONES				12/23/2005				Page 2


Soft palate length, however, except for the uvula appears relatively normal and the faucial pillars appear normal.  Intranasally, she has fairly significant nasal spur off the left side of the septum.  The turbinate appears to touch against the spur.  On the right side the turbinates are enlarged but appears to be a passable airway.  The luminal valves appear constricted on both sides.  The nostrils appear a little bit constricted.  She has some mild to moderate snoring.  She sometimes is tired during the day.  She does not have any notable evidence of sleep apnea.  To palpation, Vicki has high-moderate to low-severe pain to palpation over the TMJs, high-moderate over the masseters and moderate pain over the temporalis, styloid areas and shoulders.  Vicki has difficulties manipulating her jaws.  If she opens, she has to close her jaw slowly because of the significant pain problems that she has.  The joints seem to be fairly smooth today but she does state that she occasionally gets some clicking type of sounds. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION  
Panorex shows presence of impacted maxillary third molars.  She has crowns on all the molars, the upper second bicuspids and also has restorations in the lower second bicuspids.  The sinuses appear reasonably clear.  Right condyle appears larger than the left condyle.  Flattening on the anterior heads and posterior heads can be seen.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears sclerotic on the head and there is some flattening posteriorly and some anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be a decreased superior and posterior joint space indicative of possible anteriorly displacement of the articular disc.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit sclerotic and has a little bit of anterior beaking present.  There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space.  On opening, there is actually fairly good translation of both condyles.  There appears to be a little bit more arthritis involving the left TMJ than the right side as far as the condylar morphology is concerned.

Water's view shows that she has a mucous retention cyst in the right maxillary sinus.  The rest of the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The septum appears relatively straight and the turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  It is possible she may have a nasal spur stepping off into the right side of the nose.  

Lateral cephalometric radiographic shows that she has basically a skeletal Class I relationship.  Distance from soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 6 to 7 mm and from the base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall about 5 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Post bilateral mandibular subcondylar fractures.
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction.
Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches.
VICTORIA JONES				12/23/2005				Page 3


Myofascial pain.
Posterior crossbite on the right side.
Severe masticatory dysfunction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Bilateral TMJ MRI.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider using cross arch elastics on the right side to try and correct the posterior crossbite. 
CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular condylectomies, meniscectomies and joint debridement. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry as necessary.
