NIKI KERAMAT									02/26/2008

Niki is 13 years old, referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich, 3105 Legacy Drive, Plano, Texas 75023.  Niki has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability all at zero.  She takes no medications.  No earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo and no other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm on the left and 3 mm on the right.  Maxillary midline is off to the right side about 1 mm.  Mandibular midline is about 2 mm off to the right and chin is probably 3-4 mm off to the right.  In profile view, maxilla is probably 5 to 6 mm deficient.  Mandible is probably 10 mm AP deficient.  Chin neckline is somewhat shorter, although the chin neck angle is moderately well defined.  Intraorally, she has retained primary E’s bilaterally.  She has the rest of her teeth back to the second molars.  She has a 6 x 6 retainer in place.  She has some moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch.   In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars present.  She has slight Class III cuspid relationship on the left side by about 2 to 3 mm, and on the right side it is about 2 mm Class III.  She has an anterior bite of about 1 mm.  She has an overbite that extends from the right first bicuspid through the left cuspid.  She has a crossbite on the left side involving the first bicuspid and primary molar.  She has a transverse cant to the occlusal plane with the left side being at least 2 mm higher than the right side.  The right cuspids may be about 1 mm posterior to the left cuspids.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal as do the structures.  Her tonsils are quite large particularly on the left side.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the left side.  Turbinates are relatively normal in size.  There may be some slight decreased airway on the left side because of the deviated septum.  To palpation, Niki has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, however, she has definite palpable clicking in the left joint and right joint with an opening click on the left at about 10 mm, on the right side at 15 mm, and closing click on the left at about 5 mm and on the right side at 10 mm.  Maximum opening is about 57 mm.  Excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction.  Niki became aware of the clicking in her jaw joints about one year ago of unknown etiology. She has previous orthodontic treatment beginning about the age of 10 including maxillary expansion, retainer placed in the lower arch, and orthodontics to align the maxillary front four teeth.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  Retained primary E on the right side with lack of a successor beneath that tooth.  On the left side, the crown is still remaining of the primary E, although the second right cuspid is developing beneath the resorbing crown and root of the primary E.  She has a 6 x 6 retainer in place.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Difficult to evaluate the joints.  Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  Septum is reasonably straight.  Nasal airway appears partially blocked on the left side compared to the right side.  Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears slightly small in size.  There appears to be decreased joint space vertically.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit more of a hockey stick shape to it.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  There may be some slight decreased vertical joint space.  On opening, there is moderately good translation of both joints.  Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a totally high occlusal plane angle, significant adenoid mass in the nasopharynx area, and some constricture of the oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level where it measures about 9 mm, but up by the adenoid tissue measures only about 5 mm.  She has a high occlusal plane angle and vertical discrepancy at least at the occlusal level.  Maxilla and mandible appear AP deficient.  There is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of about 1.5 to 2 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Niki would be as follows:

1.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations.
2.	AP maxillary hypoplasia and vertical asymmetry.
3.	Vertical maxillary hypoplasia. 
4.  	AP mandibular hypoplasia.
5.	Class III cuspid molar relationship.
6.	Anterior overbite.  
7.	Crossbite on the right side.  
	8.	High occlusal plane angle.  
9.	Crowding of lower anterior arch. 
10.	Snoring.
11.	Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
12.	Residual adenoid tissue in nasopharynx. 
13.  	Retained mandibular primary left E with a successor.
14.	Retained mandibular primary right E without a permanent successor.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

	1.  	Presurgical orthodontics.
a.  Align and level maxillary arch.  
b.  Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward.
	2.  	MRI of left and right TMJ in about 1 year. 
3.	Monitor growth and development.  
4.	Surgery.
a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back onto the facial midline, level the transverse occlusal plane as well as the AP occlusal plane and advance the mandible.  
c.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly as well as level it transversely.  
d.  Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
5.  	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
6.	Possible eventual replacement of mandibular primary right E.