RENEE KERVIN								01/18/2010

Renee is 34 years old, referred by Dr. Daniel Dugan.  Renee was involved in a motor vehicle accident in November 2005 sustaining what appears to have been a left subcondylar fracture and a left parasymphysis fracture.  She had her jaws wired together for 4 weeks and then she wore rubber bands for 4 weeks.  Her bite was off and she initiated orthodontic treatment in March 2008 with Dr. Terry Moore.  

She gets headaches about once a week at a level of 5 in the frontal and temporal areas.  She does not have any significant TMJ pain and average daily pain may be around a 3.  She rates her jaw function and diet at 0 and disability at 2.  She takes birth control pills and Pristiq 50 mg q.d.  

She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  She has problems with her right thumb and her right big toe and her neck.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

CLINCAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Renee has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is about 1 mm off towards the left side.  The mandibular dental midline is also about 1 mm off to the left side.  The chin is probably about 3-4 mm off to the left side.  In profile, she has fairly good facial balance.  Chin neckline appears relatively normal in length and the chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth on the right side back to the third molar with a partial impaction of the right third molar.  She has  left teeth exposed back to the second molar.  The teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and level.  She has some periodontal problems around the lower anterior teeth, particularly the left cuspid lateral incisor.  In the upper arch, she has all her teeth back through the second molars.  She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship and molar relationship.  She has a tendency towards a cross bite on the left side, particularly in the first and second molar areas and to a lesser extent in the bicuspid areas.  Her right ear is a little bit lower than her left ear by probably 2-3 mm.  She has a transverse cant in her occlusal plane with the left cuspid being about 2 mm higher than right cuspid in both arches.  The maxillary left cuspid is perhaps 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid and in the same in the lower arch with the left cuspid being posterior to the right cuspid.  She did have some fractured maxillary left central and lateral incisors that have been rebuilt up.  This happened when she fell in the shower at the gym after her jaws were unwired.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  Fascial pillars appear a little bit constricted of a moderate amount.  Intranasally, the tissues look reasonably healthy.  The left turbinate is mildly enlarged and the right one appears more normal.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  There does not appear to be any significant nasal airway obstruction.  She has an anterior overbite of about 1.5 mm.  To palpation, Renee has some mild tenderness over the temporalis, masseters, and retromandibular area.  On opening, she has a palpable click on the left joint at 35 mm of opening and a closing click at 35 mm.  On the right side, she opens reasonably smoothly, but on closing she has a click at about 30 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that she has 4 impacted third molars.  Turbinates appear fairly large, although the sinuses appear relatively clear.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints on these films.

Coronal view shows that she has enlarged turbinates, but the sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Axial view shows that she has enlarged turbinates, but the sinuses appear clear.  

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show that the condyle appears to have good width to it.  There appears to be decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint between the lateral rim and the lateral pole of the condyle.  The condyle otherwise looks reasonably healthy.  There is a downward curvature of about 2 mm at the lateral rim of the fossa.  

Right TMJ coronal tomograms shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width.  It appears actually a little bit healthier than the opposite side, however, there is decreased superior and particularly at the lateral joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the posterior head and a smaller area of sclerosis on the top of the head of the condyle.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking present.  Joint space actually looks reasonably good.  Articular eminence is relatively normal in inclination.  

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the posterior head and appears a little bit more sclerotic across the top of the condyle.  The articular eminence is relatively normal in inclination.   The joint space appears somewhat decreased vertically and posteriorly. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she appears to have a slight increased occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway AP dimension at the soft palate level is about 5 mm, and at the base of the tongue it is about 5 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Renee would be as follows:

1.	Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. 
2.	Maxillary AP hypoplasia and asymmetry.
3.	Mandibular AP hypoplasia and asymmetry.
4.	Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
5.	Headaches. 
6.	Myofascial pain. 
7.	Impacted third molars x4. 
8.	Periodontal defect with the mandibular left cuspid and lateral incisor. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Continue to align and level the maxillary arch.
	b.	Continue to align and level the mandibular arch. 
2.	Periodontal evaluation and treatment of the mandibular left cuspid and lateral 	incisor area. 
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward about 3-4 			mm and level it transversely.
	c.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible 6-7 mm	 		with a counterclockwise rotation.
	d.	Surgical removal of third molars x4.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 


