CAMBRIA KESLER								07/28/2011

Cambria is 14 years old, birth date 11/13/1996.  Referred by Dr. Rick Parigini, 1702 Country Road, Suite G, Minden, NV 89423.

Cambia was first diagnosed with having JRA at the age of 18 months.  She had just started walking and then began to regress to where she crawled and then even had some difficulties with that.  Relative to her TMJ joints, her symptoms did not begin until she was about 12 years old.  She had orthodontics from the first through the seventh grade on and off.  She had Herbst appliance on for some time as well.  They did some other kind of devices on her front teeth to pull her lower jaw forward.  She currently takes methotrexate 1 cc per week and Naproxen as she needs for pain.  She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her knees, ankles, right wrist, left ring finger.  She may clench her teeth at night as she wakes up with more pain in the morning.  She rates her TMJ pain at 2, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 3, diet at 2, and disability at 1.  She gets headaches about a level of 4 in the frontal and temporal area.  Her headaches occur about 3 to 4 times per month.  There is a history in the family of headaches similar to Cambria’s headaches.

In frontal view, Cambria has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is 18 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 5 mm.  The maxillary midline may be about 1 mm to the right of the facial midline, but the mandibular dental midline is 2 mm to the left.  Chin may 2 or 3 mm to the right.  Nose tip is about 2 mm off to the right side.  Lower dental midline and chin are just slightly off from each other with the mandibular dental midline being a little bit to the left of the chin midline.  In profile, maxilla and upper lip appear to be retruded about 4 or 5 mm and chin appears to be retruded about 15 mm.  The chin neckline is short and the chin neck angle is not defined.  She has C-shaped curve to the upper lip.  She appears to be slightly over closed vertically.  Brie (her preferred name) has a transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being 4 mm shorter vertically then the left side.  The maxillary and mandibular arches appear to be relatively symmetric anteroposteriorly.  She is a full Class II cuspid relationship on the left side, but Class I on the right side.  As Brie opens her jaws, she does shift towards the left side probably about 3 to 4 mm.  The inferior border of the right side is about 5 to 6 mm higher than the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear mild to moderately enlarged.  She has about a 3 mm vertical over bite.  She may have just 2 to 3 mm of increased fullness in the ramus area on the right side as compared to the left side.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  The maximal incisal opening is 47 mm, opening without pain 39 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 8 mm, to the left 6 mm.

Basic diagnoses for Brie would be follows:

Bilateral TMJ juvenile rheumatoid arthritis but much further advanced on the right side compared to the left side.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia as well as asymmetry with the right side being 4 mm shorter vertically at the cuspid level.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and transverse asymmetry with the right side being 4 mm shorter than the left side at the cuspid area and 10 to 12 mm vertically shorter at the inferior border. 
Class I cuspid relationship on the right side, Class II cuspid relatively on the left side.  
Mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.
Over angulation of lower anterior teeth.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
High occlusal plane angle.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 			removing 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower incisors 			any further forward. 
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ total joint prostheses.
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	c.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
	d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance in a counterclockwise direction 		and level it transversely.
	e.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the chin forward.
	f.	Left mandibular inferior border ostectomy to establish normal vertical 			height of the mandible.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
 