HAYDEN KEYS								12/10/2009

Hayden is 14 years old  and referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich, 3105 Legacy, Suite A, Plano, Texas 75023.  Primary concerns he has are as follows:

1.	Jaws are out of alignment.
2.	Only his very back teeth touch and all other teeth do not fit together.
3.	Difficulties eating and chewing.
4.	Difficulties breathing particularly through his nose.
5.	Snoring.
6.	Daytime tiredness. 

Hayden was not aware of having clicking and popping in his jaw joints until he saw Dr. Goldreich who identified it and Hayden is now aware of it.  Date of onset is unknown and etiology is unknown.  Hayden takes no medications.  He has no headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain.  He rates his jaw function, diet, and disability at 0.  He has no problems with earaches, vertigo, nor hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  He does have at least moderate snoring at night.  He has mild daytime somnolence, but is not aware of sleep apnea.  He sleeps pretty well at night.  He is predominantly a mouth breather, particularly at night.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Hayden has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.  Maxillary midline is 1 mm to the left, mandibular dental midline 2 mm to the left, and chin is probably 4 to 5 mm to the left.  In profile view, Hayden has AP maxillary deficiency of probably approximately 6-8 mm at the incisor edge.  Upper lip supralabrale is probably a good 3 mm posterior to subnasale.  He has an obtuse nasolabial angle.  Chin is probably about 20 mm AP deficient.  Chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  He has a lip incompetence of probably about 6 mm.  Intraorally, Hayden has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has some significant crowding of the lower anterior arch of probably about 4-5 mm.  He has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he is missing probably the first bicuspids, but has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has a high arched palate.  He occludes predominantly on his second molars and bilaterally the rest of his teeth are out of occlusion.  He has about an 8-mm anterior open bite.  He has very close to a Class I cuspid relationship.  The maxillary arch is fairly level transversely, but the lower arch is lower on the right side in the cuspid area probably by almost 2 mm compared to the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy.  However, the faucial pillars are extremely constricted probably contributing significantly to his airway issues.  Tonsils are just mildly enlarged.  Intranasally, the septum appears to be deviated significantly off towards the left side.  Turbinate on the right side is quite large and on the left side at least anteriorly it appears a little bit more normal in size.  There is probably some moderate airway obstruction.  He does have bilateral posterior cross bites.  To palpation, he has some tenderness over the retromandibular areas.  On excursion, he has popping in the left TMJ that is audible, but the right side is fairly smooth.  Maximum opening is 41 mm and excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.  Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are aligned with each other when the occlusal cant is taken into consideration.  Hayden has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.  He has an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch with the incisors being probably a good 3 mm elevated compared to the more posterior teeth.  The second molars are intruded in the upper arch because of the occlusal relationship.  The transverse discrepancy of the maxilla is approximately 12 mm.  The mandibular second molars are tipped significantly lingually.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a high occlusal plane angle in the mandible.  The maxillary occlusal plane angle looks more normal.  He occludes only on the second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion.  He has got about a 9 mm anterior open bite.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is about 3.5 mm and at the base of the tongue about 4 mm.  The maxilla appears AP retruded as does the mandible.  

Coronal view shows that he has a hypertrophied inferior turbinate on the right side and also enlarged middle turbinate on the right side.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Coronal view does show that he has significant transverse maxillary hypoplasia. 

Axial view shows that he has enlarged turbinates on the right side, but the left side does not look so bad.  The septum is a little bit deviated off towards the left side back in the bony area and the anterior cartilage in the septum is deviated significantly off to the left side and almost touches the lateral nasal wall.  

Coronal TMJ tomograms on the left side show that he has deformed condyle with the lateral pole probably 4-5 mm higher than the medial pole.  Joint space does not look too bad.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  The condyle does have an unusual shape to it. 

Right TMJ condyle has a little bit more normal morphology.  Joint space however appears somewhat decreased compared to the opposite side.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows that the condylar head and neck appear somewhat short in length.  The condyle looks a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly.  However, joint space looks fairly good.  The articular eminence is moderately steep and somewhat elongated.  The condyle does appear a little bit arthritic towards the medial side.  

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle with a little better morphology.  Condylar head and neck are somewhat longer on this side, but not too significant.  Joint space looks reasonably good except towards the lateral aspect of the joint it appears a little bit narrow.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination and is somewhat elongated.  

Panorex radiograph shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  The rest of the teeth are present and appear healthy.  The left condyle and neck appear a  little bit shorter than the right side.  

Diagnoses for Hayden would be as follows:

1.	Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
2.	Rule out right TMJ condylar hyperplasia.
3.	Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia.
4.	Mandibular AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
5.	Anterior open bite of 9 mm.
6.	Bilateral posterior cross bites.
7.	Missing maxillary first bicuspids due to previous extractions.
8.	Class I cuspid but Class II molar relationship.
9.	Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal AP 	dimension 11 mm).
10.	High occlusal plane angle in the mandibular arch at 25 degrees (normal 8 
            degrees).
11.	Crowding in the lower anterior arch. 
12.	Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.
13.	Hypertrophied right turbinate. 
14.	Severely deviated nasal septum off to the left side blocking the left nasal airway.
15.	Significant constricture of the posterior faucial pillars.
16.	Impacted third molars x4.
17.	Occluding only on the left and right second molars with all other teeth out of 	occlusion. 
18.	Transverse cant in the mandibular occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm 	lower than right side.  The upper arch is fairly level.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  	MRI of left and right TMJs.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.     Align and level the maxillary arch.  Place brackets on all the teeth including 		        the second molars, but incorporate the 2nd  molars in the arch 		         
                    wire.  Open up 1 mm of space between the upper laterals and cuspids.  Tip 		        lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for 		        interdental osteotomies.  		.
	b.    Align and level mandibular arch.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor 	and consider any other TMJ work necessary following acquisition 			of MRI.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction. 
	 c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and expand it 			approximately 12 mm.  
	d.	Right inferior turbinectomy.
	e.	Nasal septoplasty.   
	f.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4.
	g.	Reconstruction of the bilateral posterior faucial pillars.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
5.	Restorative dentistry to build up the lateral incisor or centrals depending on the 	restorative dentist’s preference.