GHADA KHALLAF									12/06/2006

Ghada is 37 years old.  She is in good health with no major medical problems.  She smokes about 20 cigarettes a day and she has been doing that for about 20 years.  She does not take any medications.  She is not allergic to anything.  The primary concern that Ghada has is that she has undergone a lot of facial changes.  In 2002 she sought treatment to try and get her dental midlines aligned better.  She has had orthodontics for about 2 years.  Four bicuspids apparently had been extracted.  This treatment has caused some facial changes for her where she feels as though her lips have moved backwards from where they were originally and she still has the asymmetry in the midlines.  Basically she feels as if she has lost the fullness in her lips and still has some of the asymmetry.  

Upper lip length is 21 mm.  Tooth-to-lip relationship is 0.  Maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to the left.  Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the right.  The chin is probably about 3 mm off to the right.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned to each other.  In profile view, she does have some fullness to her lips but apparently not as much as it used to be there.  Upper lip subnasale may be just slightly retruded.  Upper lip supralabrale is probably about 4 mm anterior to subnasale.  The chin appears slightly AP deficient.  AP position of the chin may be just slightly retruded.  Intraorally, she has an implant bilaterally in the lower arch in the first bicuspid area.  The rest of the teeth are present back through the third molars.  In the upper arch she is missing the right first bicuspid.  On the left side she has a bicuspid probably on an implant.  There is an implant in the right first bicuspid area but it has not been built up yet.  Occlusion appears to be off somewhat.  She is a little bit Class III on the left side by 1 to 2 mm and on the right side she is a Class II by probably 3 to 4 mm.  She may have a tooth size discrepancy.  Slight accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch and perhaps in the upper arch also.  In the left side in the first molar area she is probably a good 3 mm Class III.  In the lower arch, the left cuspid may be about 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  In the upper arch, the left cuspid is probably 1 mm or 2 posterior to the right cuspid.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  She has an overbite of about 1 mm.  To palpation, she has virtually no discomfort around the head and neck area.  A little bit of tenderness in the back of her neck but she thinks that is because of the way she slept and it is not usually tender there.  

She does not wear her splint at night.  She gets headaches and discomfort in her jaws.  She states that about 5 years ago someone did something bad to her that hurt her feelings and she developed an abnormal head movement where she sort of dips her head in a rhythmic fashion.  She notices it mostly when she tries to drink somewhat. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 first bicuspids but with osseointegrated implants in position.  The upper right implant lacks a superstructure yet.  Sinuses are clear.  Third molars are absent in the upper arch.  The condyles appear a little bit flattened on the anterior aspect but not too bad.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are fairly clear.  Nasal airway looks reasonably good.  A little bit more obstruction on the right side as compared to the left side.  The septum looks straight.  

GHADA KHALLAF				12/06/2006				Page 2


Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  There appears to be increased anterior and vertical joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  The condyle does appear to be pushed back against the posterior wall and probably related to the long-term probable Class III elastics she probably wore on that side. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Superior and anterior joint spaces appear increased.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  However, there is a significantly decreased posterior joint space between the condylar head and posterior wall of the fossa.  On opening there is good translation of both joints.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a little bit of an overjet of probably 1 mm or 2 and probably less than a mm of vertical overbite.  She appears to have a skeletal Class II relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway shows an opening of about almost 8 mm at the soft palate level and about 11 mm at the base of the tongue.  Intraorally, the oropharyngeal tissues look healthy and soft palate, uvula and faucial pillars all look relatively normal.  Intranasally the septum is deviated a little bit of too the right side.  Turbinates appear moderate in size thus causing some decreased airway perhaps on the right side.  She does have some significant constricture of the luminal valves particularly on the right side more than the left.  Holding her nose open did help her breathe a little bit easier. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Maxillary asymmetry with the midline and occlusion shifted towards the left side. 
Slight AP maxillary deficiency.
Slight Class III end-on occlusion on the left side and end-on Class II occlusion on the right side. 
Missing all 4 first bicuspids with replacements using osseointegrated dental implants. 
Condyles positioned posteriorly in the fossas.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
MRI of left and right TMJs. 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla slightly and rotate it back to the facial midline advancing the left side. 
Bilateral mandibular sagittal split osteotomies to advance the mandible. 
TMJ surgery if indicated from the MRI evaluation.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Prosthetics to finalize the occlusion. 
