NIOUSH KHOSROWYAR								07/17/2010

Nioush is 18 years old and referred by Dr. George Adams and Dr. Nowri who is her uncle.  His cell phone # is 972-333-1424 and work # is 972-733-0106.  Nioush has been in orthodontics for about 2-1/2 years and just had the braces taken off yesterday by Dr. George Adams.  By history, she has no problems with headaches, TMJ problems, myofascial pain except for some pain in her left shoulder area.  She takes no medications.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  She does have some problems occasionally with her hip joints and her neck.  She is aware of nocturnal clenching and sometimes during the day as well. 

Primary concerns that Nioush has include the following:

Upper teeth are over angulated.
Some facial asymmetry with increased fullness transversely on the right side of the face and also perhaps vertically on the right side of the face as well.
Right eye is lower than the left eye.

In frontal view, Nioush has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face with just some slight vertical imbalance of the eyes with the left eye about 2 to 3 mm lower than the right side.  The nasal tip is deviated to the right side about 3 mm.  The maxillary incisors are about at least 2 mm to the right.  The mandibular dental midline is about 2 to 3 mm to the right and the chin is about 6 mm to the right.  Upper lip length is about 15 mm, upper tooth lip relationship is 1 mm.  In profile, upper lip is a little bit retruded at subnasale about 3 to 4 mm.  She has basically a Class I occlusion with a 2 mm overbite relationship.  The maxillary incisors appear over angulated.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal.  Intranasally, the right turbinate is enlarged some.  She reports no problems with snoring, although she says she does whistle when she sleeps.  She has mild daytime somnolence, but no sleep apnea.  She sleeps well and she feels she breathes mainly through her nose when she sleeps.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Incisor opening is 48 mm.  The excursion movements are about 7 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the four third molars, but all other teeth are present.  The sinuses look reasonably clear.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are fairly clear with just a slight increased thickness of the sinus membrane on the lateral aspect of the sinus.  Right inferior turbinate appears quite large and appears to be obstructive in the nasal cavity.

Axial view shows that the right turbinate is enlarged and seems to obstruct most of the airway on that side, but the left turbinate appears more normal.  The right sinus demonstrates some swelling of the sinus membrane on the lateral aspect of the sinus wall and a little bit on the anterior wall.

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The joint space may be a little bit narrow superiorly and posteriorly.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow.

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The joint space seems to be greater on this side than the opposite side.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that could be slightly larger than the right side.  The joint space is decreased vertically.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The joint space is decreased more at the lateral aspect of the joint than elsewhere.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has maxillary and mandibular vertical hypoplasia.  Oropharyngeal airway looks very good.  Upper incisors and to a lesser extent the lower incisors appear somewhat over angulated.  Right commissure is about 2 to 3 mm higher than the left commissure.  The grandmother apparently has facial asymmetry as well.  

Basic diagnoses for Nioush would be as follows:  

Anterior vertical and posterior right vertical hypoplasia and asymmetry.  
Anterior and right posterior vertical hypoplasia. 
Rule out left condylar hyperplasia versus osteochondroma/osteoma.
Over angulated maxillary and mandibular anterior teeth.
Transverse facial asymmetry with the maxillary midline shifted 2 mm to the right, mandibular dental midline shifted 2.5 mm to the right, and chin deviated 6 mm to the right, and nose deviated 3 mm to the right.
Orbital dystopia with the left orbit and eyebrow 2 to 3 mm lower than the left.  
Hypertrophied right nasal turbinate. 
Decreased left TMJ joint space with a need to rule out TMJ pathology.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm. 
External nasal deformity.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Consider MRI of left and right TMJs to be sure the joints are healthy.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots 		distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case segmental maxillary 			surgery is indicated. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 			about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract. 
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Maxillary osteotomies to rotate the maxilla back onto the facial midline, down 			graft the right side and upright the incisors. 
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back towards the 			right side and increase the occlusal plane angle.  
	c.	Consider TMJ surgery if indicated from MRI.
	d.	Right nasal turbinectomy.
	e.	External rhinoplasty.
4	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 