ANDREA KIBBE									11-08-04

Andrea is 52 years old. She was referred by Dr. Tadlock in Fort Worth. 

Patient History

Andrea has had previous orthodontics with Dr. Leward Fish and had surgery on what appears to be the anterior and mandibular anterior dentoalveolus with extraction of the first bicuspids and posterior repositioning of the dentoalveolus. The surgery was done in 09/1982. She seemed to do well for quite some time until she felt that the bone started to re-grow in the anterior maxillary area. It creates more of a visual problem for her and does not seem to be related to any kind of pain type of problem. She had a bridge in the upper right side supported by two teeth, and she eventually lost those teeth and the bridge. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. The only joint that bothers her is her left knee. There are no headache problems and no TMJ problems that she is aware of. 

Her primary concerns are:  1.  Excessive fullness in the upper jaw and lip  
                  2.  Excessive bone growth around upper jaw area
Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Andrea has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 30 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -5 mm. Mandibular dental midline and chin are pretty close to being on the facial midline. Maxillary midline may be just slightly to the left. Andrea does have some fullness in the anterior maxillary area. Upper lip supralabrale is probably about 8 mm anterior to subnasale. Chin-neckline is somewhat short. Chin may be just slightly retruded. Lips are full and protrude anterior to the chin by probably about 8 to 10 mm. 

Intraorally, she is missing the lower left first bicuspids and second and third molars. She has a crown on the lower first molar and a cantilever crown off of that molar to replace part of the second molar. On the right side, she is missing the first bicuspid and third molar. In the maxillary arch, she is missing the left first bicuspid and third molar, and on the right side she is missing the right first and second bicuspid and all three molars. She has a partial replacing the bicuspid and first and second molar, except the second molar is just part of the denture base. She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm. Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular left first bicuspid, second and third molar, with a cantilever crown off the first molar to replace part of the second molar. Mandibular right side is missing the first bicuspid and third molar. Maxillary right side is missing the first and second bicuspid and all three molars and on the left side missing the first bicuspid and third molar. There is an interosseous wire in the right paranasal area. The left sinus looks a little bit cloudy compared to the right side. Condyles look reasonable in this view. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear reasonably equal in opacity. Turbinates are moderate in size. A little bit of deviation of the nasal septum. She has no problems breathing through her nose. Maxillary dental midline appears to be to the left of the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline but to a lesser extent.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that seems to have fairly reasonable shape with a little bit of flattening anteriorly. Appears to have good joint space vertically and posteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that looks fairly reasonable in shape, and articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space is a little bit more difficult to identify here but seems to be reasonably well-balanced.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. 

Cephalometrically, she appears to have a little bit of bimaxillary dentoalveolar protrusion. Basically a Class I skeletal and dental relationship. Negative tooth-to-lip relationship is present. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 8 mm at the base of the tongue and about 9 mm at the soft palate level. Andrea has significant problems with snoring. She doesn’t have any particular daytime somnolence. She wakes up occasionally unable to catch her breath or from the snoring. She thinks she is probably more of a mouth breather when she is sleeping. When she does wake up at night, her mouth and throat are usually dry as well as her nose. 

Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged. Septum may be deviated a little bit off toward the left side. Difficult to see back in very far. Nasal floor appears to be somewhat elevated. 

Intraorally, oropharynx appears fairly good. Uvula is moderately hypoplastic. Soft palate may be moderately hypoplastic. Faucial pillars are moderately constricted. 

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary hyperplasia
Vertical maxillary hypoplasia
AP microgenia
Missing maxillary right bicuspids x 2, molars x 3, and maxillary left first bicuspid and third molar, mandibular left first bicuspid, second and third molar, and mandibular right first bicuspid and third molar
Hyperplastic turbinates
Deviated nasal septum off to the left
Nasal airway obstruction
Severe snoring
Predominantly a mouth breather when sleeping

Recommended Treatment

Surgery, Stage I
Maxillary osteotomies to downgraft the maxilla 5 mm and move it backward approximately 4 mm
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to bring the chin forward 5 mm
Partial turbinectomies

Surgery, Stage II
Consider osseointegrated implants to left maxilla
Restorative dentistry to rebuild arches