LYNN KIMBEL									06/04/2007

Lynn is 41 years old and referred by Dr. Stephen Fennell, 600 Oglethorpe Ave., Athens, GA, 30606.  The only surgeries that Lynn has had in the past include TMJ surgeries and orthognathic surgery.  She smokes ½ pack of cigarettes per day and has done this for 15 years. 

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: 
Zanaflex 6 mg t.i.d.
Lortab 10 mg, 1 tablet q.i.d.
Diclofenac 50 mg t.i.d.
BCP.

She has had an adverse reaction to morphine and to Demerol.

Lynn's TMJ problems began when she was a teenager where she had clicking and popping in her joints.  She really did not have any real significant pain problems until about 10 years ago when her symptoms worsened and then got quite severe.  Etiology is unknown.  She did have orthodontics when she was a young teenager.  In 1997 to the present time she has had 12 different splints that have been constructed without success.  In 2003, she had TMJ surgery that included discectomies and temporal-fascia flaps performed bilaterally.  She then began orthodontic treatment in 2004 and in 2004 she also had her mandible advanced.  Her orthodontic appliances were removed in 2005.  In addition she has had physical therapy treatment and pain management.

Lynn rates her TMJ pain level at a level of 8, headaches at a level of 7 that are throughout the head but can escalate to a level of 10 two to three times per week.  These severe headaches can cause nausea and vomiting.  She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 7 and disability at 7.  She gets occasional earaches but has continuous tinnitus.  The only other joints that really bother her are her neck.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and daytime. 

In frontal view, Lynn has fairly good facial symmetry.  She has some slight increased fullness on the left side compared to the right side.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about –1 to 2 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, she does have some slight AP maxillary deficiency of about 2 mm.  The mandible appears to be retruded by probably a good 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is extremely short and chin-neck angle is anterior but reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, Lynn has all her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.  There is a small area of lack of attached gingiva around the left central incisor.  In the upper arch, Lynn has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class II end cuspid relationship by about 1 to 2 mm.  She has about ½ mm vertical overbite.  She has about a 2 to 3 mm overjet.  She hits predominately on the second molars.  Transverse occlusal plane is level.  She has had such a traumatic occlusion that recently she fractured the upper left second molar and had to have a crown placed on that tooth.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear normal in size and the septum is reasonably straight.  There does not appear to be any nasal airway obstruction at least that can be seen anteriorly.  Uvula and soft palate may be a little bit elongated but faucial pillars look relatively normal.  She has moderate to severe snoring.  
LYNN KIMBEL				06/04/2007				Page 2

She has moderate daytime somnolence .  Her husband states that he has observed her holding her breath sometimes for 15 to 20 seconds and then gasps for air.  She apparently does not sleep well.  She usually ends up having to take a nap when she gets home from work.  To palpation, she has some moderate pain over the left TMJ, left styloid area and milder pain over the temporalis, left masseter, left SCM.  Maximal incisal opening is 45 mm and she opened to about 36 without significant pain.  Excursive movements are about 5 mm in each direction. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of bone plates in the mandible with 6 screws in each plate bilateral.  She has a crown on the maxillary left second molar.  Sinuses appear relatively clear though there could be a little mucocele in the left maxillary sinus.  

In bilateral TMJs, the condyles appear severely arthritic with significant resorption.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear.  She has a septal spur off the septum extending into the left side of the nose back in the bony septal area and it appears to come fairly close to touching the lateral wall and does impinge into the turbinate.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a joint with severe arthritis and decreased joint space.

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle that is severely arthritic and postured slightly forward in the fossa and significantly degenerated.  Articular eminence is relatively flat.  Moderate translation of both condyles on opening.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm at the soft palate level and about 7 mm at the base of the tongue.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ severe rheumatoid arthritis.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Anterior open bite tendency.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Sleep apnea symptoms.
Large nasal septal spur off to the left side partially blocking the airway.
 Occluding predominately on the second molars.  





LYNN KIMBEL				06/04/2007				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Medications.
a.  Klonopin 1 mg tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s.  Consider ½ tablet once or twice during the day to help control clenching.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Be sure to keep lateral incisor roots tipped forward and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and decrease the occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral mandibular coronoidectomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Nasoseptoplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
