MARTHA KENNEY									07/28/2009

Martha is 77 years old and referred by Dr. Allison Hedeen-Sibley, 3434 Swiss Avenue, Suite 100, Dallas, TX  75204.

Martha developed TMJ problems when she was about 60 years of age in about 1992.  She subsequently was treated by Dr. Miles Poor with right TMJ arthroscopy.  Since that time, she has actually done fairly well and only within the last 6 months did she start to develop some significant pain again.  It first affected both sides, but now it has settled primarily in the right side.  Martha rates her current headaches at about a level of 9 and they occur on the right side in the frontal, temporal, and on top of the head.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 5, diet at 5, disability at 7.  She gets right-sided earaches, occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss.  The only other joint that bothers her is at the base of her right thumb.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. 

She takes the following medications:

Benicar HCT 40 mg/25 mg.
Simvastatin 80 mg.
Metoclopramide 10 mg q.d.
Ropinirole 0.75 mg q.h.s.
Hydrocodone 7.5/325 p.r.n., but usually two per day. 
One A Day vitamins.
Aspirin 81 mg q.d.
Calcium citrate.
Vitamin B complex. 
Tylenol.
Omega fish oil. 
Benadryl.
Miralax.
Pepcid AC.

The only previous surgery she has had besides the TMJ surgery was in 1995 she had neuromas removed from both feet and in 2006 she had a diaphragmatic hernia repair.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Martha has good facial symmetry and balance.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is probably about -2 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much aligned to each other.  In profile, she has reasonably good balance.  Intraorally, Martha has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has good attached gingiva, although there is some inflammation around some of the teeth.  In the upper arch, she has a partial denture replacing the cuspid and bicuspids on the right side.  She has all of her teeth on the left side.  She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with about a 2-mm overbite.  Her oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively healthy.  Soft palate may be moderately elongated.  Fascial pillars may be slightly constricted.  She does not appear to have any nasal airway obstruction.  She is predominantly a nasal breather.  To palpation, Martha has moderate pain over the temporalis muscles and very minimal discomfort over the right TMJ, right posterior neck and right shoulder area.  With jaw function, she has audible crepitation in both joints.  Maximal incisal opening is 39 mm and opening without significant pain about 30 mm.  Excursion movement to the right was about 4 mm, to the left about 6 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the maxillary right cuspid, first and second bicuspid, and the maxillary left second and third molar.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  Turbinates appear relatively normal in size and bony septum appears fairly straight.  It is difficult to evaluate the TMJs.  
Coronal view shows that the turbinates are relatively normal in size with what appears to be good airway.  Sinuses appear clear.    
Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are relatively normal in size and septum is reasonably straight.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows condyle that is postured a little bit forward in the fossa with an increased vertical joint space, but decreased anterior joint space.  There are some degenerative changes in the condylar head with some small osteophytes and also a pseudocyst in the head of the condyle.  There also appears to be some pseudocyst in the articular eminence as well.  The fossa itself is quite small in anteroposterior width.  Some anterior beaking is present.   
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that also appears large for the size of the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderate in inclination.  There is increased superior joint space and decreased anterior joint space.  There is significant beaking of the condyle.  Posterior joint space also appears decreased.  Fossa appears quite small relative to the size of the condyle.  There are arthritic changes in the condyle, but does not appear to be quite as progressed as the left side.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a skeletal Class I and occlusal Class I occlusion in jaw relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway appears a little bit constricted at the soft palate level in AP dimension of about 3 to 4 mm and at the base of the tongue the AP dimension is 10 mm.  The soft palate looks a little bit elongated.  

The coronal tomogram of left TMJ shows a condyle with arthritic changes on top and a pseudocyst in it.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  Lateral rim curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm.  There is increased vertical joint space over most of the condyle, but decreased at the lateral aspect of the joint. 
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There are some degenerative changes associated with it.  Joint space in the center part appears fairly well balanced, but there is decreased joint space at the medial and lateral aspects of the fossa.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. 
Basic diagnoses for Martha would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis. 
Bilateral TMJ pain. 
Myofascial pain affecting predominantly the temporalis muscles. 
Headaches 
Missing maxillary right cuspid, first bicuspid and second bicuspid replaced with a partial denture.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Medical management with the use of anti-inflammatory medications, if tolerated.
Consider TMJ occlusal splint therapy to try to decrease symptomatology. 
If the above measures do not alleviate the pain, then proceed on with surgery. 
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
