CINDY LOU KIBBE									04/06/2009

Cindy Lou is 48 years old, referred by Dr. Edward Gray, 1516 Virginia Ranch Road, #1A, Gardnerville, NV 89410.  Primary concerns that Cindy Lou has includes the following:

Inability to open the mouth to eat. 
Nutritional complications secondary to liquid diet.
Pain.
Getting worn down with pain and difficulty eating.
Effects on her ear, eye, and now possibly related Bell’s palsy.

Previous history relative to her TMJs include braces at age 9 to 16 from 1969 to 1976.  She had a retainer at age 19.  

Her accident was in October 1989 when she was 29 years old.  An 18-wheeler ran over her car ay apparently crushed it.  The driver of the truck kept going and it was a hit and run accident.  They never identified the driver, but the truck ran over the back of the car and pushed her face forward into the steering wheel.  Her jaws were wired together after the accident as she had some fractures around her orbits and her mandible apparently.  It was not until February 1990 that they took her to surgery and reconstructed the orbits and the lower jaw.  She apparently had some subcondylar fractures that caused dislocation of the condyles.  She apparently during that operation also had the bilateral temporalis fascial flaps to reconstruct the joints.  They apparently advanced the mandible forward at that same time.  She subsequently had arthroscopies in March 1990 and June 1990.  With the big surgery on February 14, 2009, she also had a chin implant and four plates with 27 screws placed apparently up around the orbital area.  From 1991 to 1997, she had removal of the some her plates and 20 screws and in addition arthroplasties on the joints bilaterally to try to release some of the scar tissue.  She did fairly well until March 9 when she developed severe pain and significant dysfunction of her jaws.  In the chart is a list of all Cindy Lou’s other surgeries that she has had. 

Cindy Lou rates her TMJ pain at a level of 9 and average daily pain is about 7.  She gets headaches at about a level of 8 predominantly on the right side in the frontal and temporal area and behind her eye.  She also gets pain down through her right neck and shoulder area.  She rates her jaw function at about 9 to 10.  She is basically on a liquid diet so her diet is at 10, and her disability is on average about a level of 9.  It is getting more difficult for Cindy Lou to even swallow.  She is losing weight at about an average of 5 to 6 pounds per week.  She is getting some significant dizziness.  She gets earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo, more prominent on the right side as compared to the left side.  She, however, is now beginning to develop some left-sided symptoms as well.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing of her teeth.  She has some numbness that she is now developing in her right cheek area.  She seems to have a fairly reasonable facial nerve function at this point in time, although there could be just very slight decreased function on the right side.  It is difficult to tell if that is related to Bell’s palsy or just to the significant pain on that side.

Cindy Lou currently takes the following medications:

Synthroid 300 mg per day. 
Premarin 0.9 mg per day.
Vitamin B12, vitamin D and a multivitamin. 
Ambien 10 mg p.r.n. sleep.
Soma 350 mg 4 times per day p.r.n. muscle pain.
Lortab elixir 2 to 4 tsp. q. 4 to 6 hours p.r.n. pain.
Promethazine 25 mg q.4 to 6 hours p.r.n. nausea.
Acyclovir 400 mg q.i.d.
Clindamycin 450 mg q.i.d.

The acyclovir and Clindamycin were given to her in case there was a possible Bell’s palsy developing.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Cindy Lou has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are fairly well aligned with each other.  In profile, she may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency, and the chin may be retruded about 8 to 10 mm.  Chin neckline is not defined.  Cindy Lou is missing the mandibular left first molar and probably the third molar with the second molar drifted forward into almost in the first molar position.  On the left side, she is missing the mandibular second and third molar.  In the upper arch, she is missing the second bicuspid and second and third molar, and on the right side she is missing the bicuspids.  To palpation, Cindy Lou has severe pain over the right temporalis, masseter, TMJ, and styloid area, moderate to high moderate pain over the shoulders, right posterior neck, right SCM.  She does have a slight Class II end-on occlusion on the right side and close to a Class I on the left side.  Maximum incisal opening is 15 mm, but only about 5 mm without pain.  Excursion movement to the right was 5 mm, to the left 2 mm.  She does have a history of snoring, but does not claim any problems with daytime somnolence or sleep apnea issues.  Intranasally, turbinates are relatively normal in size and, in fact, look small.  She does have a huge septal perforation that is probably at least 15 x 20 mm. 

I-CAT EVALUATION.  Panorex view shows the absence of the maxillary left second bicuspid, second and third molar, maxillary right bicuspid and third molar, mandibular right first molar and third molar as well as the two central incisors and the left second and third molar.  There is some periapical pathology around the mandibular right second molar and mandibular left first molar.  She has got four bone screws in the ramus of the left mandible and three bone screws in the ramus of the right mandible.  Both joints look severely arthritic.  Sinuses look relatively clear.   
Coronal view shows her turbinates are actually moderate in size more posteriorly and the sinuses are clear.  There is a large perforation present in the septum.  
Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  
Right TMJ sagittal view shows severe arthritic changes with anterior beaking and decreased joint space and bone-on-bone contact.  
Left joint shows even a more severely condyle with anterior beaking and areas of erosion and decreased joint space and should be pretty close to having bone-on-bone contact in some areas.  
Coronal view of the right joint shows the lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly significantly almost 8 to 10 mm.  There is bone-on-bone contact through a good portion of the joint.  The condyle is very small mediolaterally.  There are degenerative changes in the fossa as well as in the condyle.  
In the left TMJ, there are severe degenerative changes as well.  The condylar head is a little bit broader mediolaterally.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly significantly.  There is decreased vertical joint space, and it appears that it could be bone-on-bone contact.  Both joints exhibit advanced osteoarthritic changes.  
Lateral cephalometric radiographs show that Cindy Lou has a significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension at the soft palate level of about 5 mm and at the base of the tongue about 5 mm as well.  

Basic diagnoses for Cindy Lou would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis secondary to previous trauma.
AP and posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Sleep apnea.
Severe pain. 
Severe masticatory dysfunction.
Probable periapical abscess around the mandibular right molar and possibly the mandibular left molar.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Extracting mandibular right first molar if periapical abscess can be confirmed.
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral coronoidotomies. 
Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.
Extensive dental reconstruction to include implants and crowns.  

Cindy Lou states the following additional problems:

Currently taking in liquids and cannot eat or chew at all.
She is losing approximately 5 pounds per week due to malnutrition. 
She is extremely tired during the day. 
Difficulties swallowing likely due to the significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Severe TMJ and jaw pain, being worse on the right side than the left side.
Right-sided headaches.
Severe myofascial pain, particularly on the right side.
Approaching total disability. 
