NAZIK KEMALEDDINE								06/28/2010

She is 59 years and 9 months of age.  Her surgery date was February 1, 2000.  Her condition is getting progressively worse.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 9, jaw function 8, diet 9, disability 7, headaches 9 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area bilaterally.  The incisal opening is 13 mm.  Excursion movements are about 1 mm in each direction.  She is on the following medications:

Talwin 5 to 6 tablets per day.
Aldactone 50 mg q.d.
Pentaloc p.r.n. 
Bascopan p.r.n. 
Senokot p.r.n. 
Dulcolax p.r.n. 
Scheduled Botox injections.
Voltaren cream.
Celebrex 100 mg q.d.
Flexeril 10 mg p.r.n. 

She has increased level of earaches and continues with tinnitus, vertigo, and hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her neck, left hip, left knee, right shoulder, feet, left hand and fingers.  She has gingival recession secondary to previous jaw surgeries.  She was involved in an MVA May 10, 2009, and sustained a fractured right arm, an injury to her right shoulder, left foot, and ankle with subsequently developed frozen right shoulder.  She has significant problems with nausea and metal hypersensitivities to chromium, cobalt, nickel, and aluminum.  She also has osteoporosis.  She maintains a 7 mm anterior open bite and transverse collapse of the maxillary arch.  

Diagnoses are as follows:

Hypersensitivity to materials in prostheses including chromium, cobalt, nickel, and aluminum.  
Generalized periodontal disease with gingival recession.
Significant dental mal-alignment secondary to previous surgeries requiring the use of arch bars.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe myofascial pain. 
Severe headaches.
Anterior open bite of 7 mm.
Maxillary transverse hypoplasia and posterior vertical hyperplasia.
Severe masticatory dysfunction. 
Severe jaw dysfunction with incisal opening of 13 mm (normal incisal opening is 45 mm).

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Periodontal surgery to correct the periodontal disease and gingival retraction.
2.	Orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch. 
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral removal of TMJ Concepts mandibular components.
	b.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular counterclockwise advancement with 		custom-made mandibular prosthetic components of pure titanium (this will 			eliminate the chromium, cobalt, nickel, and aluminum materials).
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the posterior aspect superiorly and close 
                        the open bite.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
5.	Restorative dentistry as necessary to finalize her bite relationship.