SHERANNE KEMME									07-21-04

Sheranne is 42 years old and referred by Dr. William M. Hang, Westlake Blvd., #202, Westlake Village, CA  91362.

Patient History

She has had insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus since the age of 14 years. She had tonsils and adenoids done at the age of 8 years, breast augmentations at 25 years of age, C-section at 32 years of age, and dental implants at 30 years. She is in good health except for the diabetes. 

Patient Concerns

Severe headaches
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Difficulties eating and chewing
Severe snoring
Sleep apnea symptoms 
Extreme daytime tiredness
Progressive retrusion of her lower jaw

Current Medications

Insulin R Humalog 6 to 12 units per day.
Insulin NPH Humalin 14 to 22 units per day.
Accupril 20 mg at bedtime.
Lasix 40 mg at bedtime.

Allergies

She had a severe rash to penicillin at the age of 11. Sheranne has problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, she has problems with vertigo and hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her shoulders, elbows, right thumb, and left hip. She has significant problems with snoring. I am not sure if she clenches or bruxes her teeth. She gets headaches two to three times a week that she rates about a level of 8 in the frontal and temporal area with the right side being a little bit worse than the left side. She rates her TMJ pain at 8, overall average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 7, diet at 7, and disability at 7.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Sheranne has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 to 4 mm. Maxillary dental midline is shifted to the left probably 2 mm. Mandibular dental midline also is 2 mm to the left as is the chin.

In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Could be just slightly AP deficient at subnasale by maybe 2 to 3 mm. Chin is AP deficient by probably 15 to 18 mm. She has a relatively high mandibular plane angle but not too bad. Chin-neckline is somewhat short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, she has full dental reconstruction done with multiple implants, and she has the same thing in the upper arch. Will need the x-rays to determine which are her natural teeth and which are the implants. Based on the teeth she currently has, she has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side and left side. She has about a 2-mm vertical overbite. Has a crossbite tendency posteriorly on the right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy. Faucial pillars might be a little bit constricted and may be posteriorly positioned. Uvula and soft palate length look relatively normal. However, the distance from the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall appears decreased.

Turbinates are moderately hyperplastic, particularly the left side being larger than the right side and perhaps providing some constricture. Sheranne states that she is predominantly a mouth breather, particularly when she sleeps.

To palpation, she has rather severe pain over the right temporalis and high moderate to severe pain over the right masseter, bilateral SCMs, left styloid area, and moderate pain over the left temporalis, masseter, right styloid area, right TMJ, and high moderate to severe pain to palpation over the left TMJ. Incisal opening maximum is 46 mm but only 30 mm with reasonable comfort. Excursive movements are 7 mm in each direction. Transversely, there is a cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being probably almost 3 mm lower than the left side.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that she has her anterior six teeth and left second bicuspid and has one implant posteriorly on the left side and three implants on the right side. In the upper arch, she has her four incisors, and on the right side has cuspid, bicuspid, and first molar. On the left side, she has five implants. She has root canals on the mandibular right central, lateral incisor, left cuspid, maxillary left lateral incisor, right lateral incisor, cuspid, and first molar. Sinuses appear clear. Condyles don’t look too bad. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle with some anterior beaking present. Could be some decreased vertical joint space. Could be a little osteophytic formation off the top of the condyle but difficult to tell. On one view, it is hard to identify the cortical bone on top of the condyle. Moderate inclination of the articular eminence. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some significant arthritic changes. A little bit of flattening on the anterior head. Appears to be a little spike extending superiorly from the mid part of the condylar head on one of the views. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Left side seems to have more arthritic changes than the right side. 

On opening, there is some restricted translation on the right TMJ compared to the left side. Appear to be more degenerative changes on the left condyle than the right condyle.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. She has huge frontal sinuses. Turbinates appear moderate in size. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good with the airway to soft palate level measuring about 8 mm and at the base of the tongue about 7 mm. There is some distance between the tongue and the palate. Some hyperfunction of the mentalis muscle. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with apparent reduction
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency and asymmetry
AP mandibular deficiency and asymmetry
Class II end-on occlusion 
Transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being 3 mm higher than the right side
Maxillary dental midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin all shifted 2 mm off to the left side
Missing maxillary left cuspid, bicuspids, molars, right second and third molars, mandibular left first bicuspid and molars as well as the right bicuspids and molars
Multiple osseointegrated implants including the maxillary left quadrant has five implants, mandibular left quadrant has one implant, and mandibular right quadrant has three implants
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction
Predominant mouth breather
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Severe snoring
Sleep apnea symptoms 
Severe daytime somnolence
AP microgenia
Bimaxillary protrusion

Recommended Treatment

Section maxillary prosthesis between the lateral incisors and cuspids to facilitate segmentalization of the maxilla

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction as well as align the chin and dental midline on the facial midline
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the occlusal plane, expand slightly, and upright the incisors
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies

Restorative dentistry to finalize the occlusion
