KARA KEMP									02/07/2011

She is referred by Dr. Frank Stitch, 495 S. Denton Tap Road, Coppell, TX 75019.  Kara is 28 years old, birth date is 06/10/1982.  

HISTOR OF CURRENT CONDITION.  Kara apparently had clicking and popping in her jaw joints even from her teenage years, but relatively asymptomatic.  It was not until 2005 that she had significant onset of pain, headaches, and developed a closed lock situation.  She had orthodontics from the age of 8 to 14 including head gear, and this was performed where she grew up in Maryland.  In 2005, she received a splint and wore that through 2009.  It did help decrease the pain and the headaches, but did not fix the problem.  Her bite has shifted and changed and so the splint does not fit any more and so she has not worn it since 2009.  She does get some massage therapy that helps with the neck and shoulder area.  She gets headaches 2 to 3 times a week at about a level of 5 in the frontal and temporal area and usually wakes up with these in the morning.  Her headaches can escalate to 9.  Her TMJ pain is at 7 and is usually worse in the mornings.  Her average daily pain is at 7, jaw function at 7, diet at 5, and disability at 4.  She does not have any problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  The only joints that may bother her are possibly her hips.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime.  

In frontal view, Kara has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  She does have some fullness in the masseter muscle areas bilaterally probably as a result of the clenching and bruxism.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 6 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  The nasal tip is just slightly off to the right side 1 to 2 mm.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance with the upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  Chin may be a little bit retruded by maybe 8 mm.  She has about 7 mm of lip incompetence.  Chin neckline and angle are moderately defined.  Intraorally, Kara has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has some moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch and has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has an end-on Class II occlusion being about 4 to 5 mm Class II.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  The transverse occlusal plane is fairly level, although may down slightly on the left side 1 mm.  She has had her wisdom teeth removed.  Kara is not aware of snoring at night when she sleeps, she has moderate daytime somnolence.  She is not aware of sleep apnea problems per se, but does wake up frequently at night.  She believes that she probably breathes through her mouth when she sleeps at night.  Oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal and healthy.  Intranasally, it is hard to see the turbinates, but the septum is deviated off towards the left side.  The columella is moderately wide.  Nostrils are narrow particularly on the left side.  Kara has moderate pain over the masseters, TMJs, posterior neck and shoulder areas and mild tenderness over the medial pterygoids.  On opening, joints function relatively smoothly, but in excursion movements she has a palpable click on the right side.  The maximal opening was 25 mm, opening without pain 18 mm.  The excursion movements were 9 mm in each direction.  It appears that if she opens vertically that she has a closed lock situation, but in excursion movements she can reduce the right disc.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has a root canal on the maxillary left central incisor.  The sinuses look reasonably clear.  She has a brachiocephalic mandibular morphology.  Bony septum is fairly straight.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the left side where it fills a good portion of the inferior aspect of the nasal airway.  Sinuses appear clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  There is increased anterior joint space indicative of an anterior displaced disc.  The joint space is decreased posteriorly and superiorly.  A little bit of sclerosis on top of the condyle.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with more sclerosis on top.  The condyle is somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  There is an increased anterior joint space.  The articular eminence has slightly less inclination compared to the opposite side.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows some decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has some slight extrusion of the lateral pole of the condyle.  The joint space may be somewhat decreased, but does not appear to be as significant as the opposite side.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Kara has her head tipped up somewhat.  Oropharyngeal airway looks good.  She has a skeletal and occlusal Class II end-on occlusion. 

Basic diagnoses for Kara would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocations with a closed lock on the right side.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia. 
Maxillary vertical hyperplasia.
Class II occlusion.
Crowding of the lower anterior arch.
Bilateral TMJ pain. 
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Hypertrophied turbinates with nasal airway obstruction. 
Clenching and bruxism.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Medications:  Klonopin to control nocturnal clenching and bruxism.  
2.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
3.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially 			and cuspid roots tipped distally in case interdental osteotomies are 				required.  
	b.	Align and level lower arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 
                        1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them too far forward.  
4.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor (dependent on MRI evaluation).
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly and correct any 			transverse discrepancy.
	c.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
	d.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin. 
	e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

I gave her a prescription for Klonopin 1 mg tablet, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x3.  