SARAH KEMP									09/28/2010

Sarah is 30 years old, birth date 07/21/1980.  She was referred by Dr. Craig O’Donoghue, 1005 Danby Street, Fairbanks, Alaska 99701, and Dr. Hang.  

Sarah’s TMJ problems began when she was about 22 and she feels it was likely due to retraction orthodontics.  She had orthodontics from 1990 to 1995 where she wore head gear and also neck gear.  Her joint problems began actually probably before the age of 22, probably back when she was a teenager.  She had an orthotic appliance in 2005 for about 2 years.  She received a soft night guard in 2008.  She has been receiving massage therapy since about 2007 until current.  She takes no medications.  She rates her headaches at a level of 4 throughout the head, but they seem to start in the temporal area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 4, diet at 2, disability at 4.  She gets occasional earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo, but no hearing loss and no other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime.

On frontal view, Sarah has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5.  The maxillary and mandibular midlines are pretty much on the facial midline.  The chin is shifted a little bit to the left side about 3 mm.  In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably 2 mm.  Sarah is probably about 6 mm AP deficient in the maxilla and probably 15 to 18 mm deficient in the mandible.  The chin neckline is shorter, although the chin neckline is moderately formed.  Intraorally, Sarah has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch, but has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, Sarah has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Sarah is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm.  She has had her wisdom teeth removed.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Sarah has got moderate pain over the masseter muscles, medial pterygoids, retromandibular area and shoulders and milder tenderness over the TMJs and posterior neck area.  Maximum incisal opening is 54 mm, excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Some of the molar roots look somewhat short.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  The right mandibular cuspid has a short root.  

Coronal view shows the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  The septum deviates a little bit off towards the left side in the bony area. 

Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The sinuses are relatively clear.  
Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has fairly good morphology with a little bit of flattening on the anterior head.  The condyle is fairly seated in the fossa.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology, although some flattening on the head and a little bit of anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence is moderately inclined.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The vertical joint space appears somewhat diminished.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 or 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal views show a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is a lateral extension off the lateral pole of the condyle that extends out towards the lateral aspect of the lateral rim.  There is a downward curvature of the lateral rim of about 3 to 3 mm.  There is an indention in the lateral aspect of the condyle.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Sarah has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  The oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 to 5.5 mm at the soft palate level and 7 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnoses for Sarah would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 				counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  