BARBARA KENDRICK								09/26/2007

Barbara is 59 years old referred by Dr. Nancy Massey, 460 Byhalia Road, Hernando, MS 38632.  Barbara has chronic severe migraines, neck and shoulder pain, thyroid disease and depression.  She had sinus surgery at the age of 16 when she was diagnosed with sinus headaches.  At that time she had a deviated septum corrected as well as antrostomies performed.  This did improve her situation but she has continued to live on medications since that time including BC powders through high school and college.  She has tried all the migraine headache medications and narcotics including morphine, demerol etc. in an attempt to control her headaches and this has been unsuccessful for her.  In addition, she has had Botox injections predominately in the temple area and also in the posterior neck and base of the shoulder area and also in the frontal area near the paranasal region as well.  The Botox injections do help her.  Dr. Massey has made a bite splint for Barbara.  This helped her tremendously.  Since July, she has only had four major headaches and has required Maxalt only four times during that timeframe.  Barbara has been told that she has TMJ problems.  Barbara used to get headaches daily but since the splint she has only had 6 headaches.    

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:   
Synthroid 1.25 mg.
Topamax 150 mg.
Lexapro 20 mg.
Lunesta 3. 
Maxalt-MLT 10 mg.
Darvocet 100-650.  

ADDITIONAL SURGERIES:  Appendectomy in 1966, sinus surgery in 1965 and then a hysterectomy in 1975.

Barbara generally wakes up with her headaches when she gets them.  They used to be on a daily basis prior to the splint.  Her headache level would be at a level of 9 beginning in the left temporal area but then going all throughout the head.  She rates her TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 1, diet at 1.  Prior to the splint she rated her disability at about a level of 9.  With her splint her disabilities are at a level of 2.  she has no trough with earaches or tinnitus but gets occasional vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is very much aware of major clenching at night and she clenches sometimes during the day.  Barbara reports moderate snoring.  She has moderate daytime somnolence but not aware of sleep apnea.  She takes Lunesta to help her sleep and without that she does not sleep well at all.  She feels that she is a mouth breather.  In looking at her dental models she seems to have some significant wear.  She has crowns on many of her posterior teeth.  

In frontal and profile view, Barbara has good facial symmetry and balance.  She has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a good Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has had trouble getting her back teeth together since wearing this splint.  It is probably due to some increased thickness of the bilaminar tissue versus intrusion of teeth.  She has about a 3 mm anterior deep bite.  Oropharyngeal areas look healthy.  She has an elongated uvula which may contribute to some of her snoring.  The soft palate maybe a little bit elongated.  Faucial pillars appear relatively normal as do the tonsils.  Intranasally, the septum is a little bit deviated particularly at the base off towards the right side.  Interestingly, the anterior part of the turbinate on the right side appears to have been previously resected but the posterior aspect of the turbinate is still present and seems to be blocking that airway.  On the left side the turbinate appears somewhat enlarged and is blocking the airway.  Holding the nostrils open, Barbara could breathe easier through her nose particularly on the left side.  When Barbara was having the significant problems she felt as though she had arthritis in her face.  This may be related to the chronic and severe clenching problem that she has.  To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the styloid areas, shoulders, moderate pain over the posterior neck, left SCM and moderate pain over the left temporalis muscle.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly though there may have been a little bit of a noise in the left one.  Incisal opening is 44 mm.  Excursive movements are about 7 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows presence of all the teeth except the third molars.  She has crowns in  most of the posterior teeth.  She has root canals on the first and second molars and mandibular right side and first molar on the maxillary right side.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Left condyle appears a little bit smaller than the right condyle.  It appears she had an apicoectomy performed on the mandibular right first molar.  

Waters view shows that she has severe nasoseptal deviation back in the bony area deviated way off to the left side superiorly and then off to the right side at the base.  The left turbinate does not appear quite as large.  The right one is not as readily seen on this particular film.  Sinuses do appear clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Articular eminence has relatively normal inclination.  Joint space appears a little bit thin on the anterior aspect of the condyle but appears good superiorly and posteriorly.  

Left TMJ tomogram is not as quite readable.  It appears as though there is more narrow joint space.  Articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  On opening, there is some restricted translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a skeletal Class I position and a Class I occlusion.  Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted with the airway passage of less than 5 mm at the base of the soft palate.  However, at the base of the tongue it appears to be more round 8 to 9 mm.  Tongue appears to fill the majority of the oral cavity.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Severe nocturnal and daytime clenching.
Severe headaches.
Myositis affecting predominately the temporalis muscles, neck and shoulder muscles.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hyperplastic soft palate and uvula.
Macroglossia. 
Sleep apnea symptoms.
Slight posterior open bit secondary to splint therapy with possible slight increase in thickness of the bilaminar tissues versus slight posterior dental intrusion.
Hypertrophied turbinates and deviated nasal septum. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Medications. 
Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s.  Dosage may need to be adjusted for effectiveness.
Discontinue occlusal splint.
Surgery.
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty with lateral inversion flaps.
Reduction glossectomy.
Nasoseptoplasty. 
Bilateral partial turbinectomies. 

I gave her a prescription for Klonopin 1 mg tablet, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x3. 