DIANA KENNEDY									08/21/2008 

Dena is 58 years old.  Referred by Dr. Jason Pehling, DDS, MS, 211 N. Northgate Way #221, Seattle, WA 98133.  Dena’s problems began when she was 18 years of age due to an illness.  Dena passed out and she fell and struck her chin on a concrete floor with her head hyperextended.  She does not know if she had any fractures or not as no x-rays were taken, but this initiated her joint situation.  She has a closed lock situation that then developed.  In 1969, an orthopedic surgeon removed the right disc.  In 1984, the left joint was operated on with removal of the anterior disc and placement of Vitek IPI implant.  In 1991, the left joint was operated on again with removal of the implant and debridement of the joint.  She has subsequently had 3+ years of orthodontics that was completed in January 2008 .  She originally had some orthodontic treatment as a teenager.  Apparently, she had 4 bicuspids extracted and was treated with retainers that created significant problems for her.  She then had 3 ½ years of orthodontics to reopen up those spaces.  This also helped with her joint area by unlocking it and decreasing the unloading on the joint.  It also opened up her airway and decreased some of her sleep apnea symptoms.  She has not heard of a diagnoses of having sleep apnea, but did have mild snoring problems and does not know if she snores now or not.  In December 2007 and  January 2008, she had 4 steroid iontophoresis treatments performed.  She had splint treatment in 2004, but this worsened her situation.  She was unable to tolerate the splint and may have had a reaction to some of the materials used in the splint. 

Dena takes the  following medications:

Aspirin 81 mg q.d. 
Ibuprofen 600 mg 2 to 3 times per day.
Prilosec OTC 20 mg q.d.
Bupropion XL 150 mg morning and midday.
Gabapentin 300 mg at bedtime. 
Synthroid 0.075 mg q.d.
Loratadine 10 mg q.d.
Aqueous nasal steroid q.d.
Vagifem.
Co-enzyme Q-10 400 mg q.d.

Other medical conditions that Dena has include the following:

Classic and complicated migraines. 
Major depression, but well controlled. 
Atopic allergic rhinitis, eczema, and reactive airways.
Hypothyroidism and hyperprolactinemia. 
Microresponder to medications. 
Possible mitochondrial disorder (MELAS syndrome).
Raynaud disease.
Chronic leukopenia.
Mild increased total cholesterol.
She has degenerative joint disease in her spine, right knee, and probably her hips. 
The primary concerns that Dena has at this time include the following:

Severe left TMJ arthritis and less severe right TMJ arthritis.
Difficulties communicating because of increased pain and muscle spasms and her bite worsens with more jaw function.
Disability insurance hassles. 
Difficulties eating and chewing. 
TMJ pain.
Headaches.  

Dena gets headaches on the left side in the temporal area at about a level of 3, but on the left side she also more commonly gets her classic migraine headaches with only occasional occurrence on the right side.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 8, diet at 7, and disability at 10.  She does develop some paresthesias in the left side of her face predominantly associated with muscle spasms.  She gets occasional earaches on the left side, rarely tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her cervical and lumbar spine as well as her right knee, hips, and occasionally her fingers will flare up. 
  
CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Dena has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  The maxillary midline is maybe just slightly off to the left side and mandibular dental midline maybe just slightly off to the right side.  The chin may be just slightly to the left 1 or 2 mm.  In profile view, Dena has upper lip supralabrale and posterior subnasale.  The upper lip is retruded by probably about a good 4 mm.  The chin is retruded by about  10 to 12 mm.  Intraorally, Dena is the missing mandibular left and right first bicuspids and maxillary left and right first bicuspids, but the spaces have been reopened with her more recent orthodontics.  She appears to have nice spaces.  She is a basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm.  Maxillary arch is fairly level transversely.  The right cuspid is down probably about 1 mm.  Incisal opening maximally is about 30 mm, but 20 mm without much pain.  Excursion movements are about 6 mm in each direction.  Joints function reasonably smoothly, although there is slight crepitus in the right joint.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has crowns on the maxillary left first and second molars, mandibular right first molar, and numerous inlays and other large restorations.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Condyles both appear quite arthritic.  The right condyle appears actually enlarged in size over normal, whereas the left one appears smaller in size.  On the right side, it appears that there has been some bone deposition on the condylar head, whereas on the left side it appears that there has been resorption.   
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that does not appear as large as it does on the Panorex probably due to just the angular position.  The condyle has a bit more normal size in this view.  Articular disc is moderately shallow.  There is decreased joint space.  There is anterior beaking present.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite small in anteroposterior dimension.  There is significantly decreased vertical joint space, but increased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow and virtually no superior joint space.  On opening, there is moderate restricted translation of both joints.  
Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates appear enlarged.  Nasal septum is reasonably straight with perhaps a little bit of a septal spur off the right side.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Dena has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  She has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  A definite difference in her vertical position in the inferior borders of the mandible at the angle area with the left side about 8 mm higher than the right side.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about almost 7 mm at the soft palate level, but somewhat narrower to about 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  Dena does have a head postured forward neck position.  The oropharyngeal airway looks good.  The tissues all look relatively normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear quite large.  Dena does require 2 medications per day to help keep her airway open.  

Basic diagnoses for Dena would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with cranial perforation on the left side.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
High occlusal plane angle. 
Missing all four first bicuspids, but spaces have been reopened. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction. 
TMJ pain.
Headaches.  
Myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Apply appliances to maxillary arch including the second molars.    
Apply appliances to mandibular arch including the second molars.  
Place spacers to maintain the bicuspid spaces in all 4 quadrants.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction  and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posterior. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).  
Bilateral mandible coronoidotomies. 
Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine the occlusion.
4.   Restorative dentistry to replace the missing bicuspids with consideration for implants and crowns versus crown or bridge reconstruction.