HALEY KENNEDY 									04/23/2007

Haley is 17 years old and is referred by Dr. Peter Crump.  Haley became aware of having some jaw joint problems at about the age of 15 of unknown etiology.  Her joints began to click and pop.  Previous history included in the 4th grade that she had a palatal expander placed then sometime after that she had some orthodontic appliances put on for just about 2 weeks.  She had full orthodontics performed at the age of 14 to 16.  Haley has noticed a change in her occlusion and her lower teeth are more posterior now compared to the position of the upper teeth.  She was placed in a splint initially in 2006 but this was ineffective.  She then was referred to Dr. Peter Crump who made her a splint in February of 2007.  This splint does help decrease her pain levels.  She takes Motrin for her pain.

She gets headaches of a more recent onset in the temple area at about a level of 6.  She gets pain in the TMJs at about an average of 7 and average daily pain of 2.  She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 4, disability at 1.  She has no problems with earaches, vertigo or hearing loss but does get occasional tinnitus.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching or bruxing at nighttime.  She is not sure how much she does that now with her new splint.  

In frontal view, Haley has just some slight increased fullness in the right side of the face compared to the left side by maybe 2 to 3 mm.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably 2 mm.  Maxilla and upper lip appear to be retruded by 4 to 6 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded by about 12 to 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is short although the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Vertical facial dimensions appear good.  Intraorally, Haley has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  Teeth are fairly nicely aligned and leveled.  There is adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  She has a little bit of gingival resection around the cuspids.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship by about 2 to 3 mm and she has an overjet of about 1 to 2 mm.  She has about ½ mm vertical overbite.  She slides into a fairly good occlusal relationship.  Intranasally, the turbinates are enlarged.  The septum may be deviated just a little bit off towards the right side.  Haley does report she had a nosebleed on the right side this morning.  There is a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1 mm to 1.5 mm higher than the right side at the cuspid area.  To palpation, she had some mild to moderate pain over the left TMJ and milder pain over the left temporalis and fairly minimal tenderness over the left styloid area.  On opening, the left joint functions relatively smoothly.  On the right side there was a palpable click at about 15 mm of opening and about 10 mm of closing.  In excursive movements, the right joint had more of a crepitus type of sound although the left side continued to be relatively smooth.  Maximal incisal opening is about 37 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 10 mm, to the left 9 mm.  During the winter of this year it hurt her to open her bite very much at all just to take a small bite.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of bilateral maxillary unerupted third molars, mandibular right developing unerupted third molar.  The left third molar is absent.  Sinuses look fairly clear.  

HALEY KENNEDY 				04/23/2007				Page 2

Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  Difficult to see the left joint but the left joint looks a 
little bit arthritic.  

Waters view shows that the left sinus appears small and not well pneumonated.  The nasal septum has a spur off the bony aspect to the right side and maybe a little bit to the left side as well.  Left turbinate appears enlarged, right one appears more normal in size.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears small in size with loss of vertical anteroposterior volume.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space appears perhaps slightly increased.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has also lost volume vertically and anteroposteriorly.  Articular eminence is not quite as steep on this side as the opposite side.  Joint space may be just slightly increased.  On opening, there is mildly good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph demonstrates the presence of high occlusal plane angle and a skeletal Class II relationship.  Slight Class II occlusal relationship as well.  Some adenoid tissue present in the nasopharynx.  Oropharyngeal airway appears somewhat constricted with an airway dimension of about 7 mm at the soft palate area and maybe 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  She does appear to have a head postured forward neck position. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Impacted bilateral maxillary third molars and mandibular right third molar.
 Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Nasoseptal spurs.
 Nasal airway obstruction.
 Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
 Snoring. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. 


HALEY KENNEDY				04/23/3007				Page 3

Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and downgraft it posteriorly.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomy to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Nasal septoplasty. 
Surgical removal of impacted bilateral maxillary third molars and mandibular right third molar.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
