JOHN KIMBROUGH									     02-01-05

John is 23 years old and referred by James Compton, DDS, MSD, 4610 N. Garfield Street, Ste. A-9, Midland, TX  79705.

Patient History

John takes the following medications:
Adderall 20 mg x 4 daily
Xanax 1 mg 5 times per day
Valtrex 1 g once a day

John developed stomach problems when he was on Celebrex. He will sometimes have problems with diarrhea but attributes that mainly to stress factors. John has an anxiety disorder with panic attacks. John doesn’t have any problems with the panic attacks as long as he is on his medications. Stress seems to have set those problems off. He has had about three fainting spells in his life, and the last one was about a year ago. It may be related in part to the panic attacks. John has some allergy problems that may in part be due to seasonal factors. He does have difficulties at times breathing through his nose. John has been diagnosed as  having ADHD/anxiety disorder. He previously has had a frenectomy. John rates the headaches that he has gotten particularly during the last two weeks in the frontal and temporal area at about a level of 2. Doesn’t report any pain directly in the TMJ area. Rates his average daily pain at around a level of 5, jaw function at 4, diet at 0, and disability at 4. Says that his lips feel numb essentially all the time. He had his wisdom teeth removed at the age of 16 and did not have numbness to his lips after that. He had orthodontics done from the ages of 11 to 13. Just opening his jaw and manipulating it a certain way, he had a very loud, audible pop in the right TMJ. John does not know when the onset of his problems occurred particularly in reference to clenching and grinding. He has done that as long as he can remember. This etiology is currently unknown.

No other joints bother him except he does get some tendinitis in his thumbs. He is very much aware of clenching and bruxing at night and during the day and would rate this as being a severe problem. He drinks about three to four Cokes per day. 

John has been on the Adderall for approximately three years. Has been on the Xanax about the same amount of time. He has been on Valtrex for about one year. 

John said that when he was skiing this past winter that he got fairly significant pain on the right side of his jaw through the joint and down through his jaw area. He thought it might be related to the change in altitude and the coldness. John feels that he has been clenching his teeth ever since he had his braces removed. He said also he used to be able to click and pop his right TMJ at will, and now it is more difficult to do so. He says that he can feel sometimes when he wakes up in the morning that his teeth have moved which is indicative of probably significant nocturnal clenching. Looking at his teeth, it appears that it is more of a clenching problem than a bruxing problem because the anatomy of his teeth is still well-defined, and there are really no significant wear facets. 

Patient Concerns

Significant shifting and movement of his teeth with the upper anterior teeth becoming extremely flared and the lower anterior teeth becoming quite crowded
Headaches
Pain through the jaw areas
Clenching and grinding of the teeth at night and during the day

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, John has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -4 mm. Maxillary and mandibular midlines are pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin.

In profile view, John has excessive fullness in the upper lip and has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip with protrusion of upper lip supralabrale being about 8 to 9 mm anterior to subnasale. Has a prominent labiomental fold. Has fullness in the submental area. Chin-neckline is relatively long. 

Intraorally, John has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. He has some significant crowding, lower anterior arch. John reports he is getting a little gingival retraction from around the lower teeth, and he has had some ulcerations on his gingiva down in that area. In the upper arch, John has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has severe flaring of the upper anterior teeth. No spaces have developed between the teeth, however. Has just a slight Class II tendency on the right side by probably a couple of millimeters. Is getting a little bit of buccal flaring of the maxillary cuspids and lingual inclination of the lower cuspids. Has an anterior deep bite of only about 3 to 4 mm. Uvula appears a little bit enlarged and elongated. Soft palate looks reasonably normal or perhaps just slightly long. Tonsils are present but appear normal in size. Faucial pillars are maybe mildly constricted but not too significantly. 

Intranasally, turbinates have mild enlargement but not significantly. Septum is deviated off to the left, but he appears to have a reasonable airway bilaterally. Do not feel that he has any significant nasal airway obstruction at this time. Columella and luminal valves all look normal. John states that he has been told he does snore moderately. He has some mild daytime somnolence but is not aware of any problems with apneic episodes when sleeping.

To palpation, he has moderate discomfort of the masseter muscles and milder tenderness over the temporalis, SCMs, and posterior neck area. Although he did have one loud audible pop in the right TMJ earlier, when I examined him now, his joints seemed to function relatively smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is about 52 mm. Excursive movements are 6 mm in each direction. 

Previous records sent by Dr. Compton include some photographs from 11/21/96 showing completion of the orthodontics. The x-rays show that he has fairly good Class I cuspid-molar relationship although a little bit Class III cuspid relationship on the left side. Midlines are well-aligned, and there appears to be normal inclination of the maxillary and mandibular incisors without any evidence of flaring of the uppers and no evidence of crowding of the lowers. There are photographs from 09/29/94 showing that there wasn’t any particular crowding but a little bit of an anterior deep bite relationship of probably 4 to 5 mm, but the teeth appear to be in good angulation of both the upper and lower arch. Lateral cephalogram from the same date shows that both the upper and lower incisors have relatively normal inclinations and that John actually has an excessive upper tooth-to-lip relationship of probably about 4 to 5 mm and Class II end-on occlusal appearing relationship for the most part and does have an increased anterior vertical height of the mandible, although there is increased soft tissue thickness in that area. 

Panorex from the same date shows all the teeth are present, although the third molars are developing the crowns and are unerupted. At the time that these records were taken, John was 13.2 years old. There is a Panorex taken on 11/21/96 showing that all four third molars are present and the crowns are developing. The rest of the teeth appear to be well-aligned. Sinuses appear clear, and turbinates appear moderate in size with a good nasal airway. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses probably are reasonably clear. All four third molars are absent. Anterior mandibular dental height appears short vertically. Upper incisor roots fade indicative of overangulation. Right condyle appears a little bit wide anteroposteriorly with maybe some slight anterior beaking present. Left condyle appears a little bit more normal. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear, and the nasal airway is quite patent. Midlines appear to be on, and jaws appear relatively symmetric. Decreased vertical height in the anterior maxilla. 

Right TMJ tomogram appears to be fairly well-centered in the fossa with good joint space superiorly and posteriorly. Articular eminence is fairly steep and is moderately long in length. Condyle appears to have reasonable shape.

Left TMJ is not quite as clear. Condyle appears maybe a little bit broader anteroposteriorly. However, there does appear to be good joint space. Articular eminence does not appear to be quite as steep on this side as the opposite side. I would suspect that in both joints the discs may well be in adequate position.

On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints with the condyles coming down along the posterior aspect of the articular eminence but not reaching the inferior aspect of the articular eminence. 

Lateral cephalogram shows that there is significant vertical maxillary deficiency and vertical mandibular deficiency. There is severe overangulation of the maxillary incisors. Lower incisor angulation doesn’t appear to be too far out of the normal range. Oropharyngeal airway is quite adequate with the oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level of about 11 mm and at the base of the tongue of about 17 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

Rule out TMJ articular disc dislocations
Severe mandibular hyperdystonia
Chronic severe clenching
Vertical maxillary hypoplasia
AP mandibular hyperplasia
Severe overangulation of maxillary incisors
Crowding, lower incisors
Slight Class II occlusal relationship by 1 to 2 mm
ADHD/anxiety disorder

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJ

Medications to try to control and eliminate the mandibular hyperdystonia and severe clenching

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Try to upright central incisors some. This will likely deepen the bite more than it currently is. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to upright the incisors and downgraft the maxilla
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition the mandible into a proper facial balance
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to increase vertical height of the mandible
Consider possible TMJ surgery if articular discs are dislocated (this will be determined by MRI)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 