ALICIA KIMMEL									09-19-03

Alicia is 19 years old and referred by Dr. Steven Hill, 4211 85th Street, Lubbock, TX  79424.

Patient History

Alicia is taking tetracycline, and it is the only medicine she is taking, and that is for her skin under the directions of a dermatologist. Alicia’s orthodontist is Edwin Wentz, DDS, 4013 84th Street, Lubbock, TX  79423.

Alicia apparently has significant problems with daytime somnolence. It is difficult for her to get up in the morning and to stay awake in school. About anytime that she sits down or stops doing something, she can fall asleep. This is having a significant affect on her school work and her abilities to just function normally. She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss, no headaches, no TMJ pain, and no myofascial pain. She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 2, and disability at 8. Disability is predominantly related to her extreme tiredness and inabilities to perform normal daily functions without falling asleep.

She has an allergy to KEFLEX. She has some problems wearing cheap earrings. 

The only medication she takes is tetracycline that she takes for her face. 

She states that the onset of her problems began most likely as best as she can recall around the age of 14 to 15 of unknown etiology. This was the first that they noticed that her jaw was becoming more retruded. The previous treatment she has includes orthodontics where she had orthodontic treatment first from ’97 to ’99. The braces were off for about six months, and they were reapplied again for one year somewhere around 2000 through 2001.

Patient Concerns

Decreased airway at the back of the throat
Snoring
Jaws become significantly receded and are continuing to worsen
Severe daytime tiredness
Difficulties breathing through the nose
Mother has observed apneic episodes when she is sleeping

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Alicia has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face but has some asymmetry in the lower third face. Pupillary plane looks fairly level. Right ear may be just slightly lower than the left ear by probably a few mm. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 6 mm. Maxillary dental midline and mandibular dental midline appear to be pretty much on the facial midline. Chin appears to be deviated off to the right side probably about 3 or 4 mm. 

Profile view shows that Alicia has increased lower third vertical height. Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale, and maxilla is AP deficient by probably 4 to 6 mm. Chin is AP deficient by 25 to 30 mm. Chin-neckline and chin-neck angle are essentially nonexistent. In natural head position, she actually has an additional fold of tissue in the submental area.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Some crowding in the lower anterior arch. Alicia appears to have good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally being Class II by about 2 to 3 mm. She has an overjet of probably about 1.5 mm. She has an overbite of about 1 mm. She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 4 mm higher than the left side. Oropharynx appears clear. However, her faucial pillars are extremely narrow transversely. This may be contributing some to the airway obstruction. The posterior faucial pillars also appear to insert into the posterior pharyngeal wall area.

Intranasally, the septum looks straight, but she has hyperplastic turbinates bilaterally that are causing some significant decrease of her airway. 

To palpation, Alicia has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Some crepitus in her joints when she opens and closes. Incisal opening is 31 mm maximum, and excursive movements are about 6 mm in each direction. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear moderately large. All four third molars are present, and the lowers are impacted, and the maxillary right one may be erupting in. The left maxillary third molar is quite small and deformed. Relative to the condyles, the right condyle has undergone severe resorption with almost the entire head and part of the condylar neck being gone. Left side also shows significant loss of the condylar head although not as severe as the right side. She has incredibly dense cortical bone at the inferior border of the mandible that seems to extend back and include the entire angle of the mandible as well as up the ascending ramus area posteriorly. This is present on both sides. Interestingly, the cortical thickness at the inferior border is greater on the right side as compared to the left side. It measures 7 mm in thickness.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone severe resorption. What is left of the condylar head appears a little bit sclerotic. Significantly decreased joint space. Articular eminence appears relatively shallow. Significantly decreased vertical height of the ramus area. She has an accentuated gonial notch present. 

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle with significant resorption. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. There does not appear to be much joint space between the condylar head and the fossa. Vertical height of the ramus and condyle appears show. 

Open views show fairly good translation of both condyles. 

Waters view shows that there is some deviation of the nasal septum, and turbinates are moderately large. Sinuses are clear. The significant vertical asymmetry is seen with the right mandibular ramus and maxilla being vertically shorter than the left side. May be about a 5-mm vertical difference at the angles of the mandible. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Alicia has a severe high occlusal plane angle. Her mandible is severely retruded mainly due to loss of vertical height of the ramus and condyle area. She has a fairly significant skeletal Class II jaw relationship. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 2 to 2.5 mm at both the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue. Tongue appears to fill the entire oral cavity. Slight Class II occlusal relationship is present. There is a definite vertical discrepancy between the inferior borders of the mandible and also at the occlusion plane level with the right side being higher than the left side by about 3 mm in the cuspid area and 3 to 4 mm at the inferior border. Soft palpate appears to be quite long. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe idiopathic condylar resorption
Severe AP mandibular deficiency and asymmetry
AP maxillary deficiency
Anterior vertical maxillary excess
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP microgenia
Anterior mandibular vertical excess
Transverse asymmetry with the right side being vertically shorter than the left side
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being lower than the right side
Class II end-on occlusion 
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of 2.5 mm (normal dimension 11 mm)
High occlusal plane angle of 28 degrees (normal 8 degrees)
Hypertrophied nasal turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars and maxillary left fourth molar

Recommended Treatment

CT scan of TMJs and jaw structures using TMJ Concepts protocol

Surgical removal of impacted maxillary third molars x 4 and maxillary left fourth molar

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy 

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, meniscectomies, debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies with bone plate stabilization and hydroxyapatite grafting
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)
HTR implant to anterior mandible
Bilateral inferior turbinectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
