STACI KIMMEL									07/18/2006

Staci is 32 years old, referred by Dr. Don Tillery, Orlando, FL.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Intense pain in the TMJs.
Major headaches that occur daily.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Difficulties breathing through the nose.

Staci recalls that when she completed her orthodontic treatment about the age of 16 that her orthodontist did note that she had some clicking in her jaw joints.  She was given a splint at that time and Staci continues to use that splint currently.  She therefore used an occlusal splint for about 16 years.  However, it has been over a year that Staci really began developing significant pain problems associated with her jaw joint pathology.  She currently takes no medications.  She does get earaches, tinnitus, and occasional vertigo but has no hearing loss.  She has no other joint problems.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism.  She does get daily headaches at about a level of 8 that occur predominately on the left side in the frontal and temple areas.  She rates her average TMJ pain at 8, average pain around the head and neck area around 8, jaw function 8, diet at 8, disability at 2.  

In frontal view, Staci has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 
19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are also fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, Staci has some slight AP maxillary deficiency but not too bad, only about 2 to 3 mm.  Chin is retruded probably 12 to 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, Staci has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars present.  In the upper arch she also has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being a little bit greater on the left side than the right side and being probably about 3 to 4 mm.  She has an overjet of about 4 mm.  She has an anterior open bite of probably 1 mm.  It appears that Staci hits predominately on her molars, primarily the second molars and she hits first on the left side before the right side.  She chews mainly on the left side.  Staci states that she is unable to chew on her back teeth.  Oropharyngeal tissues appear relatively normal as do the soft palate, uvula and the faucial pillars.  Staci feels a lot of airway resistance as she tries to breathe through her nose.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side but there is a large septal spur off the left side.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged and there is a combination of factors that probably tends to block off her airway fairly significantly.  Using the speculum on the right side significantly improved her airway.  Her right nostril is constricted because of the significant deviation of the septum at the anterior region.  To palpation, she has very significant pain over the left TMJ but nowhere else around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function very smoothly but she had pain in the left joint on her widest opening.  Maximal opening was 32 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 2.5 mm, left about 5 mm.  



STACI KIMMEL				07/18/2006				Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  All other teeth are present.  Root canal and maxillary left central incisor.  There may be some material in the maxillary sinuses.  The septum appears to be deviated off to the right side.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  The left condyle appears more narrow anteroposteriorly than the dimension of the right condyle.  The condyle looks a little bit more arthritic. 

Right TMJ tomograms show there may be some decreased superior and posterior joint space.  The condyle has a hockey stick shape to it.  The styloid process is moderately elongated.  Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a hockey stick shape to it.  Joint spaces may be decreased.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is significant restricted translation but a little more translation on the left side than the right side.  

Waters view shows the sinuses actually do look fairly clear.  The septum is deviated a little bit off to the right side.  The turbinates are quite enlarged.  They appear to block off the majority of the nasal airway.  There is some spurring of the septum off towards the left side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Staci has a high occlusal plane angle of right mandible.  It appears to occlude only on the second molars.  The oral pharyngeal airway is surprisingly good and measures about 6 to 7 mm at the soft palate level and almost 9 mm at the base of the tongue.  She has an occlusal Class II relationship and an anterior open bite.  

Tooth size analysis reveals no tooth size discrepancy.  However, I suspect that there probably is one because the incisors and cuspids are fairly thick in the medial buccal dimension.  She does have some veneers on some of the anterior teeth.   Dental model analysis reveals that she does have a Class II end-on cuspid relationship.  It appears to occlude primarily on the second molars and all other teeth are presumably out of occlusion.  She has about a 4 mm overjet relationship.  As we slide back into a Class I cuspid molar relationship she does have a tendency to have a little bit of a crossbite.  She continues to have an anterior open bite.  She has an accentuated curve of Spee with incisors being up an extra 1 to 2 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and closed lock as well as significantly degenerative changes.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Slight AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Anterior open bite.

STACI KIMMELL				07/18/2006				Page 3


Occludes predominately on the second molars and most all the other teeth are out of occlusion.
Deviated nasal septum.
  Hypertrophied turbinates.
  Nasal airway obstruction.
  Predominate mouth breather.
  Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
  Snoring.
  Daytime somnolence.
  TMJ pain.
  Headaches.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Surgery stage I.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors with probably discoplasties particularly on the left side.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies (by Dr. Larry Weprin.)
Nasal septoplasty (by Dr. Larry Weprin.)
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make space for interdental osteotomies.  Place a step in the archwire so that the four incisors are aligned at an elevated plane level compared to the cuspids and posterior teeth.  
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery stage II.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, down graft the posterior aspect and expand.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
