DARCY KINDSCHY								04-02-03

Darcy is 33 years old and referred by Dr. David Ten Hulzen.

Current Medications

Darcy takes the following medications:

Nortriptyline 125 mg q.h.s. 
Neurontin 400 mg, 400 mg--600 mg per day
Relafen 750 mg b.i.d. 
Vicodin approximately 2 tablets in the evening

Darcy has to limit her pain medication because she cannot be on narcotics and work, although she feels she could certainly benefit by better pain control during the day.

Patient History

Darcy’s problems began in about 1986 in a roll over school bus accident, and a student fell on her right jaw and head. Two months later, she had her wisdom teeth removed and since that date has had jaw problems. Darcy feels that the onset of her TMJ problems was more related to the removal of her wisdom teeth than to the bus accident. She has had fairly extensive treatment since about 1986. She had her first surgery in 1994 where she had bilateral arthroscopies of the TMJs performed. In 1994, she had bilateral TMJ arthroplasties with temporalis fascia flaps that worked relatively well. In 1999, she had bilateral Christensen TMJ total joint prostheses placed. She had difficulties recovering from that particular surgery. By mid 2001, she developed severe disabling headaches again, vertigo, tinnitus, jaw, neck, and shoulder pain. She is on her current medications but in the past has had prednisone, Botox, acupuncture, physical therapy, and muscle relaxants. She has been to see several surgeons in reference to her current situation. She gets earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo, although the vertigo is somewhat controlled with anti-inflammatory medications. If she doesn’t take her anti-inflammatory medications, her vertigo is so severe that she cannot drive. She has no other joints that bother her at this time. She has an allergy to SULFA. She is aware of having any problems wearing jewelry. 

Her pain in the jaw areas does increase throughout the day. It is usually worse in the evenings. She does have continuous headaches even when medicated that range at about a level of 6 in the high temporal area and in the posterior head. Without medications, the headaches would be around a 9 or a 10. With medications, her TMJ pain is at a level of 6 and without medications it would likely be at 8. Overall pain with medication on an average day is about 6. Darcy rates her jaw function at 2 and diet and disability at 6.

Allergies

SULFA.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Darcy has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 to 2 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, chin, and nasal midlines are all pretty much aligned with each other. 

In profile view, Darcy demonstrates some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm. Mandible is probably 15 to 18 mm AP deficient at the chin area. Chin-neckline is extremely short, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. 

Intraorally, Darcy is missing the lower first bicuspids. She has severe crowding, lower anterior arch with probably 6 mm of crowding present. Right cuspid is somewhat blocked out of the arch. In the upper arch, she is also missing the first bicuspids. She has an anterior deep-bite of about 3 mm and has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. There is a slight cant in the occlusion with the left side being about 2 mm higher than the right side. Oropharynx is clear. To palpation, she has a moderate to high moderate pain to palpation throughout most of the head and neck area with some mild to moderate tenderness over the SCMS, posterior neck, and shoulder area. Maximal incisal opening is about 40 mm but without significant discomfort about 30 mm. Excursive movements are 3 mm in each direction. On opening and closing, she feels that she hears some sandy kind of sounds in the right joint, and in the left side, she just hears some popping noises. 

Intranasally, the septum may be deviated a little bit off toward the right side. Right turbinate is fairly large and seems to block a good portion of the airway. Left turbinate is relatively normal in size with what appears to be a good airway.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinate on the left side actually looks large compared to the right side. The four first bicuspids and all four third molars are missing. She has bilateral L-shaped Christensen total joint prostheses with metal condylar heads. She has L-shaped mandibular components, and she has 11 screws in each side. She has metal on metal function. There are some vascular clips present as well in the area with probably three of them on the right side and one on the left side that can be seen. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows the mandibular prosthesis and the fossa prosthesis, and they appear as though they are in good functional position. I cannot see any significant evidence of heterotopic bone around the area but cannot rule that out either.

Left TMJ tomogram shows the metal fossa and metal condyle functioning together. Appears to be some reactive bone that is overgrown in the posterior aspect of the fossa component. There is a little vertical gap between the posterior aspect of the fossa and the fossa area itself. 

Opening shows that there is fairly good translation of the right condylar mandibular component, whereas the left side does not appear to move very much.

Waters view shows that the condylar components are pretty well centered in the fossa components. Appears that the screws are in place, and there are at least four to five on the right side and probably four to five on the left side. 

Cephalometric evaluation shows that the maxilla and mandible are both retruded. She has a high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway may be somewhat compromised but difficult to tell because I can’t see the posterior aspect of the soft palate. At the base of the tongue, the oropharyngeal airway dimension measures only about 3 mm. 

Darcy does have a sleep disorder that she feels is probably related to pain factors. She does snore some. 

Other Systems

Darcy has no other joint problems except for the TMJ. She has had probably two urinary tract infections during her life. She gets occasional nocturia. She does on a more frequent time frame have difficulties urinating and difficulties emptying her bladder. She has two children, ages 2 years and 1 year. She had ovarian cysts x 2, and this was just in the past year. She had an eye infection about two years ago. She has dryness of her eyes. She does get occasional burning and itching. She has earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo. She has had bronchitis x 2 in the past. She gets occasional nausea with her severe pain. No known STDs. She has some significant fatigue problems and relates this to pain and her medications. Although she has no thyroid problems, thyroid disease does run in her family. She does have some memory loss but attributes that to perhaps the medications. She has had quite a bit of exposure to birds and raised chickens, usually 50 at a time, from about the age of 1 up to 15 years. She has had occasional contact with cats growing up, and these were mainly barn cats, but she didn’t like cats and didn’t have too much contact with them. She has had dogs essentially all of her life, and occasionally they may have eaten birds. Growing up on her farm, she had cows and horses. Her husband now raises cows and has over 450 cows and some horses as well. When she was growing up, her brother raised pigs and usually had 20 to 50 at a time. The only implants in her body are the bilateral TMJ Christensen prostheses.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ Christensen total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ metallosis and possible foreign body reaction
Rule out hypersensitivity to chromium cobalt alloy
Severe AP mandibular deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Class I cuspid-molar relationship but only occluding on two teeth, which are the right cuspids. All other teeth as far as she can tell are out of occlusion
Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars secondary to previous extractions
Moderate crowding, lower anterior arch
Headaches 
Severe TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Earaches 
Tinnitus
Vertigo
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway space of 3 to 4 mm (normal 11 mm)
High occlusal plane angle

Recommended Treatment

Testing at the Environmental Center at Dallas to evaluate for hypersensitivities to metals in the prostheses

Presurgical orthodontics 
Apply brackets and stabilizing arch wire to the maxillary teeth
Place appliances and stabilizing arch wire to the mandibular teeth
 
Surgery
Removal of bilateral Christensen total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ debridement
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Fat grafts to bilateral TMJs (harvested from abdomen)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it posteriorly

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

I spent about 2-1/2 hours with her today in the consultation. We discussed all the potential risks and complications involving nerves, bleeding problems, infection, malocclusion, etc. She seemed to have a good concept. Having been through three surgeries before, and she has had I believe three to four consultations in the past few months, she has a fairly good grip on the situation. She is to contact us if she has any other questions or concerns. I answered all the questions that she had at this time in reference to her condition and the recommended surgery.