PAULA KING									06/01/2007

Paula is 56 years old, referred by Dr. Dale Gallagher, 12210 Pecan St. Austin, TX 78727.  Also, Dr. Dudley Hodgkins, 3901. S. Lamar, Ste. 420, Austin, TX 78704.  She has had previous C sections x2, a tonsillectomy and wisdom teeth removed.  She is in good health except for the jaw problems.  Paula is not sure when her jaw problems started.  As long she can remember her lower jaws have been retruded and doctors have told her she has an unusual jaw shape and form.  She had orthodontics as a child including the use of headgear to get her teeth together.  She actually went along fairly well without any significant symptomatology except for the retruded jaws until she was involved in a motor vehicle accident in 2002.  She sustained a blow to the jaw on the left side and sustained a concussion.  She was off work for almost six months.  She had a lot of pain problems and spasms.  She could not open her mouth.  She was placed in splints in 2002 and this seemed to help reduce some of her symptoms.  She then consulted with Dr. Gallagher and Dr. Hodgkins and they developed a treatment plan.  Paula began her orthodontic treatment in 2005.   Her current medications are Estrogen, progesterone, Adderall, DHEA and vitamins.  The Adderall she takes because following her concussion she had some difficulties remembering and the Adderall has helped her in that regard.  Other joints that bother her include her fingers and her knees.  She says that her mother and her grandmother also had the same kind of joint changes in the fingers that Paula is starting to develop.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing in the teeth at nighttime as well as during the day.  She has no problems with earaches, vertigo or hearing loss but does have constant tinnitus.  She has some seasonal allergies.  Cheap earrings cause irritation to her ears.  Paula has no trouble with headaches.  She rates her TMJ pain at about a level of 6.  On an average day she does not really have too much of the pain at all.  She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 7, disability at 4.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION 
In frontal view, Paula has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0.  The right side of the face is a little bit more full than the left side.  Nasal tip is off to the right side maybe 1 or 2 mm.  Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline may be 11 to the right and the chin is probably a couple of mm to the right.  In profile view, Paula has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip.  She has a prominence of the nasal dorsum.  Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably at least a couple of mm.  The maxilla is retruded by at least 6 mm.  Chin is retruded by about 20 mm.  Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not evident.  Intraorally, Paula is missing lower first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  Posterior teeth are quite flat.  She has orthodontic appliances on and teeth are fairly well aligned and level.  She has thin but hopefully adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she is also missing the first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being about 5 mm Class II.  She has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm.  She has an overjet of about 4 to 5 mm.  Uvula is hyperplastic.  Soft palate and faucial pillars appear relatively normal.  Tonsils could not really identify them.  Turbinates are relatively normal in size and the nasal airway looks reasonably good.  Septum is straight.  Luminal valves may be a little bit constricted.  Maximal incisal opening is 42 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is 7 mm, left is 6 mm.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  She has some significant audible crepitation in the TMJs being louder on the left side as compared to the right side.  Transverse occlusal plane is fairly level.  
PAULA KING				06/01/2007 				Page 2

There may be a slight yaw to the maxilla and mandible being shifted to the right side 1 to 2 mm.  Paula has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.  She has a significant accentuated curve of Spee with the incisors being at least 3.5 mm perhaps off the flat plane.  The lower arch is fairly flat.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars and all 4 first bicuspids.  Sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear normal in size and septum appears straight.  Condyles are severely arthritic and demonstrates significant resorption of the condylar heads and neck.  She has a high mandibular plane angle.  

Waters view shows the septum is straight and turbinates are moderate in size.  Sinuses appear clear.  She has huge frontal sinuses particularly on the left side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows severe condylar resorption.  The fossa appears quite large and the articular eminence is located quite anterior in the skull base.  The severely resorbed deformed condyle sits about 4 mm anterior to the posterior wall of the fossa.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a similar picture with an elongated fossa and articular eminence is located far anteriorly.  The condyle is functioning on the posterior aspect of the articular eminence with a significantly increased posterior joint space of probably at least 5 mm.  Vertical height of the mandibular ramus and condyle bilateral is extremely short.  On opening, there is some translation of both joints.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has AP maxillary, posterior vertical maxillary deficiency, severe AP mandibular deficiency.  She has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship and high occlusal plane angle with an anterior open bite.  Oropharyngeal airway suprisingly is larger than what one would expect with the position of the jaw structures.  She does have a curvature to her spine to posture her head forward.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ severe resorptive arthritis.  
Severe AP mandibular deficiency. 
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
Class II occlusion.
Apertognathia. 
Missing maxillary first bicuspids.
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. 
Occluding only on the first and second molars bilaterally.  
 History of clenching and bruxism.
 TMJ pain. 
 Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 Constant tinnitus.
PAULA KING				06/01/2007				Page 3


 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm. 
 Overangulation of lower incisors.
Sleep apnea symptoms. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Disengage the second molars from the archwire.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy.  Disengage the second molars from the archwire.
CT scan of the TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, down graft it posteriorly and maximize the occlusal fit.  
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry as necessary to reconstruct the molars to maximize the occlusal interrelationship. 