LYNN KINMAN									04/16/2008

Lynn is 52 years old.  Referred by Dr. Arnold Pitts, 4786 Caughlin Parkway, Suite 305, Reno, NV 89509.  Lynn takes the following medications:
Centrum multivitamin.
Fish oil.
Calcium.
Vicodin 7.5 mg p.r.n. severe jaw pain, usually taking 5-7 tablets per week.
Yaz.
Aleve 600 mg daily.

Lynn rates her headaches at a level of 7 and they occur predominantly in the right temporal area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 6, diet at 5, and disability at 6.  She has mild earaches, but no tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  No joints bother her at this time.  She is aware of clenching at night.  It is unknown when Lynn’s jaw joint problems actually began.  She apparently had an open bite and her dentist suggested she have orthodontics performed.  She had orthodontics for about 14 months beginning in 2002, finishing in December 2003.  Since that time, about 3 months after the orthodontics was completed, is when she began having some pain problems in her right joint.  She noticed towards the end of orthodontics and afterwards that her teeth on the right side did not fit together very well.  Since that time, she has had the following treatments:  Splint therapy x3, physical therapy for 4 months 3 times per week.  This included ultrasound, massage, craniosacral manipulations. She has had acupuncture and she also has had equilibration on her teeth.  She has been seen and evaluated by a pain management specialist who has treated her with medications and trigger point injections.  She also did Feldenkrist therapy.

CLINICAL EVALUATION.  Lynn has good facial symmetry and appears to have good left-to-right facial balance.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 1 mm.  Lynn has noticed that her right ear is lower than her left ear and this has been a problem more recently and she has to have her sunglasses adjusted in order for them to fit properly.  In profile view, she has fairly good facial balance.  Chin neckline may be just a little bit short.  For the most part though, facial balance is good AP-wise and vertically.  Intraorally, Lynn has all of her teeth back to the second molars.  She has some gingival recession, although she has good attached gingiva.  In her upper arch,, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars as well.  She has crowns on a lot of the posterior molars.  She has a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  She has a slight transverse asymmetry with the maxillary right cuspid being about 0.5 to 2 mm higher than the left cuspid.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the right TMJ and milder pain over the right styloid and right posterior neck area.  Lynn has difficulty sleeping on her back because the pressure in the right joint becomes fairly severe.  She feels best sleeping in a semiupright position in a Lazy Boy kind of chair.  When Lynn has her splints in place, it causes her to actually clench more which then exacerbates her pain.  


Basic diagnoses for Lynn would be as follows:
Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe degenerative changes.
Right TMJ pain. 
Right-sided headaches.
Right-sided myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:	

Medications.
Vicodin 7.5 mg q.8 to 12 hours p.r.n. pain. 
Klonopin 1-mg tablet, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet at bedtime. 
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. 
Right TMJ condylectomy.
Right TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Fat graft to the right TMJ (harvest from the abdomen).  
Application and removal of arch bars.