MEGAN KIRBY									10/04/2010

Megan is 34 years old.  She is a self-referral. Megan’s TMJ problems began as a teenager back in high school.  She would develop an occasional close lock situation involving the right TMJ.  However, it was not until the age of 31 when she was intubated for thyroid surgery that her joint problems escalated.  

Megan had orthodontic treatment from about the age of 8 through high school including head gear and other mechanical factors.  She has had 3 upper splints and 1 lower splint, and the lower splint she has had for about 2 years.  Other treatment she has had includes iontophoresis, manipulation of the jaws and TMJs under sedation, and medications.  None of these have been effective for her.  She currently takes the following medications:

Synthroid 0.1 mg q.d. (she had a total thyroidectomy September 2007).
Tylenol Arthritis medication.
Ibuprofen.

Megan gets daily headaches in the frontal and temporal area predominantly on the right side at a level of 6.  She occasionally gets headaches in the same areas on the left side.  She rates her average daily TMJ pain at 6, facial pain and headaches at 6, jaw function at 3, diet at 7, disability at 5.  She gets moderate earaches but not tinnitus nor vertigo.  She gets occasional hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her right shoulder and her fingers.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and occasionally during the day.

In frontal view, Megan has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 1. The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably 3 mm.  The upper maxilla is retruded about 6 to 8 mm and the mandible is retruded about 15 mm.  The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, Megan has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has a little crowding in the lower anterior arch and has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, Megan has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a probably a slight Class II end-on occlusion cuspid relationship being may be 10 mm Class II.  She has a slight over jet of about 2 mm.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  Oropharyngeal anatomy and tissues all look relatively normal.  Megan did have her wisdom teeth removed around 1996.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the right TMJ, right retromandibular area, and some minimal discomfort over the right temporalis muscle.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly, although she gets occasional crepitation in the right joint.  When she opens, she deviates to the right side about 3 mm.  The maximal incisal opening is 38 mm, opening without pain 22 mm.  She has about 10 mm of excursion movement in each direction, but as she shifts towards the right side, she has increased pain in the right TMJ area.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  Stylohyoid ligaments are partially calcified.  

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are pretty much normal in size.  In the left sinus, there is a little bit of thickening of the mucosa along the lateral nasal wall.  The septum is reasonably straight.  

Axial view shows that the septum is straight and turbinates are moderate in size with the left one being a little bit larger than the right one.  There is some increased thickening of the sinus mucosa on the left side.  The left turbinate appears just slightly larger than the right turbinate but there appears to be adequate airway.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some anterior beaking and sclerosis.  The head of the condyle looks like a hockey stick.  There appears to be decreased vertical and posterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit more sclerosis on the head and some greater amount of anterior beaking.  There is decreased vertical joint space and the joint space over the articular eminence is little bit more shallow on this side.  Medially, there is some significant flattening on the head of the condyle.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  Cortical bone appears to be intact.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm.  There appears to be decreased lateral joint space indicative of medial displacement of the disc.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Megan has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway is narrow.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 3.5 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 5.5 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Megan would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis with bilateral displaced discs and an unsalvageable disc on the right side.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 3.5 mm (normal 11 mm).
TMJ pain.
Headaches. 
High occlusal plane angle.
Slight Class II end-on occlusion.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider slenderizing the lower anterior teeth 
                        to upright them slightly.
2.	CT scan.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts 			total joint prostheses.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction.
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
	d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  