ALIME (ALLY) KIRDAR							08/10/2011
DOB:	11/20/1966

Ally is 44 years old.  She believes that she has had TMJ and jaw problems for quite a few years.  About 1-1/2 years ago, she had some “poor dental work done” and this has significantly increased her symptomatology.  She has had some dental work on her anterior teeth.  She has had no previous orthodontics.  She has all of her teeth present back through the third molars.  She has really had no treatment to date.  

Ally gets headaches, the right side worse than the left side at about a level of 5 in the frontal and temporal areas that occur almost weekly.  They can start in the afternoon, but get progressively worse.  She can usually take a couple of Tylenol and this usually will manage the headaches. She sometimes wakes up in the morning with clicking in her joints, but that seems to go away after some jaw function.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime, but not during the day.  She believes that the clenching and bruxing is what is causing her headaches and her TMJ pain.  She rates her TMJ pain at 2, but almost on a weekly basis it can escalate to 8.  Average daily pain is at 5, jaw function at 4, diet and disability at 2.  She does get the clicking in the morning when she first wakes up, but then that goes away.  She says that she does have some crepitus in her jaw joints.  She has no earaches tinnitus nor vertigo.  The only other joint that bothers her is her left knee.  She does feel that her occlusion is slowly changing.  Sometimes she will have an open bite predominantly in the mandibular right anterior area.  Primary concerns she has at this time include the following:

Facial asymmetry.
Headaches.
Headache and jaw pain.
Changing of the occlusion.

Based on the photographs, her ears are covered so it is difficult to tell the orientation of her head.  When asked if she has any aesthetic concerns, it is predominantly the facial asymmetry that bothers her and she does not seem to be too concerned about her profile.  She plans to come for a clinical evaluation and MRI evaluation.  At that time, I will be able to examine her facial balance and, if she is not concerned about the profile, we may like to try to maintain that as best as possible.  She does have some bi-maxillary protrusion, but again if this is not of concern, we would likely be able to treat her orthodontically than with TMJ and orthognathic surgery without extractions.  

Basic diagnoses would like be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ pathology (need MRI to determine).
Bi-maxillary protrusion.
Class I cuspid relationship on the left side, Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side.  
In frontal view, the mandible more prominent on the right side of the face as compared to the left.  
Transverse cant in the soft tissues of the lips with the right commissure being 3 mm lower than the left side.
On smiling, less elevation of the right commissure compared to the left side.  
Mandibular dental midline is shifted off to the left side about 2 mm.  
Yaw of the jaw is present it being shifted off towards the left side 2 mm.  
Malrotated mandibular right second bicuspid.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth and 			retract to help correct for a moderate tooth size discrepancy of 1 mm.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ procedures if indicated and dependent on clinical and MRI 			evaluation.
	b.	Possible bi-maxillary surgery to level the transverse facial planes and 			correct the posterior yaw with maximizing the occlusion.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  

We will wait to evaluate her and determine precise treatment time and options for her.  