AARYN KERKIS 									05-09-03


Patient History

Aaryn’s problems began when she was about 12 to 13 years of age. She had an ankylosed maxillary lateral incisor and had about 10 surgical procedures in all to try to get it mobilized and into place. Instead, a jaw malalignment problem was created as all the teeth in both the upper and lower jaw were pulled toward that ankylosed tooth. Her pain problems and TMJ joint problems appear to have begun somewhere around the age of 15. At about the age of 16, her orthodontics was completed, and she was given a retainer with a build in bite type of appliance, which she has worn for five years. This helps considerably, as if she doesn’t wear it, her pain increases significantly.

She has no earaches or tinnitus but does get vertigo where she will have a bout every couple of weeks. Other joints that bother her include her wrists and her ankles. She is allergic to CODEINE and is not aware of any jewelry problems. She is aware that she clenches and bruxes her teeth at night. She gets headaches two or three times a week. They can be quite painful. She has to go to bed and take medication. This usually will get her through the episodes. Without the medications and without going to bed, the headache can have a much greater exacerbation. She rates her headaches that occur predominantly in the frontal area and perhaps into the temporal area, too, at about a level of 5. She rates her TMJ pain at 7 and average daily pain at about 5, jaw function and diet at 5, and disability at 7.

Current Medications

Birth control pills
Excedrin
Occasional Vicodin

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Aaryn has fairly good facial balance in the middle and upper third face. Some asymmetry in the lower jaw. The right side of the mandible is vertically shorter than the left side by about 6 mm. Mandible may be a little bit more prominent on the right side at the angle as compared to the left side by probably about 3 to 4 mm. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm on the left and a millimeter on the right. She has had a previous rhinoplasty. Maxillary dental midline may be shifted to the left 1 to 2 mm. Mandibular dental midline is shifted to the left about a millimeter. Chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.

In profile view, Aaryn has fairly good facial symmetry and balance. Chin-neckline may be just slightly short, but chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. Chin may be just slightly AP deficient by maybe 3 to 4 mm. 

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Has adequate attached gingival. Teeth are nicely aligned and leveled. Transverse width might be a little bit constricted.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship bilaterally. Has a significant transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side of the maxilla and mandible being 4 mm  higher at the cuspid area as compared to the left side. Transversely, the posterior occlusion is rotated toward the left about 3 to 4 mm posteriorly in the molar area. Oropharynx appears clear. Soft palate and uvula look relatively normal. Nasal airway looks good with no evidence of obstruction. She does have some slight residual nasal deformity where she has some of her lower lateral cartilage on the right side that is bulged out, and the nasal tip is a little bit wide. Has a small bump on her nose also. 

To palpation, she just has some very mild tenderness over the right TMJ and over the masseter muscle areas. As Aaryn opens and closes her jaws, she has a glitch in the left TMJ at probably about 25 mm of opening. On excursive movements, she has a popping noise consistently in the right joint. Left joint seems to function smoothly. Aaryn’s symptoms are greater on the right side as compared to the left side. Maximal incisal opening is 42 mm but without much discomfort just at 34 mm. Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction. 

Previous records on Aaryn when she was a lot younger show she had good facial symmetry. It appears that it was actually the maxillary right first bicuspid that may have been the ankylosed tooth and not the lateral incisor, although the lateral incisor has had its own share of problems including that it did get fractured at one point and then has a root canal. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. The maxillary right first bicuspid is missing, and there is a bridge replacing it. The right lateral incisor has just part of the root remaining and has a crown on it. The rest of the teeth all look healthy and in good condition. The sinuses look relatively clear. Nasal airway looks as though the turbinate is a little bit enlarged perhaps more posteriorly. Right condyle appears smaller than the right condyle. Both appear to have some bony changes associated with them. 

Waters view shows a little deviation of the nasal septum. Airway appears reasonable. Sinuses appear clear. Symmetry in the mandible can be seen with the right side being shorter than the left side by probably 4 to 5 mm. Left angle of the mandible is more prominent than the right side by 4 to 5 mm. Transverse cant in the occlusal plane is also noted. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is relatively small compared to the size of the fossa. Has some anterior beaking present. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep but fairly long. 

Right TMJ shows a condyle that is quite small in size anteroposteriorly and probably mediolaterally as well. Significantly decreased vertical joint space. Articular eminence has sort of a more shallow slope on this side compared to the other side, although it is fairly long. There is evidence that there may have been some condylar resorption on this side. 

On opening, there is some restricted translation on the left TMJ, and there is a little bit better translation on the right TMJ. 

Cephalometrically, she is basically a skeletal Class I. Slight over-angulation of the maxillary incisors. Oropharyngeal airway looks good. Difference in the occlusal plane level is evident with the right side being about 3 or 4 mm higher than the left side. Surprisingly, the inferior border of the mandible doesn’t appear quite as vertically imbalanced as it appears clinically.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with greater deterioration on the right side as compared to the left
Maxillary hypoplasia and vertical asymmetry
Mandibular hypoplasia and vertical asymmetry
Jaw vertically shorter on the right side as compared to the left side
Maxillary and mandibular dental midline shifted to the left
Posterior maxilla and mandible shifted toward the left approximately 3 to 4 mm
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being vertically shorter by 3 to 4 mm
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
External nasal deformity secondary to previous trauma

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level mandibular arch 
Align and level mandibular arch 

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to transversely level the occlusal plane, shift posterior aspect of the maxilla toward the right, and align the midlines
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to level the occlusal plane, shift the posterior aspect toward the right, and align the midlines
External rhinoplasty

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
