COLLIN KIRKPATRICK								03/29/2006

Collin is 14 years and 3 months of age, referred by Tom Czarnecki, DMD, 754 N. Carroll Ave., Southlake, TX 76092. Phone number:  817-488-1150.  Collin has a history of asthma problems and still has problems with that.  He does get frequent nose bleeds.  He has had his third molars removed.  He also has a history of getting sinus infections.  When Collin was 8 years old he did have a seizure and it appears it may have been related to medication (Wellbutrin) and he may have had a fever at the same time.  No other recurrences since then.  

MEDICATIONS:  
Adderall XL 40 mg daily.
Celexa 30 mg daily.
Drops for hair loss. 
Trazodone 100 mg q.h.s. 

ALLERGIES:  CEDAX AND CECLOR.

Collin has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or hearing loss.  Of late he has had some problems with vertigo.  Collin also has an allergy problem to grass and pollens.  He does have significant allergy problems and does get recurrent sinus infections.  

Collin is a triplet.  He has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain or myofascial pain around the head and neck area.  He rates his jaw function at 2, diet at 0, disability at 0.   

In frontal view, Collin has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 to 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted 1 to 2 mm to the left.  Chin is also slightly shifted to the left.  In profile view, there may be some slight AP deficiency maybe 2 to 3 mm but not too significant.  The mandible may be retruded about 10 mm.  Chin-neckline and angle appear well-defined but chin neckline is somewhat short.  Intraorally, Collin has teeth erupted through the first molars in the lower arch and second molars in the upper arch.  In centric relation, he has a Class II occlusal relationship being almost a full Class II on the left side and not quite as significant on the right side but still probably 4 to 5 mm.  He has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  As Collin sized forward into a good incisor relationship he still has just a slight Class II occlusal tendency indicative of probably a tooth size difference.  In centric occlusion he does have a crossbite tendency in the left first molar area and has bilateral posterior open bites in the molar area.  The posterior open bites are about 2 mm in the molar area.  Intranasally, the nasal septum is deviated a little bit off to the right side.  The right turbinate appears a little bit larger than the left turbinate but there does appear to be adequate airway on both sides with the left side being significantly larger than the right side.  Collin gives no history of snoring or sleep apnea symptoms.  He does have some tiredness during the day but likely not related to sleep problems.  Collin does have difficulties sleeping at night but his parents feel it may be related to the medications that he takes during the day.  When he does not take the medications he can sleep pretty well at night without any additional sedative medications.  He says he loves chocolate ice cream but this apparently may not be the factor contributing to this.  Maximal incisal opening for Collin is 48 mm.  Excursive to the right 9 mm, left 6 mm.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  Collin has a transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being 1 to 2 mm higher than the right side.  On the left side the mandible may be vertically short 2 to 3 mm compared to the right side.  There may be slight increased fullness on the right side by 2 to 3 mm as compared to the left side.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows there may be some sclerosis around the roots of the maxillary second molars.  Maxillary third molars and mandibular left third molar are absent.  Mandibular right third molar is present as the second molar was previously extracted because it was deemed ankylosed.  Looking at the maxillary first and second molars it is possible that there could be an ankylosis problem associated within as well.  The roots are not as identifiable and there is some sclerotic bone around the roots.  Maxillary central incisor roots are flared significantly in part from one another.  The sinuses appear clear.  The turbinate on the left side appears enlarged.  Articular eminences are extremely steep.  The left condyle appears to have some flattening on the anterior aspect.  Not good views to evaluate the TMJs.

Waters view shows that Collin has a significantly deviated nasal septum with a spur off to the right side and may be blocking a good part of the airway.  This is back in the bony aspect of the nose.  The right turbinate appears relatively normal in size but the left turbinate appears huge and it appears to be blocking the airway particularly on the left posterior aspect.  The sinuses actually look relatively clear. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle has some flattening on the anterior head and a little hockey stick shape associated with it.  Increased anterior joint space but moderately decreased posterosuperior and posterior joint spaces.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows condyle appears more centered.  It still may not be all the way back in centric relation on this side compared to the MRI.  The joint space is fairly well balanced.  Articular eminence is quite steep and long in length.  Tooth size analysis reveals a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.  In the lower right quadrant the tooth that was ankylosed was actually the first molar.  That tooth was removed and second molars had been brought forward into the first molar position.  The third molar is developing and the plan is that hopefully that it will erupt into the second molar position.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is some vertical discrepancy between the left and right side.  The left side is shorter vertically at the occlusal plane actually more so than at the inferior border.  A little bit of a high occlusal plane angle is present.  Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted particularly at the base of the tongue where the airway is only about 5 mm or less.  At the soft palate level there is airway space of about 4.5 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation (rule out ICR.)
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Class II occlusion being worse on the left side than the right side. 
Mandible deviated to the left side 1 to 2 mm. 
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1 to 2 mm shorter vertically than the right side.
Bilateral posterior open bites.
Possible ankylosed maxillary first and second molars bilaterally.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Recent history of vertigo.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Detach first and second molars from the arch wires.
Consider using vertical elastics to see if any movement can be achieved vertically to close the open bites (we need to rule out that the orthodontic mechanics were not responsible for keeping the teeth apart).
Surgery stage I:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Continuation of presurgical orthodontics.  If no ankylosis then continue to align and level the arches and complete orthodontic treatment.  If ankylosis is present then continue to align and level the anterior 10 teeth in both arches but leave the molars out of the archwire.  This will create a step in the occlusal plane.
At the age of 17 to 18 following completion facial growth.
Perform osteotomies as necessary to complete the bite relationship.