CLAIRE KITZMILLER								11-24-03

Claire is the niece of Dr. Rick Roblee, 1915 Green Acres, Fayetteville, AR  72703.

Patient History

Claire is 14 years old. She does have a history of asthma in the past and will have an occasional flareup but nothing that causes her to have a significant amount of problem. Claire has some seasonal allergies. Claire does have some problems wearing cheap jewelry in reference to earrings. 

She gets headaches once or twice a week, and they usually occur in the frontal and temporal area at about a level of 5. Headaches usually start in the middle of the day or at night. She rates them at a level of 5 in the frontal and temporal areas. She rates her average daily pain when she has her headaches at about a level of 4, jaw function at 0, diet at 1, and disability at 0. The only medications she takes are Claritin for seasonal allergies and Advil for her headaches. She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss and no other joint problems. She has difficulties wearing cheap earrings. She is not aware of any problems with clenching and bruxing.

Patient Concerns

Overbite
Headaches 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Claire has good facial symmetry and balance. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth to lip relation is about 2 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty muchaligned with each other. Mandibular dental midline may be just about 0.5 mm to 1 mm off to the left side. Upper lip appears retruded by about 3 mm. Chin appears retruded by about 10 mm. Chin-neckline appears a little bit short, although the chin-neck angle is moderately well-defined. She has good balance between the cheeks, lips, and nose. She has a fairly obtuse nasolabial angle. 

Intraorally, she is missing all 4 first bicuspids. The teeth are fairly well-aligned and leveled. Most of the space is closed in the extraction areas, although there is a little space on the right side between the cuspid and the second bicuspid of about 1 mm. She has an end-on Class II occlusion by probably 4 to 5 mm with the left side being a little bit greater than the right side only because of the residual spacing on the lower left side. Has an overjet of about 3 mm. As she slides her lower jaw forward where her front teeth touch, she is still about 1 mm to 1.5 mm Class II in the cuspid area. Could be indicative of a slight tooth-size discrepancy. Claire may be more of a mouth breather at night when she sleeps, at least according to her parents. Oropharynx appears clear, and all tissues appear healthy. She has had her tonsils removed, and she had a T&A done at the age of 5. 

Intranasally, the left turbinate looks a little bit inflamed and slightly enlarged and comes fairly close to touching against the nasal septum. On the right side, the turbinate appears a little more normal in size, and the airway appears good, at least at the anterior part that we can observe. She does have about a 2-mm vertical overbite relationship. Maximal incisal opening is 48 mm. Excursive movements are about 9 mm in each direction.
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses are fairly clear. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. She has four developing unerupted third molars. Roots on the central incisors appear a little bit foreshortened. Condyles appear a little bit flattened on the anterior edge bilaterally. All four first bicuspid are absent.

Waters view shows that the jaws are fairly symmetrical. Sinuses appear clear. She has a developed frontal sinus on the left side but not on the right side. Turbinate on the left side appears somewhat enlarged compared to the right side. 

Left TMJ shows some flattening on the anterior head with a little bit of anterior beaking. Appears to be significantly decreased posterior and superior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep but relatively short in vertical length. Increased anterior joint space. The disc possibly could be displaced anteriorly in the vertical position but with an early reduction.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit small on one view and appears to be superiorly and posteriorly displaced. Decreased superior joint space. Articular eminence is more shallow on this side, and the anterior joint space appears to be greater than the opposite side. Disc could possibly be dislocated on this side as well. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. Appears to be space between the condyles and the articular eminences indicative of a reducing joint. 

Cephalometrically, Claire appears to have some slight AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency. She has a skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship. She appears to have a high occlusal plane angulation. 

Bolton’s analysis shows that there is a tooth-size discrepancy of only about 0.5 mm to 1 mm. However, the incisor edges might be slightly thickened on the upper teeth but not too significantly. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Class II occlusion
Missing four first bicuspids (extracted for orthodontic purposes)
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4
Short roots on the maxillary central incisors
High occlusal plane angle
Headaches 
TMJ pain

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch
Continue to align and level mandibular arch
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it about 3 to 4 mm and downgraft it posteriorly to decrease the occlusal plane angle
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Surgical removal of four impacted third molars

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
