BARBARA KLASSEN								06/23/2008

Barbara is 59 years old, referred by William Hang, DDS, MSD, 101 N. Westlake Blvd., Suite 202, Westlake Village, CA 91362.  Primary concern that Barbara has is sleep apnea. She is currently on a CPAP machine that she has used for the last 4 years.  During that time, the pressures have been increased from 5 to 8.  She tolerates the CPAP machine, but would prefer not to have to live with it the rest of her life.  Interestingly, Barbara states that she has had significant back problems through the years.  When she started using the CPAP machine, the pain in her back went away.  However, she notes that when she wakes up in the morning and if her mask did not fit very well during the night, she again will have the backaches.  It is possible this could have some relationship to decreased oxygen saturation.  She does state she has difficulties breathing when she lies down before she falls asleep. She feels as though she has lump on the left side of her throat and this area feels swollen.  She takes the following medications:

Zetia 10 mg q.d.
Calcium 500 mg 1 per day.
Ferrous sulfate 325 mg 2 per day.
Clonazepam 0.5 mg 1/2 to 1/4 pill at night.
Nasonex 50 mcg 1 per day.
Diovan 80 mg 1 per day.
Omeprazole 20 mg 2 per day. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Barbara has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 28 m.  Upper tooth lip relationship is -3 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, Barbara appears to have some maxillary AP deficiency of about 4 mm.  The chin appears to be about 15 mm AP deficient.  Chin neckline is extremely short and chin neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, Barbara has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her upper teeth back through the second molars except she is missing the maxillary left first bicuspid.  She is also missing the second molar.  She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship, but has bilateral posterior crossbites and an incisor end-on relationship.  She has virtually zero vertical overbite.  She is missing all four third molars.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  There may be some mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction.  Luminal valves are moderately constricted.  Orally, the uvula is moderately enlarged.  The soft palate may be moderately elongated, however, the fascial pillars are severely constricted and this is combined with relatively large tonsils that are present.  The transverse oropharyngeal airway appears to be less than 1 cm.  Barbara has severe snoring without the CPAP, but with the CPAP it is not as noticeable.  She has moderate to severe daytime somnolence, severe sleep apnea, and a severe sleep disorder.  She tends to breath through her mouth a lot during the day.  At night with the CPAP, the air probably significantly goes through her nose instead of her mouth.  She has restless leg syndrome.  In addition, she feels that she oftentimes is in a fog during the day.  On opening, Barbara appears to have clicking in both joints at somewhere around 25 mm of opening and about 10-15 mm of closing.  To palpation, she has some moderate tenderness over the right shoulder, but nowhere else around the head and neck area.  In her joints, the condyles can be palpated to extend beyond the lateral rim of the fossa.  Maximal incisal opening is 42 mm, excursion movements to the right 8 mm, to the left 7 mm.  On excursion movements, she has an audible click in the right TMJ.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, the maxillary left second molar, and first bicuspid.  She has a root canal in the mandibular right second bicuspid and crowns on most of the posterior teeth.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints.  
Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The turbinates are moderate in size and the bony septum appears relatively straight.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic with decreased posterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with increased anterior joint space.  The condyle appears somewhat narrow anteroposteriorly.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is moderate translation of both joints.    
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Barbara has some AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency.  Upper lip is long and she has a negative tooth-lip relationship.  She has an increased occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 9 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 13 mm.  
Basic diagnoses for Barbara would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations.  
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.  
AP mandibular deficiency. 
High occlusal plane angle. 
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.
Missing maxillary left first bicuspid and second molar as well as all four third molars. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied nasal turbinates. 
Hyperplastic uvula and soft palate.
Severe constricture of the posterior fascial pillars with a combination of hypertrophied tonsillar tissue and anatomical malposition. 
Severely decreased transverse oropharyngeal airway.  
Severe sleep apnea. 
High blood pressure. 

Recommended treatment would include the following:

MRI of left and right TMJ.  
 Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up maxillary left first bicuspid space to equal the size of a bicuspid tooth.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies that will be necessary to correct the bilateral posterior crossbite. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 to 3 mm of tooth structure and retract.  
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction by one of the following methods:
Bilateral disc repositioning with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral total joint prostheses (determination will be dependent on the MRI findings).
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in the counterclockwise direction down grafting the posterior aspect.   
Mandibular advancement by one of the following methods.
Bilateral sagittal split osteotomies if TMJ disc can be repositioned.
Mandibular advancement with total joint prostheses if joints are non-salvageable. 
Bilateral tonsillectomy.  
Bilateral UPPP procedure. 
Bilateral partial turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
Restorative dentistry. 
Placement of osteointegrated implant in maxillary left first bicuspid area.
Place crown on osteointegrated implant.
