LAUREN KLEIMAN									12/19/2005 

Lauren is 16 years old referred by Dr. David Goldberg, Avenue Palmas 745-PB, Mexico City DF, Mexico, 11000.  Lauren is in good health with no major medical problems.  When Lauren was at least 12 years of age she had a good bite relationship.  Now the lower jaw has grown out to be on the upper jaw.  She has had orthodontic appliances on her teeth for about four years.  Lauren has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She said she is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  

In frontal view, Lauren has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is probably 4 mm.  The nasal tip is off the right side probably a couple of mm.  Maxillary midline is off to the right about 1 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is off to the right about 3 mm.  Chin is off to the right side about 5 to 6 mm.  As she shifts her chin towards the left side, it does improve her overall facial symmetry.  Maxillary midline may actually be a couple of mm off to the right side.  In profile, Lauren has some lip incompetence of probably about 6 mm.  The maxilla appears to be AP retruded by probably 4 to 5 mm.  Chin-neckline is relatively normal and chin-neck angle is very well defined.  She has a high mandibular plane angle facial morphology.  Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids.  The transverse width of the lower arches appears constricted.  In the upper arch, she has had first bicuspids also extracted.  She is end-on Class III occlusion on the right side by probably 4 to 5 mm and on the left side, she is probably a good 5 mm Class III.  The upper and lower arches are fairly symmetric in AP position of the cuspids.  The upper arch is fairly level with maybe just a 1/2 mm difference with the right side being slightly higher than the left side.  In the lower arch, the right side appears to be about 1 mm higher than the left side.  She does have an anterior open bite of about 2 mm.  No cross bite is present.  There is an anterior cross bite difference of probably about 6 mm.  Intraorally, the tonsils are present and are moderately enlarged.  The uvula and soft palate are relatively normal.  Probably some mild to moderate constricture of the faucial pillars that may be related to the tonsils being present.  She does have some mild deviation of the nasal septum off to the right side and the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  She is not aware of any problems of snoring, sleep apnea etc.  Lauren has had orthodontics for approximately 4 years.  She has had all 4 first bicuspids extracted.  At one point, the lower teeth were being tipped back inwards trying to control the occlusion.  Lauren actually has been in treatment in various treatment and various stages since about the age of 8 years old.  Her current appliances have been on about 4 years.  She at one time had a high-poll headgear apparently to try to retract the upper teeth or to keep them from erupting vertically.  She apparently was told 4 years ago that she did have a vertical growth pattern and there would be some problems keeping the teeth and jaws together.  The maximal incisal opening is about 53 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is 4 mm, to the left 5 mm.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head or neck area including no tenderness over the joints.  She rates her headaches at 0, TMJ pain at 0 and no pain at all or discomfort around the head and neck area.  Interestingly, she can generate clicking and popping in her joints particularly if she goes to excursive movements to where it actually can be audible.  My initial evaluation did not reflect that but she then demonstrated that she could do that.  Dental model analysis shows that there is a discrepancy in width to the upper and lower arch. 


LAUREN KLEIMAN				12/19/2005				Page 2


Lower posterior teeth are tipped lingually with an increase curve of Wilson or as in the upper arch there is an excessive curve of Wilson and manipulating the models will get the patient into a good Class I cuspid molar relationship, however, there is a transverse width discrepancy with the mandible being too narrow compared to the maxilla.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of all 4 third molars except the left maxillary third molar is overlying the first and second molars.  The 4 first bicuspids are absent, but on the other hand it is possible that it could be that all 4 second bicuspids are extracted and not the first bicuspids.  There is adequate room between the lateral incisors and cuspids.  It may actually be more on the palatal side.  The sinuses look clear.  It is difficult to evaluate the TMJs.  

Waters view shows that a little deviation in the nasal septum is present.  The right turbinate appears enlarged particularly posteriorly.  The right airway seems to be occluded while the left one seems fairly open.  The sinuses appear clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears fairly normal in morphology but maybe elongated head and neck length.   Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  There may be a little bit of decreased posterior joint space and superior joint space but difficult to determine.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears more narrow anteroposteriorly than the opposite side.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both TMJs.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal and occlusal Class III relationship.  High occlusal plane angle is present.  Oropharyngeal airway appears good except there is some adenoid tissue at the posterior nasopharyngeal area.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES 
Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations. 
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Transverse constriction of the lower arch.
AP maxillary deficiency and asymmetry.
High occlusal plane angle. 
Slight vertical maxillary excess. 
Transverse maxillary arch excess.
Increased curve of Wilson in maxillary and mandibular arches.
Class III occlusion.
Anterior open bite.
Impacted third molars x4.
LAUREN KLEIMAN				12/19/2005				Page 3


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Try to decrease the transverse width of the upper arch to decrease the accentuated curve of Wilson.
Continue to align and level the lower arch.  Expand the lower posterior teeth from the bicuspid to the molars to decrease the accentuated curve of Wilson.
Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors to stop the excessive mandibular growth.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible backwards.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Post Surgical Orthodontics
                 Finish and retain