NANCY KLEIN									8/24/05

Nancy is 44 years old, referred by Dr. Al Bishop.  She has some seasonal allergy problems and some sinus problems.  She takes Allegra D occasionally for her allergies and she takes birth control pills.  Nancy is not sure how long ago her jaw joint problems began but she thinks somewhere around 7 years ago when she yawned and had an open lock situation develop.  Since then, she has had problems with her jaws.  Her jaws lock open and particularly when she had dental work done, she had difficulty closing her jaws afterwards.  She could not sing anymore at church and when she would talk for more than a few minutes, she would develop pain.  She had difficulty eating and does not sleep well at all secondary to the pain factors and jaw positioning etc.  She has difficulty swallowing and choking. 

She has had a long history of clenching of her jaws.  Her dentist a few years ago placed her on ibuprofen and this helped her for awhile.  She finally went to see Dr. Al Bishop.  She had orthodontics previously when she was in the 8th through the 10th grade including extractions of all four first bicuspids.  She also had her third molars removed.  She was in a headgear when she had her braces done earlier.  Essentially the upper jaw and teeth were pulled back to meet the retruded mandible.  Because of her significant pain and dysfunctional problems with her jaw, she finally began treatment in January with Dr. Bishop and had her orthodontic appliances put on.  She apparently has deep bite and Dr. Bishop is in the process of decreasing that level of deep bite and this has significantly improved Nancy's symptoms.  She has no earaches, gets some tinnitus, no vertigo, has some hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching at night time.  To palpation she has no pain around the head and neck area.  In jaw function, she has some crepitus in both of her joints with the right side being greater than the left side.  She rates her headaches at a level of 6 in the temple area but since she has had her orthodontics beginning in January, her headaches have significantly decreased.  Her TMJ pain was about a level of 6 but since her orthodontics, it has decreased significantly as well.  Her average facial pain used to be about a level of 6, since her orthodontics currently is at 0.  She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 5, disability at 5.  In centric relation, she does have an overjet of about at least 2 to 3 mm.  Class II occlusion is actually slightly worse than previously mentioned and she is closer to 5 mm Class II on the left side and 4 mm Class II on the right side.

In frontal view, Nancy has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 24 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm on the left and 5 on the right.  Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline and chin.  In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Maxilla is AP deficient by probably at least 6 to 8 mm.  Chin is AP deficient by approximately 20 mm.  There is no chin-neck angle. There is a jaw slope from the chin down into the neck.  Submental area is moderately full.  She has some lip incompetence probably about 6 to 7 mm.  Intraorally, Nancy has orthodontic appliances on all of her teeth.  She is missing lower first bicuspids.  Teeth are being aligned and leveled.  A little depression of the left lateral incisor compared to the rest of the teeth.  In the upper arch, she is missing first bicuspids.  She hits prematurely and it appears on her upper incisors and lower brackets.  She has a slight Class II end-on occlusion being a greater end-on Class II occlusion on the left side as compared to the right side.  She is probably 3 to 4 mm Class II on the left side and about 3 mm Class II on the right side.  
NANCY KLEIN				8/24/05				Page 2



She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  She occludes only on her maxillary central incisors and her lower incisor brackets.  She has had some composite buildup on her second molars so that she will have some contact back in that area as well.  The rest of the teeth do not touch.  Uvula appears relatively normal in length.  The soft palpate may be a little bit posteriorly positioned.  Of interest, she is missing the posterior faucial pillar on the right side.  The left side is normal and the left side of the palate is positioned a little bit lower than the right side is.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is level.  Intranasally, the turbinates are hyperplastic of a moderate degree. The septum appears relatively straight.  Nancy is unaware of any nasal airway obstruction, however, I suspect she probably has mild to moderate obstruction.  Her nostrils are moderately narrow.  Luminal valves look relatively normal in size.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Left joint seems to function reasonably smoothly and the right joint has some crepitus that is more apparent in the first jaw opening.  Nancy states she has always had more problems with the right joint than the left.  Maximal incisal opening is 32 mm, without discomfort 23 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 8 mm and to the left 7 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four first bicuspids and all four third molars.  It is difficult to evaluate sinuses although the left side looks a little bit more cloudy than the right side.  Difficulty to tell the condition on the condyles because of the quality of the x-ray.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses do appear clear.  Turbinates appear fairly large with minimal airway present.  The bony septum looks fairly straight.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows arthritis in the TMJ with anterior beaking.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  Joint space appears decreased particularly towards the anterior aspect.  The posterior joint space looks perhaps slightly increased.  

The left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some arthritic changes associated with decreased superior and posterior joint space.  There appears to be some kind of calcified mass sitting in front of the condylar head.  This calcified mass measures about 9 mm by 8 mm.  On opening, there is moderate translation of both condyles.  The condyles are significantly flattened and have significant anterior beaking present.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that both the maxilla and mandible are significantly retruded.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  She has a Class II occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 3.5 mm at the base of the tongue and perhaps only 1 or 2 mm at the soft palate level although the line of the soft palate is difficult to identify.  There is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of almost 2.5 mm.  
NANCY KLEIN				8/24/05				Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
Severe AP mandibular deficiency. 
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical deficiency.
Class II occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway space.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Headaches.
Masticatory dysfunction.
Lip incompetence.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.
Vertical inclination of maxillary incisors.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Open up spacing around the upper lateral incisors to equal at least 1 mm on each side.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Elevate mandibular left lateral incisor approximately 1 mm.
CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement (20 mm) utilizing TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 8 mm and down graft the posterior aspect approximately 6 mm to decrease the occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
5.  Restorative dentistry to bond or veneer the maxillary lateral incisors.  
