SCOTT KLEIN									5/16/05

Scott is 47 years old.  He has had his tonsils removed, had his appendix removed and had vocal cord nodules removed.  He also had had surgery for his strabismus.  He had one episode about a year ago of atrial fibrillation.  

MEDICATIONS: 
Prevacid.
Remicade.
Propecia.
Folic acid. 

Scott's current problem began on Tuesday, May 10, 2005.  He was eating and developed some jaw joint problems.  His teeth would not come together comfortably after that episode.  He reports that he has had noises in his joints for at least 25 years.  This began of unknown etiology.  He has had no treatment to date for his current situation.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo.  He feels he has some hearing loss compared to 10 years ago but nothing specific.  No other joints bother him.  He does have some allergy to environmental factors.  He feels that he may do some clenching at nighttime.  He rates his TMJ pain currently at 5 overall, facial pain and jaw pain at 6 but is there periodically and not all the time.  He rates his jaw function at 4, diet at 6, disability at 3.  He has no facial numbness at this time.  Scott has good facial symmetry and balance.  Intraorally, Scott is missing lower first bicuspids.  There is some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  The upper arch is also missing first bicuspids.  The patient is taken out probably for orthodontic reasons.  Essentially Class I cuspid molar relationship.  Right side is just slightly opened posteriorly but not too significantly.  As Scott bites, he feels his teeth coming together on the left side first and then on the right side the teeth do not come together at all.  He can shift and force the teeth together on the right side but with normal biting they do not touch.  The oropharynx appears healthy.  Scott had a previous UPPP procedure performed about 20 years ago as the same time as his vocal cord nodules were removed.  This was to help his snoring.  This apparently has not been real successful.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderate size.  He had previous septoplasty and the septum looks reasonably straight.  He does have some very significant constriction of the luminal valves with the right one being a little bit worse than the left one.  Opening the nostrils and luminal valves enabled him to breathe easier.  Since Tuesday, Scott rates his TMJ pain at a level of 5, and gets periodic facial pain and headaches at about a level of 6.  Actually, it is not much of a headache, it is more of facial pain problems.  He rates his jaw function at 4, diet at 6, disability at 3.  For the most part, he does not have trouble with headaches.  He gets headaches only occasionally and when he does get them they range from 3 to 8 in severity.  However, he does have a previous history of headaches and used to carry a bottle of Tylenol with him in his briefcase all the time.  For the past 1 to 2 years, he had not had quite as much problem with the headaches as he used to.  To palpation, he has moderate discomfort over the right masseter, right TMJ, right styloid area, and moderate tenderness over the left TMJ.  Incisal opening is about 43 mm, excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  
SCOTT KLEIN			5/16/05					Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids.  Sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  

Waters view shows that sinuses are relatively clear except for a little cloudiness in the lateral aspect of the left maxillary sinus.  The septum is reasonably straight.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows the teeth are not quite together all the way.  There is good joint space around the condyle and the condyle appears to have very good morphology.  Articular eminence is fairly steep. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit flattened on the anterior aspect.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Styloid process is fairly prominent.  Joint space appears a little bit increased posteriorly as compared to the anterior joint space which appears perhaps slightly decreased.  On opening, there is actually fairly good translation of both condyles, much better than on the MRI.  The right condyle comes anterior the articular eminence.  The left one just comes forward to beneath the articular eminence.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is some AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency probably due to the previous orthodontics.  Oropharyngeal airway actually looks fairly good although there is definite tethering of the soft palate and the fibrous band can actually be seen progressing down into the oropharynx.  This is coupled with the nasal airway obstruction and is probably the primary factors contributing to his residual snoring problems.  Clinically, the soft palate almost appears a little bit short anteroposteriorly.  It does appear to be tethered inferiorly.  His tongue completely fills the oral cavity. 

In profile view the upper lip is 5 to 6 mm AP deficient.  The chin is also AP deficient by probably about 6 to 8 mm.  There is prominent labio-mental fold.  Chin-neckline is essentially nonexistent.  There is a slight cant in the transverse occlusal plane in the left side being about 2 mm higher than the right side.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction.
Left TMJ articular disc dislocation with early reduction.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency. 
AP macrogenia.
Class I occlusion.
Slight open-bite on the right side posteriorly.
Missing all four first bicuspids secondary to previous orthodontics.
Missing all four third molars.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
SCOTT KLEIN				5/16/05				Page 3


Constriction of the luminal valves. 
Sleep apnea symptoms. 
Severe snoring.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. 
Moderately high-occlusal plane angulation. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Sleep study.

Presurgical orthodontics.
Apply appliances to the maxillary arch.
Apply appliances to the mandibular arch.

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the mandible and down graft it posteriorly. 
AP reduction genioplasty.
Partial turbinectomies. 
Reconstruct bilateral nasal luminal valves.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 