KAY KLEKAR									05/05/2008

Kay is 28 years old.  Referred by Richard Ingraham, DDS, MS, PA, 5255 S. Staples Street, Corpus Christi, TX 78411.  She is in fairly good health.  She does have hypothyroidism and takes the following medications:
Synthroid 0.75 mg q.d.
Tri-Levin (BCP).
Asacol 1600 mg q.d., but does not take this consistently.
Advair inhaler 2 times per day when needed.

By history, Kay thought that she wanted improvement in her tooth alignment in smiling.  In December 2006, she began orthodontic treatment.  However, during the treatment, it was noted that Kay was developing a crossbite on the right side.  Because this seemed to be getting progressively worse, the orthodontics were discontinued in June 2007.  Since then, Kay feels that her lower jaw has continued to shift off towards the right side. She then went to see Dr. Richard Ingraham who referred her to Dr. David Curtis.  Dr. Curtis made splints for her, one to wear at night and one to wear during the day in January 2008.  She has really not noticed any improvement at all except it seems to have reduced some of the pain that she was getting down in her back.  
Kay gets headaches at a level of 6 mainly in the posterior part of the head, but also in the left frontal and temporal areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, being worse on the left side than the right side, average daily pain at 6 with moderate pain down into the neck.  She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 8 (more recently), and disability at 3.  She gets earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching her teeth at night time and also during the day.  Primary concerns Kay has includes the following:
Face looks longer on one side and is becoming increasingly more asymmetric.
Headaches.
Ear pain.
Ear ringing.
Pain in the jaws and jaw joints.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Kay has fairly good facial asymmetry in the middle and upper third face.  She has asymmetry in the lower third face.  The left side of the mandible appears about 3 mm lower than right side.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 3.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm off to the right and chin is about 6 mm off to the right.  In profile view, she does have a dorsal bump on the nose.  Upper lip supra labrale is posterior to subnasale by probably about 2 mm.  She is probably AP deficient maxilla by probably about 3-4 mm.  Chin is retruded by probably about maybe 6-8 mm.  Chin neckline is a little bit shorter, and the chin neck angle is fairly well-defined.  Intraorally, Kay has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  The upper arch may be a little bit narrow transversely.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  There is a slight increase curve of Wilson on the right side as compared to the left side.  She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by maybe 2 mm and a crossbite on the right side.  She has about 0.5 mm of vertical overbite relationship and has a buccal crossbite tendency on the left side and it is probably about 2 mm Class III on the left side.  Kay occludes only on the right first and second molars and on the right lateral incisors.  All of her other teeth are out of occlusion.  Oropharyngeal tissues appear relatively normal.  She does have a fairly good-sized ulcer on her tongue that probably measures about 6 mm in length that is adjacent to her splint.  It could be either an irritation from her splint versus perhaps traumatically biting the that area between her upper teeth and her splint.  She has two splints.  One fits on the lower arch and may be the one causing the problem with the tongue.  The other splint is an upper one with an anterior vertical dis-occluding stop.  Intranasally, the left turbinate is relatively normal in size.  The right one is moderately enlarged.  Septum is deviated off towards the right side.  This compresses the airway on the right side, although the left side looks fairly good.  The columella is quite wide and her nostrils are quite narrow, and they are probably one of the primary reasons that she tends to breathe through her mouth instead of her nose.  Luminal valves are moderately constricted.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the temporalis muscles, styloid areas, shoulders, and mild to moderate pain over the right TMJ.  She has high moderate to low severe pain over the left medial pterygoid muscle.  Joints seems to function relatively smoothly, although she does translate her left condyle over the articular eminence and this makes visible and palpable displacement.  In excursion movements, she seems to function relatively smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 57 mm, but opening without discomfort 26 mm.  Excursion movement to the right is about 7 mm, to the left about 9 mm.  She has a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the maxillary left cuspid being about 1 and at the most 2  mm lower than the right side.
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has a root canal on the mandible left second bicuspid.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The left mandible condyle and condylar neck appear elongated compared to the right side.  The right side may be just a little bit arthritic appearing.    
Waters view shows that bony septum appears reasonably straight.  Turbinates appear quite large and actually the left side appears larger than the right side.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic.  There is a little sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.  Articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condylar head and neck that are significantly longer than the right side.  Articular eminence is a little bit more shallow compared to the opposite side.  Joint space appears a little bit narrow vertically, but posteriorly appears good.  On opening, there is good translation in both condyles.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has perhaps a little bit of slight skeletal Class III tendency.  She appears to have an elongated mandible vertically.  Oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal.  She is tending towards an anterior open bite. 
Basic diagnoses for Kay would be as follows:
Left TMJ osteochondroma and posterior dislocation of the articular disc. 
Right TMJ arthritis and anteriorly dislocated articular disc.
Mandibular deviated prognathism. 
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Anterior mandibular vertical excess, but AP chin deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 2 mm lower than the right side.
Slight Class II cuspid tendency on the right side, Class III end-on occlusion on the right side.  
Crossbites on the right side and tendency towards a buccal crossbite on the left side.
Mandibular dental midline shifted 3 mm to the right of the maxillary midline.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
External nasal deformity.
Wide columella creating very narrow nostrils.
Earaches.
Tinnitus.
Vertigo.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:	
 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Ensure lateral incisor roots are tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally in case interdental osteotomies are necessary.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to gently expand the lower arch to improve the transverse width in the lower arch.
Surgery.  
Left TMJ low condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back onto the facial midline and level it transversely.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward slightly, level transversely, and correct any transverse arch discrepancies.
Reconstruct columella to widen the nostrils.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to vertically reduce and AP augment the chin.
External rhinoplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.