ROGER KLEMM									06/01/2007

Roger is 41 years old and is referred by Dr. William Hang.  Roger is in good health.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Obstructive sleep apnea.
Snoring.
Bruxism.
Tinnitus. 
Back and neck postural challenges.  

Roger is not aware of having any significant TMJ problems.  He does receive some chiropractic treatment for upper back problems.  He takes a significant amount of nutritional supplements but no other medications.  Roger has been on a CPAP machine for approximately two years and this has significantly improved his quality of sleep.  He does have a history of clenching and bruxism at nighttime.  He has no earaches but has constant tinnitus that he has had since about the age of 10.  He has no vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  Roger rates his headaches at 0, TMJ pain at 0, average daily pain and headaches at 0, jaw function, diet and disability all at 0.  

In frontal view, Roger has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 10 mm.  Mandibular dental midline and chin appear pretty much on the facial midline.  Maxillary midline maybe ½ to 1 mm to the left.  Nasal tip is 1 to 2 mm to the right.  In profile view, upper lip is retruded.  It is probably retruded by a good 6 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded by about 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is short although the chin-neck angle is reasonably well formed.  Roger tends to posture himself in a head postured forward neck position.  Roger has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth appear to be nicely aligned and level.  In the upper arch, Roger has all of his teeth back through the second molars as well except he is missing the upper first bicuspids.  Upper incisors are actually tipped lingually.  He has a small diastema between the central incisors.  He has basically a Class I cuspid, Class II molar relationship.  He has about a 2 mm vertical overbite.  The uvula is moderately enlarged.  The soft palate may be mildly elongated but not too significant.  Facial pillars appear to be relatively normal.  Roger does have crenations along the borders of his tongue.  Tonsils are small and not easily seen.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  The septum is reasonably straight.  Roger is not aware of significant nasal airway obstruction but I believe he probably has some moderate amounts.  With the CPAP it forces air through his nose.  Without the CPAP he breathes predominately through this mouth.  Maximal incisal opening is 62 mm.  Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction.  To palpation, he has some very minimal tenderness over the styloid areas but no other pain around the head and neck area.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary first bicuspids but all other teeth back through the third molars are present.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Difficult to evaluate the TMJs.  


ROGER KLEMM				06/01/2007				Page 2

Left TMJ tomogram shows the condyle to have reasonably good shape.  There seems to be fairly good joint space.  Articular eminence is fairy steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the posterior head.  There may be some slight decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is fairly steep although not quite as steep as the opposite side but perhaps a little bit longer in length.  The condyle has a little peaking morphology towards the anterosuperior aspect.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The nasal septum appears reasonably straight although there may be some deviation of the bony septum off towards the right side.  Right turbinate appears enlarged.  Left turbinate appears a little bit more normal and there appears to be airway space on the left side compared to the right side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Roger has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  He has a significantly reduced oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of less than 3 mm at the soft palate level and perhaps about 3 mm at the base of the tongue.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteromedially displaced.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Severe sleep apnea.
Missing maxillary first bicuspids.
Moderately high occlusal plane angle.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Partial nasal airway obstruction. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up space for the first bicuspid area.  Try to distalize the molars approximately 2 mm so the upper incisors are not overly flared (this may require removal of the 4 third molars pre-orthodontic treatment.)
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and decrease the occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
Partial turbinectomies.  
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.


ROGER KLEMM				06/01/2007				Page 3

Restorative dentistry.
Placement of osseointegrated implants in the maxillary first bicuspid area.
Restorative dentistry.
