KARA KLEVENHAGEN								04-01-02

Kara is 27 years old. Kara was referred by Dr. James Peoples (10497 Town and Country Way, Houston, TX  77024). Also she was referred by Linda Sullivan (Frostwood Elementary School, 12214 Memorial Drive, Houston, TX  77024).

Current Medications

Medications she takes are Ortho-Cept and Zyrtec.

Patient History

Kara did have a history of headaches before her recent jaw surgery. Headaches most commonly occurred in the temporal area, and she would get these headaches at least once a week. On December 10, 2001, after undergoing some orthodontic treatment, she had her mandible advanced by Dr. James Peoples. She was told that apparently there were some problems during surgery with muscles underneath the chin area and getting the jaw properly positioned. She was wired together for two weeks, and rigid fixation was used. She had surgery done on a Monday, and five days later, after the swelling had started to subside, she had some significant increased swelling on the left side and significant pain on that side. Nothing specifically was done. The swelling finally resolved. In early February, she apparently again developed some swelling on the left side of the face. She has been having episodes of sharp pains in and around the joint and ear area. She has no troubles currently with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. She has chondromalacia patellae bilaterally in her knees. She has some general allergy problems. She has no difficulties wearing jewelry.

Kara was in orthodontics from second grade through high school for about 10 years of active treatment. They were then off for college and then put on again, and they were put back on in July of 1998, so she has been in orthodontic appliances now for about 13 years. 

Patient Concerns

Basic concerns Kara has at this time including the following:

Teeth and jaws do not fit together properly.
Headaches.
Jaw and jaw joint pain.
Difficulties eating and chewing.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, she has fairly good left to right facial symmetry. Maxillary midline is fairly close to midline. Chin appears to be fairly close to being on the facial midline.



In profile view, it appears there may be just some slight AP maxillary deficiency. Mandible appears a little bit retruded. She has a prominent labiomental fold. Pogonion is a little bit prominent compared to the lower lip projection. Chin-neckline is a little bit short, although the chin-neck angle is relatively well-defined.

Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids. In the upper arch, she also is missing bicuspids. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally. She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm. Transverse occlusal plane appears fairly level. She reveals no difficulties breathing through her nose.

To palpation, she has some moderate discomfort over the masseter muscles and milder tenderness over the TMJs and left styloid area. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly; however, maximum opening is 28 mm and only 24 without discomfort. Right excursive movements are about 5 mm and left excursive movements 3.5 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. She has a root canal in the maxillary right first molar. She has three bone screws in each ramus. Condyles appear large. Sinuses appear clear. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa with decreased superior and posterior joint space. This could be compatible with possible anteriorly displaced articular discs. Condyles appear somewhat narrow anteroposteriorly and appear a little bit sclerotic on the superoanterior head. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology to it, better than the other side. Articular eminences are moderately steep on both sides. There is a slightly decreased posterior joint space and slightly increased anterior joint space, but the spacing looks better than the opposite side. 

On opening, there is significant restriction of translation on the right side and moderate translation on the left side. 

Waters view shows sinuses are clear. Turbinates appear relatively normal in size. Jaw structures look relatively symmetric.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class II relationship. Spacing is remaining between the lower second bicuspids and first molars. Actually, probably the second bicuspids were removed and the space is between the first bicuspids and the molars. Oropharyngeal airway is a little bit constricted with an airway at the base of the tongue of about 6 mm. At the soft palate level, it is closer to 9 to 10 mm. 

In reviewing her original models, it appears that she had primary retained second molars removed and had no precursor second bicuspids present. In the upper arch, she had some significant constricture of the maxilla and apparently was missing one set of bicuspids maybe from previous extractions. 

Dental model analysis shows that she has a tooth-size discrepancy of approximately 2.5 to 3 mm in the anterior six teeth. She also has a slightly increased curved of Wilson in the upper arch.

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations (closed-lock on the right side).
Class II occlusion.
Missing mandibular second bicuspids and maxillary first bicuspids.
Increased curve of Wilson, upper arch.
Residual spacing between lower first bicuspids and first molars particularly on the left side.
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton difference of 2.5 to 3 mm.
Low occlusal plane angulation.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Posterior crossbites in a Class I cuspid position.

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Open approximately 1 mm of space around each maxillary lateral incisor. These teeth will be bonded at a lateral time.
Continue to align and level lower arch. Strip lower anterior six teeth removing about 1.5 mm of tooth stricture and retracting. Also close residual spacing in the bicuspid-molar area and do this by trying to lose some posterior anchorage particularly on the left side.

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward with a clockwise rotation.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla, move the posterior aspect superiorly, and advance it slightly.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine and retain occlusion

Restorative dentistry to build up maxillary lateral incisors