MARY KLINGENSMTH							10/27/2011

Mary is 25 years old, birth date 09/22/1986.  Her mother is Dr. Carol Klingensmith, a general dentist in Portland, OR.  Mary was referred to me by Dr. Jeffrey Rouse, 555 E. Basse Road, Suite 200, San Antonio, TX 78210.  

Mary’s TMJ problems began in her teenage years when she developed clicking and popping.  At times she would have to manipulate her jaw to get it open.  Since her 20s, she would have just an occasional episode of getting closed lock kind of situation maybe for a day, but in the past year it has increased in the occurrence.  She still is aware of a little bit of clicking in the left joint, but in the right side the popping has stopped.  Mary gets headaches about 3 times per week predominantly in the right temporal area and on top of the head.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5 predominantly in the right side and on an average day usually hits about a level of 5.  She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 6.  Primary concern that Mary has at this time is her pain and limited jaw function.  She gets frequent earaches in the right side, but no tinnitus or vertigo.  She does have a little bit of problem with her knees but nothing real significant.  Mary usually feels best in the morning and her pain tends to escalate towards the end of the day.  She does not believe she clenches and grinds at night, but she does clench some during the day.   

In frontal view, Mary has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline.  The chin is shifted a little bit off towards to the left side about 3 or 4 mm.  In profile view, Mary has good facial balance.  Intraorally, May has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch and she has some thin attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars and is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 2 to 3 mm lower than the left side.  Mary and her mother feel that the face asymmetry has gotten a little bit worse in the last few years.  Mary does have slight increased fullness on the right side of the face in the ramus area being 4 mm stronger on the right side than the left side.  Mary has just a slight yaw in the upper jaw and lower jaw being shifted to the right side about 2 to 3 mm in the molar area.  The right side of the mandible is about 5 mm lower than the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy, although the uvula is moderately elongated.  The rest of the structures look relatively normal.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off to the right side some.  The turbinates are moderate enlarged and the right side appears to be a little bit more obstructed than the left side.  She has some mild snoring problems.  She has moderate daytime somnolence, but she is not aware of any sleep apnea issues.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the retromandibular area on the right side and some mild to moderate pain over the right masseter and mild over the right medial pterygoid.  Joints function smoothly as she opens.  The maximal opening is 27 mm and only 22 mm without pain.  The excursion movement to the right is 3 mm and to the left 3.5 mm.  
RADIOGRAPIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged a little bit more so on the right side than the left side.  Left condyle appears a little bit small in size and the right one may be a little bit enlarged.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight.  The right turbinate is moderately enlarged and the left one is also sort of moderate in enlargement.  The sinuses appear clear.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged and may cause a little bit of airway obstruction.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to be a little bit smaller in size and perhaps has lost some volume.  There is some beaking on the condyle.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow. 

Right TMJ condyle is significantly larger than the left side and is longer in a vertical dimension.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  The joint space posteriorly may be moderately decreased.  There may be some slight flattening of the posterior head of the condyle.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width, but appears to have lost some vertical volume.  There is some beaking of the condyle out laterally.  There is decreased vertical joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint indicative of probably anteromedially displacement of the disc.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The morphology of the condyle appears more normal compared to the opposite side.  There is decreased superior and particularly the lateral joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there are two occlusal plane levels and two inferior border plane levels.  The head may be tipped just slightly as clinically the vertical asymmetries are little bit greater than seen on this x-ray; however, anteroposteriorly the facial balance appears good.  Oropharyngeal airway dimension at the soft palate level measures about 9 mm and at the base of the tongue probably about 7 mm.  The tongue appears to fill the majority of the oral cavity.  The vertical height of the ramus on the right side at the angle area is almost 10 mm longer on the right side than the left side.  When Mary bites together, her back left teeth seems to touch first.

Mary did have a lot of problems with interstitial cystitis particularly during her college years.  She also had mononucleosis that she had during her senior year in high school and her freshman year in college.  She was roommates with Adrian Lichliter, a former patient.

Diagnoses for Mary would be as follows:

Right mandibular osteochondroma/osteoma.
Left TMJ resorptive arthritis.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations with closed lock.
Mandibular transverse asymmetry with the chin shifted off to the left side about 4 to 5 mm. 
Maxillary asymmetry with the right side 3 to 4 mm lower than the left side.  
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right cuspid 3 mm lower than the left side. 
Posterior yaw with the maxilla and mandible shifted off towards to the right side 3 to 4 mm.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics:  Place appliances on the maxillary and mandibular 	arches.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Right mandibular high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and 			ligament repair with Mitek anchor.  
	b.	Left TMJ articular disc respositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor. 
	c.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to level the transverse occlusal 			plane and correct the posterior yaw.
	d.	Maxillary osteotomies to transversely level the occlusal plane and correct 			the posterior yaw.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  