NANCY KNIGHT									05-02-02

She was referred by Dr. Steve Smart. Nancy is 59 years old. 

Patient History

She has had a previous ruptured appendix, and that was removed. She smokes about half a pack of cigarettes per day. She has some sinus problems and difficulties breathing through her nose.

Nancy has had TMJ clicking and popping in her joints as long as she can remember. It began of unknown etiology. About seven years ago, she developed a closed lock. She has been treated with splint therapy and medications. Currently she does take hormones, vitamins, Tylenol Sinus for headaches, and Duradrin for heaedaches, and she takes two initially but usually can control things with about three tablets. She takes up with headaches daily that can rate up to a 9 or 10. She has these everyday. After about an hour or so, they sometimes get better, but she will then two to four times during the week develop headaches also later in the day. Her headaches can get up to a level of 10. Her headaches are predominantly on the left side, and on an average day, she rates them at a level of 8 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain at a 5 on the left side on an average day and not much pain at all on the right side. 

Overall pain levels are at about a 9 on the average in the morning when she gets up. Jaw function is at 7, diet at 8, and disability at 5. To palpation, she only has some mild to moderate tenderness in the posterior neck area but no tenderness around the rest of the head and neck including the TMJs. She gets earaches, left side greater than right side, and she gets occasional tinnitus and vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her neck and her thumbs. 

She has an allergy to ERYTHROMYCIN but has no known food allergies.

She has no known problems associated with wearing jewelry.

She does have the significant snoring. She wakes up numerous times during the night usually with trying to catch her breath, and then she does have the daytime somnolence as well.

Patient Concerns

Her concerns including the following:
Severe headaches.
Moderate to severe TMJ pain.
Waking up numerous times during the night, unable to catch her breath.
Difficulties breathing through her nose.
Daytime tiredness.
Wakes up daily with severe headaches.
Sleep disorder.



Current Medications

Medications that she takes include hormone shots and vitamin B12, Tylenol Sinus, and Duradrin..

She is allergic to ERYTHROMYCIN.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Nancy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip is almost –4 mm. Right commissure is probably about 3 or 4 mm lower than the left one. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. 
Mandibular dental midline is probably a couple of millimeters to the left. Chin is also to the left probably about 2 or 3 mm. 

In profile view, Nancy has fairly good fullness in the upper lip area. Mandible, however, appears quite retruded. Chin-neckline is extremely short and measures probably only about 15 to 20 mm. Trachea is quite prominent relative to the mandible. Quite a bit of fullness in the neck tissues. Lower two thirds of the lower third face appears quite short vertically. As she postures her mandible forward, it does improve her overall facial balance, except she still has quite a prominent notch right behind the chin area in the submental area and quite a bit of fullness in the neck area. There appears to be a fair amount of adipose tissue there. 

Intraorally, she missing probably her mandibular first molar but the second molar is drifted forward. There is fairly significant crowding in the lower anterior arch of probably about 5 mm. Left cuspid is about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. In the upper arch, she is missing the right cuspid replaced with a pontic, and on the left side she is missing the second bicuspid replaced by a pontic and bridge. Maxillary left cuspid is a couple of millimeters posterior to the right cuspid. She has a Class II cuspid relationship bilaterally. She has an overjet of probably about 5 to 6 mm. She has an anterior deep bite of about 6 mm. Oropharynx looks fairly clear. Posterior faucial pillars appear to be posteriorly positioned in the oropharynx. In fact, the uvula actually was sticking back to the posterior pharyngeal wall. Uvula is of moderate size. Roof actually looks reasonably good. 

Nancy gives a history of having significant snoring problems, wakes up with apneic episodes at night, and has a lot of daytime somnolence.

Intranasally, the septum is deviated off toward the right side by about 3 or 4 mm. Right turbinate is moderately large but blocks off a good part of the airway because of the deviated septum. On the left side, she has a huge turbinate that is partially blocking off the airway there as well. Columella is relatively normal in width and also has an ample volume.



Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of mandibular right first molar, possibly the left first molar, with the second molar in the first molar position, and both third molars. In the upper arch, she is missing the right cuspid replaced by a pontic in the third molar, and on the left side, she is missing the second bicuspid replaced by a pontic and the second and third molars. Sinuses look reasonably clear. It is difficult to evaluate the turbinates in this view. She does have some severe arthritis in the left TMJ with loss of vertical height. On the right side, condyle has a little bit more normal appearance. No significant pathology is seen.

Right TMJ tomogram shows significant decrease in posterior joint space. Superior joint space also appears a little bit decreased. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. There appears to be a slightly increased anterior joint space. Some sclerotic changes on the condylar head and some anterior beaking are present. 

Left TMJ tomogram images are not quite as good, but joint space is difficult to identify, and the morphology of the condyle is not very clear. 

On opening the morphology of the left condyle is very poor, although there does demonstrate good translation in both joints. Right side seems to show a double image but may have been due perhaps to some slight movement or could possibly represent the little divot in the condylar head.

Waters view shows the sinuses appear relatively clear. She has huge frontal sinuses and ethmoid sinuses. Nasal airway looks fairly well blocked up with the turbinates and deviated septum.

Cephalometrically, she has her head tipped upward so it opens up her air space probably more than it really is. This, however, does show the severe Class II occlusal relationship, anterior deep bite, and vertical differences at the inferior border at the posterior aspect of the mandible indicative of greater bone resorption in the condyle on the left side as compared to the right side. Oropharyngeal airway actually doesn’t appear too bad, although the tongue fills the entire oral cavity and may be held forward.

Basic Diagnoses

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation, non-reducing, with severe disc deformation.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Vertical maxillary deficiency.
Severe AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II occlusion.
Anterior deep bite.
Moderate crowding, lower anterior arch.
Missing maxillary right cuspid (replaced by a pontic), left maxillary second bicuspid (replaced by a pontic), second molar, and all four third molars. 
Missing mandibular left first molar with the second molar in the first molar position and the right first molar.
Significant tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of approximately 2.5 to 3 mm with the anterior six teeth, primarily due to the small maxillary right crowned lateral incisor and small pontic replacing the missing cuspid.
Deviated nasal septum.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Hyperplastic soft palate and uvula.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 11 mm).
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain.

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Remove maxillary right cuspid pontic but could maintain the left second bicuspid pontic to maintain that space.
Align and level maxillary arch. If the cuspid extraction space on the right side closes up some, that would be okay, and it could be closed as much as 3 to 4 mm. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and the left cuspid root distally and right first bicuspid root distally.
Align and level the lower arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing 2.5 to 3 mm of tooth structure. Close up the right first molar area by distalizing the bicuspids and cuspids approximately 2 mm to improve arch symmetry and to bring the right molar forward approximately 3 mm. Also tip the molar lingually to eliminate its significant reversed curve of Wilson. This should pretty much eliminate the edentulous space on the right side.

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, meniscectomies, TMJ reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies advancing the right maxillary posterior segment to close any residual spacing from the missing cuspid. This way the right maxillary first bicuspid will function as a cuspid, eliminating the need for a bridge or implant.
Bilateral inferior turbinectomies.
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) procedure.
Nasoseptoplasty.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

Restorative dentistry to replace the bridge on the maxillary left side if necessary and perhaps put a new crown on the maxillary right first bicuspid to make it look more like a cuspid and place a slightly larger crown on the right maxillary lateral incisor to normalize it