CARLY KNOWLES									07/17/2008

Carly is 25 years old.  Referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich, 3105 Legacy Drive, Suite A, Plano, TX.   
Carly's primary concerns are as follows:

Teeth do not fit together. 
Damage to teeth due to abnormal bite relationship.
Mouth breathing. 

Carly gets occasional headaches at about a level of 4 in the temporal areas bilaterally and averages about 2 times per month.  She rates her TMJ pain at 1, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 6, diet at 0, and disability at 1.  She takes no medications at this time.  She has no earaches or tinnitus, but gets moderate vertigo, particularly when she stands up.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime.  She does have occasional clicking in her jaw joints.  Onset is unknown and etiology is unknown.  She began orthodontic treatment on December 14, 2007.  Besides wisdom teeth being removed, also the mandibular right first bicuspid was removed.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Carly has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 20  mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4.5 mm.  The maxillary dental midline is very close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the left side.  The chin is fairly well on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the left of the chin midline.  In profile view, the maxilla is probably 3 to 4 mm AP deficient.  Carly has some lip incompetence of about 8 mm.  The chin appears to be retruded 12 mm.  Chin neckline is short, although the chin neckline angle is reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular left first bicuspid, but has the rest of her teeth.  The left cuspid is probably about 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She appears to have an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.  She has almost a full Class II cuspid relationship on the right side and the left side.  There is an overjet of about 6 to 7 mm.  She has about a zero vertical overbite relationship.  She has a significant cant in the maxilla with the right cuspid being about 2 to 3 mm lower than the left cuspid.  The lower arch is a little bit less with only about 1 mm of vertical height difference with the right side being lower than the left.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over her shoulders, but no other pain.  TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly.  Incisal opening is 57 mm.  Excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  The bony septum at the base is deviated off towards the left side.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  At least anteriorly, the airway looks reasonably good, although there could be some hyperplasia of turbinates posteriorly.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars and the mandibular right first bicuspid.  She has a root canal in the maxillary right central incisor.  The left condyle appears a little bit arthritic, but the right one appears a little bit more normal.  
Waters view shows that the sinuses are reasonably clear.  The bony septum appears reasonably straight.  The turbinates appear moderate in size particularly in the left side where the airway seems to be obscured.  There may be a septal spur off on the left side that could obstruct some of the airway there.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows that she is in centric relation when the x-ray was taken as there is increased joint space.  The condyle appears to have reasonably good shape.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little flattening on the posterior aspect.  Articular eminence is steeper than the opposite side.  However, there does appear to be reasonable joint space.  On opening, there is some restricted translation, but this does not correlate to the clinical impression. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Carly has a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship with a high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 8 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 5 to 6 mm. 
Dental model analysis shows that there is Bolton's difference of almost 2 mm of tooth size.  In Class I cuspid relationship, she has a transverse maxillary deficiency with probably at least 5 to 6 mm difference.  In the lower arch, the right cuspid is about 1 mm anterior to the left cuspid so this needs to be backed up just slightly more.  Will need to lose some posterior anchorage to keep from retracting the lower bicuspid too far. 
Basic diagnoses for Carly would be as follows:
Anterior vertical maxillary excess. 
Transverse maxillary deficiency.  
Slightly AP maxillary deficiency.  
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 3 mm lower than the left side.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Class II occlusion.
Missing mandibular right first bicuspid removed for orthodontic purposes and missing all 4 third molars. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm (normal 11 mm).
Hypertrophied turbinates.  
Deviated nasal septum. 
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.
Bilateral posterior crossbites when patient placed into a Class I cuspid relationship. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Maintain 1 mm of space between the upper laterals and cuspids bilaterally to correct for the tooth size discrepancy. 
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Try to lose significant posterior anchorage on the right side as the right cuspid only needs to move posteriorly about 1 or 2 mm more.  Consider using Class II elastic to help move the posterior teeth further forward. 
Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward about 12 mm.  
Maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly as well as expand it significantly.  
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Nasal septoplasty. 
  3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.