GERRIIANA KONEIGER							12/29/2011

Gerriiana is 73 years old, birth date is 05/03/1938.  She is referred by Dr. Joe Mayes, 4601 50th Street #206, Lubbock, TX 79414.

Primary concerns Gerriiana has include the following:

Arthritis in the right jaw joint.
Severe sleep apnea.
Difficulties breathing through the nose particularly at night.
Inability to tolerate the CPAP machine.

Gerriiana is unsure when her jaw joints began and the etiology is also unknown.  She has had a full upper denture and a lower partial denture since she was 21 years old, so for a total of 52 years.  She was diagnosed with sleep apnea in 2007 and she was placed on a CPAP machine for a few months, but she was unable to tolerate the CPAP machine.  She did have a right hip replacement in 2009 and she does have some increased blood pressure issues.

Gerri gets headaches about four times a week at about a level of 4 in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally.  She rates her right TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 4, jaw function and diet at 2, and disability at 0.  She has no trouble with earaches, but does have tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  She has no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her right hip and left hip, knees, wrists, right thumb but that is doing better, back, and neck.  In addition, she has been diagnosed with the following:

Fibromyalgia.
Sleep apnea.
Restless leg syndrome.
Gastritis.
Increased blood pressure.

She may have an allergy to penicillin, but she is unaware of any reaction to jewelry.  During the past year, she fell twice, once in March and once in December, that led to the workup for a seizure disorder and they did find some changes in the brain tissues and diagnosed her with a mild seizure disorder.  She takes the following medications:

Hydrocodone 10/325 four per day.
Paroxetine 20 mg q.d. (Paxil).
Zolpidem 10 mg q.h.s.
Pramipexole.
Gabapentin 100 mg b.i.d. 
Lisinopril 20 mg q.d.

In frontal view, Gerriiana has fairly good facial symmetry.  There may be just some slight asymmetry in the mandible.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -4 to 5 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The maxillary midline is slightly off to the right side about 2 mm.  The chin is off to the right side about 2 to 3 mm.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 4 to 5 mm and chin is retruded probably 10 to 15 mm.  Chin neckline is short and angle not defined.  Intraorally, Gerriiana has just her mandibular anterior 6 teeth from cuspid to cuspid with all other teeth absent.  Gerriiana has a significant transverse cant in the lower arch with the right mandibular cuspid being 4 or 5 mm higher than the left cuspid.  She has some moderate tenderness over the posterior neck and milder tenderness over the TMJs, retromandibular area, shoulders, and right masseter.  She has crepitation in the right TMJ and on the left side she has a glitch on opening.  The incisal opening is about 45 mm and excursion movements are about 5 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all the maxillary teeth with an upper denture in place.  In the lower arch, teeth are missing from the first bicuspids posteriorly bilaterally.  All the remaining 6 anterior teeth have crowns on them with the cuspid and the right lateral incisor having root canals.  Turbinates appear fairly large.  She appears to have arthritis in both joints, but more progressive in the right joint with some loss of condylar volume.  

Coronal view shows that she bony septum is deviated off towards the left side and the turbinates are fairly large.  The right sinus is clear, but the left one has some fluid in the inferior portion.  

Axial view shows that the septum has deviations to it off to the right and then in the bony area off to the left.  The turbinates appear fairly large and appear to obliterate most of the functional airway.  The right sinus is clear.  The left sinus has fluid in it.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with arthritis with anterior beaking.  There is decreased vertical and posterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderate steep.  There is almost bone-on-bone contact with the condylar head and fossa.  The disc is likely anteriorly displaced.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe arthritic changes with loss of vertical volume.  There is some anterior beaking present.  The top of the condyle is quite flat.  The fossa is quite flat and the articular eminence has a very low slope to it.  The AP dimension on the fossa looks almost excessive particularly in comparison to the size of the condylar head.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is some sclerosis in the head of the condyle.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost significant vertical volume.  The condyle is quite arthritic.  There is significantly decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has likely some AP maxillary hypoplasia.  The oropharyngeal airway however measures about 8 mm at the soft palate level and almost 9 mm at the base of the tongue.  The soft palate appears somewhat elongated.  The turbinates appear to extend beyond the hard palate.  Her upper lip is extremely thin overlying her maxillary denture which is short vertically.  The inferior border of the mandible does not appear to be quite as vertically symmetric as does the mandibular cuspids.  

Diagnoses for Gerriiana would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis being significantly worse on the right side with loss of vertical volume and bone-on-bone contact.  
Maxillary AP hypoplasia with significant loss of alveolar bone with a full denture present.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Missing mandibular first bicuspid through third molars bilaterally with replacement with a removable partial.  
Severe sleep apnea.
Hyperplastic soft palate and uvula.
Hyperplastic bilateral inferior turbinates.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Polyarthritis, fibromyalgia, high blood pressure, and gastritis.

Gerriiana has an oropharyngeal airway that falls into the lower normal range relative to the AP dimension.  Her TMJ symptoms are relatively mild at this time, although she has likely had her TMJ pathology probably at least for 30 years or more.  In light of her age, current anatomical structures and interrelationships, and TMJ symptoms, my treatment recommendations sequentially would be as follows:

1.	Surgery Stage 1.
	a.	Bilateral inferior turbinectomies.
	b.	Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty.
2.	Reevaluate the patient’s outcome.  If sleep apnea persists or she develops 	worsening TMJ symptoms, then stage 2 would be initiated.
3.	Surgery Stage 2.
	a.	CT scan of jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
	b.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses and 		if sleep apnea persists advance the mandible forward.
	c.	If sleep apnea persists, maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla 			forward.
	d.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

If the patient is interested in pursuing dental reconstruction, then the following procedures may be indicated:

1.	Surgery.
	a.	Bone graft maxilla and place interosseus implants.
	b.	Consider placement of mandibular dental implants.
2.	Dental reconstruction.