KATRINA KOENIG									04-16-04

Katrina is 15 years old. 

Patient History

She developed at a very young age a sarcoma in the right maxilla sinus area. She had radiation for treatment. This affected the growth and development of the jaw structures. In the past she has had problems with ear and sinus infections and eye infection. She has no vision in her right eye. She does have her own eye on the right side, but she cannot see out of it. Katrina is in good health except for her jaw problems.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, she has fairly good level between her pupillary plane and also her ears. A little flaring of the right ear. A little bit of deficiency in the development of the right temporal area and right zygoma. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 9 mm off to the right side, and chin is shifted off about 12 to 15 mm off to the right side. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other if the cant in the occlusal plane is taken into consideration. Inferior border of the mandible back by the angle area on the right side is 20 mm higher than the left side. Transverse cant in the mandible shows that the right side is about 6 mm higher than the left side. In the maxilla, the right side is about 4 mm higher than the left side. 

In profile, some retrusion of the nasal dorsum of about 3 or 4 mm. Maxilla is retruded probably a good 8 to 10 mm and also vertically deficient. She has an acute nasolabial angle but probably due to the fact that the maxilla is so deficient vertically and AP-wise. Lower lip is protrusive, and chin appears somewhat retruded relatively to the position of the lower lip. Chin-neckline is about normal in length, and chin-neck angle is moderately well-defined, although there is some fullness in the submental area. 

Upper lip length is only about 16 mm. There is a decreased amount of vermilion exposed in the upper lip.

Katrina has no incisors. The alveolus is probably about 8 to 10 mm above the lip line. The soft palate seems to function. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. Soft palate appears somewhat short, and she does by speech sounds seem to have some alveolar pharyngeal incompetency. 

Katrina used to have a lot of problems with sinus infections and used to have her sinuses cleaned out on a yearly basis. Since 1995, though, she has not required further surgery for that. She does have a deviated septum with it being tipped off to the left side fairly significantly. Turbinates at least anteriorly appear fairly small in size. She states she does breathe a lot through her mouth. Her nose is somewhat small, and the nostrils are small in size as well. 

Katrina’s facial asymmetry has gotten progressively worse over the last few years. Her parents are not sure if it has gotten significantly worse in the past year.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows she has very small, almost nonexistent sinuses, particularly on the right side. On the left side, she may have a little bit of a sinus. Not much distance between the alveolus and the infraorbital rims. In the lower arch, she is missing the second bicuspid on the left side, on the right side second and third molars, and on the left side the third molar as well. In the upper arch, she has some primary teeth remaining and some deformed first molars. Right ramus is significantly shorter in vertical height than the left side. She has some sclerosing areas in the mandible particularly on the left side from the left central back to the first molar, and on the right side there is some that extends back around the cuspid-bicuspid area. Right mandibular ramus appears quite short in vertical height as compared to the left side. 

Waters view shows that the septum is deviated off toward the left side. Turbinates are pretty small, and the airway looks reasonably good. A significant asymmetry in the mandible and the maxilla can be appreciated. 

Transversely, in the upper arch on the Waters view, the posterior teeth are about 4 mm higher on the right side as compared to the left side. In the mandibular arch back in the molar area, the right side is about 8 mm higher than the left side. Right angle of the mandible is elevated about 15 to 18 mm greater on the right side than the left side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears fairly large. Sits well in the fossa. Although the joint space appears narrow, there appears to be a fairly well-balanced joint space superiorly, posteriorly, and anteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. It is possible the disc could be slightly out of position. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears flatter than the opposite side. The articular eminence is quite flat on this side. Condyle appears to be postured forward slightly in the fossa. Condylar head and neck appear quite short. Posterior joint space appears to be increased. 

Open views show some restricted translation in particularly the left joint but both joints to a certain extent.

Cephalometrically, Katrina has a really high occlusal plane angle. Lower incisors appear overangulated. Inferior border of the mandible on the left side is about 15 mm higher than the right side. Oropharyngeal airway appears good. Soft palate appears very thin. Maxilla shows significant vertical deficiency of probably 10 mm. Maxilla also appears AP deficient. Inferior orbital rims are also AP deficient. Bridge of nose appears AP deficient. Chin appears microgenic. 

Basic Diagnoses

Previous cobalt radiation to jaws and orbits
AP maxillary deficiency
Vertical maxillary deficiency being greater on the right side than the left side
Posterior vertical mandibular deficiency on the right side
Left condylar hyperplasia
Severe mandibular asymmetry with the mandible being shifted 12 to 15 mm off toward the right side
AP microgenia
Transverse asymmetry with the right side being 6 mm higher than the left side in the mandible and 4 mm in the maxilla
Right zygomatico-orbital hypoplasia
Right orbital enophthalmos 
AP deficiency of the nasal dorsum
Vertical overclosure of the jaws
Missing all permanent teeth except for the maxillary first molars with minimal root formation. There are a few retained primary teeth in the maxillary arch also with very poor root formation. In the lower arch missing the left first bicuspid, right second molar, and both third molars
Severe Class III jaw relationship
Deformed right mandibular condyle with extreme short vertical ramus
Significant hypoplasia of the sinuses
History of recurrent sinusitis
Significant vertical facial asymmetry with the right side being approximately 15 mm shorter than the left side
Short soft palate with hypoplastic musculature
Severe hypernasal speech
Soft tissue deficiency on the right side of the face
Multiple diasthemas in the lower anterior arch
High occlusal plane angle in the mandible

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to close spacing in the lower arch

CT scan of head, jaws, and facial structures (Protomed protocol)

Surgery, stage I
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back toward the left side and level it transversely
Maxillary osteotomies to advance it and downgraft it with HA grafts across the palate
Left mandibular condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy
Augmentation right zygomatic orbital area with synthetic implants and fat grafts 
Bone graft to nose (harvest graft from cranium)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Surgery, stage II
Pharyngeal flap
Placement of multiple osseointegrated implants
Residual facial augmentation that may be necessary on the right side of the face

Reconstructive dentistry to complete the occlusion
