KRISTINA KONIKOWSKI								04/21/2008

She is 27 years old.  Referred by Richard Ingraham, DDS, MS, PA, 5525 S. Staples Street, Corpus Christi, TX 78411.  Primary concerns Kristina has includes the following:
Constant and rather severe vertigo.
Popping in the right jaw joint.
Pain in the jaw joints.
Constant headaches.
Difficulty sleeping.

She takes the following medications:

Lunesta 3 mg q.h.s.
Tylenol No. 2 for orthodontic pain. 

Kristina has had a long history of nasal airway problems.  She has had multiple nasal surgeries including septoplasties, turbinectomies, removal of nasal polyps, and an external rhinoplasty.  She can breathe reasonably well through her nose.  These nasal procedures for the first round was performed December 17, 1996.  She had a revision rhinoplasty and a revision of the septoplasty on November 24, 2004.  On May 16, 2005, she had a revision septoplasty and submental lipectomy.  She again had another revision rhinoplasty and revision septoplasty on 12/13/2006.  

Relative to her TMJ situation, she believes that her joints began popping and clicking around the age of 19 to 20.  She began developing her headaches in about 2004.  The vertigo began developing about that same time and has slowly gotten worse for her.  She has had 6 years of orthodontics in the past.  She got her braces on for the second time on December 4, 2007.  She has had splint therapy from about 2002 through 2008.  This has not corrected her problem, and her pain, headaches, and vertigo have continued to worsen.  She does get occasional earaches and tinnitus as well.  

CLINICAL EVALUATION.  In frontal view, Kristin has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 2 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Nasal tip is off to the right side probably about 3 mm or so.  There is a curvature in the nasal tip.  The mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly close to being on the midline.  In profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 6 mm or so.  Chin appears to be retruded by probably about 15 mm.  Chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Kristina has had previous liposuction in the submental area.  She also has had a previous rhinoplasty.  Intraorally, Kristina has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars present.  Teeth are nicely aligned and leveled.  There is a little bit of spacing on the left side between the lateral incisor cuspid and first bicuspid.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars.  She has a Class II nonocclusion on the right side by about 2 mm and on the left side by probably about 3 to 4 mm.  She has an anterior deep bite of probably about 3 mm.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  Condyles look reasonably normal.  
Waters view shows that the bony septum has a little bit of deviation in it and a little spur perhaps off to the right side.  Turbinates appear small in size.  Sinuses look relatively clear. 
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology with a little bit of flattening in the anterior head and a little bit posterior.  There appears to be decreased superior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some flattening in the anterior head and a little bit of peaking of the condyle.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation in the right joint and some restriction on the left side compared to the movement on the right side.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Kristina has some retrusion of the maxilla and mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm at the soft palate level and 6 mm at the narrowest part of the base of tongue.  However, just below the soft palate, the width is about 8 mm. 
Based on clinical, radiographic, dental model, and MRI analyses, Kristina’s diagnoses are as follows:
Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis with articular disc dislocation with reduction on the right side and without reduction on the left side.  
AP maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Class II nonocclusion.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Vertigo.
Tooth size discrepancy of approximately 2 mm.
Some spacing in the lower arch. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:	
 
Presurgical orthodontics.
 Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip incisors forward, opening up about 1 mm of space between each upper lateral cuspid to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
Continue to align and level the mandibular arch. 
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 