KATHERINE KONKER								12/11/2008

Katherine is 20 years old.  She has been treated orthodontically by Dr. Moody Alexander.  Katherine believes her TMJ problems began in about the sixth grade when she was about 12 years old of unknown etiology.  She began orthodontic treatment in the third grade and then in the seventh grade had orthodontic treatment.  She only had the braces on for about 4 to 5 months in seventh grade.  She has appliances on now that were placed about a month ago.  

Katherine has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, nor myofascial pain.  She has no earaches, no vertigo, but does get occasional tinnitus.  Her ankles are weak, but otherwise no joint problems.  She takes some hormone medication Yaz 1 tablet at night and takes no other medicine.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Katherine has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  There may be a little tendency for the jaws to shift off towards the right side.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm.  The maxillary midline is shifted off to the right side about almost 1.5 to 2 mm.  The mandible is shifted off to the right side about 3 mm.  The chin is off to the right side about 6 mm.  Upper mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much aligned with each other.  In profile view, the maxilla may be retruded 2 to 3 mm.  The chin is retruded about 20 mm.  The chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  The teeth appear nicely aligned and level.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being about 2 mm higher than the left side.  The maxillary right cuspid is about 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  The mandibular right cuspid is 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  When Katherine postures her mandible off towards the left side about 2 mm, it improves her facial symmetry.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal.  Intranasally, the left turbinate appears enlarged.  The right side appears relatively normal, but that is just at the anterior aspect.  I could not evaluate the posterior aspect.  Septum appears reasonably normal.  There may be some moderate nasal airway blockage.  Katherine is not aware of any significant snoring problems usually.  She may have some mild to moderate daytime somnolence.  No sleep apnea symptoms to her knowledge.  She does not believe that she is a mouth breather when she sleeps. She may have just a slight head postured forward neck position.  To palpation, Katherine has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, the right joint seems to function reasonably smoothly, but in the left side, she has palpable click at about 15 to 20 mm of opening and a closing one at likely about 10 mm.  She has about a 2 mm anterior overbite.  
Basic diagnoses for Katherine would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ AICR.
Posterior vertical and maxillary hypoplasia. 
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
AP microgenia. 
Class I occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle of 21 degrees (normal 8 degrees).
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Asymmetry in the maxillary and mandibular arches with the right cuspids being 2 mm posterior to the left cuspids. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. 
Multiple mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft it posteriorly and advance it. 
Augmentation genioplasty. 
3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I talked to Katherine and her parents in reference to the diagnoses and intended surgery as well as to the risks and complications.  They understand.  Katherine’s brother Fritz previously underwent TMJ and orthognathic surgery with me probably about 4 or 5 years ago.  He has done very well.  With that experience, they have a good understanding of the process.  We will get some records today and get her workup completed for surgery next Tuesday.  
