ALLISON KOONS									02/01/2006

Allison is 24 years old referred by Dr. George Adams.  Allison is in good health with no multiple medical problems.  She has had no previous surgeries.  She takes 1 baby aspirin a day and also fluoxetine 20 mg 1 per day.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Cannot open wide.
It is hard to chew.
Feels very tired in the morning or when she talks.
Concerned that her problem cannot be fixed longterm.  
She wonders if the treatment might change how she looks.
Teeth do not line up properly and the bite is changing. 

Allison's problems began when she was about 15 years of age about 1996 of unknown etiology. At that time she was having noises in her joints and some pain.  By the age of 18, she was placed into an upper splint and this did help her some.  That one wore out probably because of clenching and bruxism and so a new splint was made on the bottom teeth and this made her pain worse and thus she discontinued it.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:  Baby aspirin and fluoxetine 20 mg daily.

She has no earaches with tinnitus or hearing loss but does get some vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  No known allergies and no problems wearing jewelry.  She is, however, aware that she does clench her teeth at nighttime and does it sometimes during the day.  She has daily headaches that occur most often in the mornings and in the evenings about a level of 4 in the frontal and temporal area.  She rates her TMJ pain on an average day a level of 8.  Average daily pain is at 4, jaw function 7, diet at 6, disability at 7.  Allison's mother has TMJ problems as does her sister.  Her brother apparently has a Class III jaw relationship like "Jay Leno."  They do have one other sister who apparently has no jaw problems. 

In frontal view, Allison has fairly good facial symmetry with may be just a slight more fullness in the right side than the left side.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  Maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline and chin are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline.  In profile view, Allison has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip.  She has lip incompetence of probably about 7 to 8 mm.  Chin is retruded probably 8 to 10 mm.  Chin-neckline is short although the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Allison has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch and apparently thin gingiva particularly around the central incisors.  There is an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a crown on the maxillary right first molar.  She has some mild crowding in the upper anterior arch.  She occludes only on the second molars bilaterally with the right side hitting first and then she has an open bite including the first molars all the around to the other first molars.  She has a Class II end-on occlusion with a 2 mm anterior open bite.  She has bilateral posterior crossbites being a little bit greater on the left side than the right side.  Lingula, soft palate and faucial pillars all look relatively normal.  
ALLISON KOONS				02/01/2006 				Page 2


Intraorally, the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are all normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates are extremely large.  The septum looks relatively normal.  The turbinates look somewhat boggy and probably significantly contributory to her sleep problems.  She tends to breathe predominately through her mouth.  However, she has no problems with snoring or sleep apnea but does have daytime somnolence.  Allison's tiredness has gotten worse during this past year.  She has a little bit of an upper arch yaw with the posterior maxilla being shifted to the right side 1 to 2 mm.  There is a slight dystopia with the right side being about 2 mm higher than the left side.  Maxilla is reasonably leveled.  Allison does have an end-on Class II occlusion.  To palpation, Allison has some mild to moderate tenderness over the TMJs but no other tenderness around the head and neck area.  Incisal opening is 46 mm.  Excursive movements are 7 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION; 
Panorex shows the presence of 4 impacted third molars.  All other teeth are present.  She has some shortening of her roots that appears particularly on the cuspids and bicuspids.  The condyles have arthritic changes and appear to have lost some volume and vertical height perhaps.  The sinuses look reasonably clear.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  There could be some deviation of the bony septum.  The turbinates appear quite large and there appears to be almost no passable airway.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has lost vertical volume.  It appears the cortical bone is fairly well intact.  Decreased joint space significantly vertically as well posteriorly.  Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be short vertically.  There appears to be decreased joint space vertically and posteriorly.  Articular eminence is a little bit more shallow on this side compared to the opposite side.  On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyles where they do come down beneath the articular eminence.  The joint space appears decreased in this area.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Allison has good oropharyngeal airway.  However, she has a high mandibular plane angle and retruded mandible and it occludes only on the second molars.  She has a 2 mm open bite and about a 4 to 5 mm overjet.  She has some anterior vertical maxillary excess.  Tooth size analysis reveals a Bolton's difference of about 2 mm. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Slight vertical maxillary excess.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Apertognathia.
Class II end-on occlusion. 
ALLISON KOONS				02/01/2006				Page 3


Occludes only on second molars bilaterally with all other teeth out of occlusion. 
Crowding of lower anterior arch. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.  
Minimal attached gingiva of lower anterior arch.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Headaches.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Mouth breather. 
Masticatory dysfunction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure to correct the tooth size discrepancy and to minimize tipping forward of the lower incisors.
Place brackets on the second molars for surgery but do not engage the second molars in the archwire.
 Surgery stage I.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Periodontal evaluation to evaluate anterior gingiva with mandibular anterior gingiva with possible grafting. 
Surgery Stage II.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly, expand and advance slightly. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

