RAMIN KORDI									01-16-05

Ramin is 22 years old and referred by Dr. Max Buckwald, 300 N. Coit Rd., Ste. 245, Richardson, TX  75080.

Patient History

At about the age of 14, Ramin began to notice that his jaws were becoming malaligned. The etiology is unknown. In 1996 at the age of 14 for about 1-1/2 years, he was treated orthodontically, and this included headgear treatment. Ramin said he did not wear his headgear and felt this may have contributed to his problem. I did assure him that wearing the headgear retrospectively could have actually caused more damage and problems, and, therefore, he was fortunate not to be wearing it at that time. Ramin says that his jaw continued to get worse, but in the past two years he has not noticed as much change in the position of his jaw structure. 

Ramin is not sure if he has any snoring problems and not sure if he has any of the sleep apnea symptoms. He is tired a lot during the day, and he has noticed over the last two years he doesn’t have as much energy as he used to.

Ramin gets his headaches sometimes in the mornings, but other times they will occur during the middle of the day. He says he can tell that it is associated with his jaws and seems to emanate from his upper jaw.
 
Patient Current Symptoms

Headaches
Pain and discomfort around the jaws
Clicking in the jaws, right side worse than the left
Difficulties biting certain foods
Cannot sleep well because of the jaw problem
Difficulties breathing through the nose
Predominantly a mouth breather particularly when sleeping

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Ramin has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -4. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline. Nasal tip is a little bit off to the left side by about 2 mm.

In profile view, Ramin has a high occlusal plane and high mandibular plane facial morphology. Upper lip supralabrale is probably 4 mm posterior to subnasale. Chin actually appears just slightly retruded by probably about 6 mm or so. Chin-neckline is a little bit short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. 

Intraorally, Ramin has all of his lower teeth back through his third molars with the right third molar not completely erupted in yet. There is some mild crowding, lower anterior arch but actually not too significant. Has good attached gingiva. Lower teeth appear to be in a little bit of a lingual inclination. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth erupted in back through the second molars. Don’t see the third molars yet. He has extremely small upper lateral incisors which will probably create a significant tooth-size discrepancy. Both lateral incisors are quite small. He has a super Class III cuspid relationship, being Class III by probably close to 10 mm on the left side and probably 7 or 8 mm on the right side. He has bilateral posterior crossbites and an anterior crossbite. Anteriorly, the reverse overjet is probably close to 11 mm. He has fairly close to a 4-mm open bite. Oropharynx tissues appear healthy.  The uvula is moderately enlarged. Soft palate is probably mildly elongated but not too significant. Faucial pillars are mildly constricted. Tonsils are moderately enlarged.

Intranasally, he has a significant deviation or spur off the septum up in the midportion of the septum that contacts almost against the hypertrophied turbinate on the right side. On the left side, the turbinate is quite enlarged as well. I would classify the turbinates as being moderate to severe enlargement. Functional airway is quite constricted. Nostrils are quite open as are the luminal valves. 

To palpation, Ramin has some mild tenderness of the temporalis muscles and styloid areas. No tenderness over the joints. Incisal opening is 61 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 5 mm and to the left 7 mm. He has anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites. Ramin gets headaches about two times per week in the temporal area that he rates at a level of 7. He rates his TMJ discomfort probably around 4 and overall average facial level of discomfort around the head and neck area at 4. He rates his jaw function and diet at 0 and disability at 3. 

Left TMJ functions relatively smoothly. Right TMJ has an opening click at about 15 mm and a closing click at 5 mm. There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about a millimeter lower than the left side. 

He has an accentuated curve of Wilson in the upper arch and the lower arch. 

In manipulating the dental models into a Class I position, there is still a transverse deficiency. There is a slight reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses are clear. Turbinates appear quite large and obliterating the nasal airway. Has all of his teeth present, but the maxillary third molars are unerupted at this time bilaterally. Tops of the condyles are not included in the imaging.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is postured forward a little bit in the fossa. Condyle appears a little bit narrow at the superior aspect of it. Posterior joint space looks okay, but the superior joint space may be decreased slightly but difficult to tell for sure. Condylar head and neck appear somewhat elongated.

Right TMJ shows a condyle that is quite narrow mediolaterally. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space looks fairly good except superiorly. Posterior head of the condyle looks a little bit flattened. Condylar head and neck may be a little bit elongated. 

Opening shows good translation of both condyles. This mobility on opening is different than what we saw on the MRI.

Waters view shows a significant deviation of the nasal septum with the bony part going off to the right side. There is significant obstruction of the nasal airway. Sinuses, however, appear clear. Right side of the mandible appears to be a little bit longer than the left side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a high occlusal plane angle. Maxilla appears to be AP deficient. Mandible appears prognathic particularly the incisal edges. Turbinates look quite large and extend posteriorly. A little bit of adenoid tissue at the most superior aspect of the nasopharynx. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is about 6.5 mm and at the base of the tongue is closer to about 12 mm. A little bit of difference in vertical height at the inferior border of the mandible. 

Basic Diagnoses

Rule out bilateral condylar hyperplasia
Right TMJ articular disc dislocation with early reduction
Maxillary AP hypoplasia
Vertical maxillary hypoplasia
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia
Mandibular prognathism
Super Class III occlusion on the left, Class III occlusion on the right
Anterior open bite of about 3 to 4 mm
Anterior reverse over-jet of 11 to 12 mm
Accentuated curve of Wilson, upper arch
Small maxillary lateral incisors
Tooth-size discrepancy of at least 2 mm
Masticatory dysfunction
Impacted maxillary third molars x 2
Maligned mandibular third molars x 2
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Moderate crowding, upper anterior arch
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Severe nasal septal deviation
Hypertrophied turbinates 
Significant nasal airway obstruction
Sleep disorder
Daytime somnolence
Apertognathia
Mouth breather

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Open up 1 mm of space around each upper lateral incisor. Do not make any attempt to expand the maxilla orthodontically
Align and level mandibular arch 
 
Surgery
Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies if it is determined condylar hyperplasia is present
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair if condylar hyperplasia confirmed.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, downgraft it, and expand it
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate it upward and back into proper occlusion
Nasal septoplasty
Bilateral partial turbinectomies 
Surgical removal of impacted maxillary third molars x 2
Extraction of mandibular third molars x 2

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Restorative dentistry to build up the lateral incisors
