SONIA (LANG) BOYD							11/14/2011

She is now 19 years and 2 months post total joint prostheses in the right TMJ that was placed following joint destruction from Proplast Teflon implants.  Her left TMJ prosthesis was placed in 1999 and she is now 12 years 4 months post surgery for that side.  She has been in almost continuous pain since I last saw her in 1999.  It has been getting progressively worse for her.  She gets headaches bilaterally in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area at about a level of 7, right TMJ pain is at a level of 9, on the left side a level of 5.  Average daily pain hits 10.  Jaw function is at 5, diet is at 5, disability is at 6.  The incisal opening is 33 mm (only 1 mm less than it was in 1999), but opening without pain 25 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 1 mm and to the left 2 mm.  Occlusion is good Class I with about a 5 mm vertical over bite relationship.  She has crepitus in both joints, probably greater on the right side than the left side.  To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the temporalis muscles, TMJs, and moderate pain over the rest of the facial structures.  She has no earaches, but has continuous tinnitus and severe vertigo, but she states she had the vertigo before I first saw her back in 1991-1992.  Other joints that bother her include her wrists, hands, fingers, hips, knees, ankles, feet, toes, neck and back.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day.  She sleeps a lot as this helps keep her mind off the pain.  She has bulging disks in her neck and back, in particular in her back in the thoracic and lower back area.  She wakes up with headaches in the morning and then they are exacerbated by clenching all day long.  Her right side of her face gets swollen in the morning and sometimes she will get some red streaking across the right side of her face.  She feels quite miserable.

Radiographic evaluation shows the presence of bilateral TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  In the right joint, there is heterotopic bone that has grown down from the anterior aspect of the eminence area coming around the anterior edge of the polyethylene and into the joint abutting against the head of the condyle.  The left joint appears clear.  I discussed with Sonia and her husband the existing problems.  We had previously heterotopic bone in 1999 on the right side by debriding the joint at that time and placing a fat graft.  The heterotopic bone has likely redeveloped as a result of the foreign body giant cell reaction caused by residual Proplast Teflon materials in the area.  

Basic diagnoses for Sonia at this time would be as follows:

Heterotopic bone formation around right TMJ prosthesis.
Chronic nocturnal and daytime clenching.
Rule out hypersensitivity to materials in the prosthesis.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Foreign body giant cell reaction continuing in the right TMJ.


Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Medication:  Klonopin 1 mg tablet 1 tablet q.h.s.  We may add an additional half tablet in the morning and half tablet in the afternoon, but we will see how she progresses with the 1 mg tablet at night.  I gave her a prescription for Klonopin 1 mg, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x2.
Test for hypersensitivity to the materials in the prostheses at the Environmental Center at Dallas and Dr. William Rea.  

Based on the findings of the hypersensitivity testing, the following procedures may be indicated:

Removal of heterotopic bone right TMJ and placement of a fat graft.
If the patient hypersensitive to materials in the prostheses, then change out components to which she is hypersensitive which could include the bilateral mandibular ramus components.

Sonia is to contact me in a week and let me know how she is doing on the Klonopin medication.  She says she has taken that in the past and apparently she tolerated it well.  We will see how she progresses in the future.  She is to keep me informed of her progress. 