MARY LEAHY ENBOM								11/14/2007

Mary is 41 years old and is referred by Dr. William Schmohl, San Rafael, CA.  Mary has been diagnosed with fibromyalgia, irritable bowel syndrome and allergies.  She had gum surgery in March of 2007.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Flexeril 10 mg t.i.d. 
Doxepin 20 mg daily.
Ambien 2.5 mg q.h.s.
BCP.

She has had an adverse reaction to penicillin. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Severe jaw pain.
Headaches. 
Bite does not fit together very well.

Mary gets headaches about 2 to 4 times per week at about a level of 5 and about once a month she gets severe headaches that range about 9 that occur predominately in the frontal and temporal areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 5, diet at 3 and disability at 7.  She gets occasional earache and tinnitus.  She has moderate problems with vertigo.  No hearing loss and no other joints bother her.  She has been diagnosed with fibromyalgia about 15 years ago.  She has had irritable bowel syndrome for around 7 years. 

In frontal view, Mary has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline just about 1 mm to the left.  The nasal tip is a little bit off towards the right side about 2 mm.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other and with the facial midline.  In centric relation, however, the lower jaw is off to the left side about 1.5 mm at the incisor edge and also the chin.  Intraorally, Mary has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth are fairly nicely aligned and leveled.  She has good attached gingiva.  She has some gingival clefting around the centrals and lateral incisors particularly the right lateral and also the cuspids.  In the upper arch she is missing first bicuspids.  In centric relation she has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being a little bit worse on the left side than the right side.  She has a tendency towards buckle crossbites.  There is about a 3 mm overjet and 0 vertical overlap.  In centric relation she occludes only on the first and second molars on the right side and all other teeth are out of occlusion.  Mandibular first molars are poorly developed relative to the enamel on them and will require crowning at a later time.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy although the uvula is moderately elongated, soft palate mildly elongated and faucial pillars are moderately constricted.  Tonsils appear normal.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side.  Turbinates are moderate in size with the left one being a little bit larger.  A little bit more constricture of the airway on the left side as compared to the right side.  She does have some moderate daytime somnolence that she relates to fibromyalgia as well as moderate sleep disorder.  
MARY ENBOM				11/14/2007				Page 2

Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 45 mm.  She can open to 18 mm without much discomfort.  Excursive movements are about 12 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the maxillary first bicuspids.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Mary had hair extensions done for her wedding a year ago and some of them are still in place and show up on the radiographs.  

In the waters view, sinuses are clear and the bony septum is fairly straight.  The left turbinate appears a little bit enlarged. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows what appears to be reasonably good space around the joint.  Anterior head is a little bit flat and there is a little bit of anterior beaking and a little superior peaking.  

Left TMJ tomogram is a little bit harder to read.  There appears to be some abnormal shape to the condyle.  The joint space does not look too bad although the posterior joint space appears decreased.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxillary and mandible are both moderately retruded.  Oropharyngeal airway, however, is relatively normal with about 10 mm dimension.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation particularly at the lateral aspect of the joints.
Transverse maxillary excess.
Slight AP maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Class II end-on occlusion.
Occluding only on the right first and second molars.
Missing maxillary first bicuspids extracted for previous orthodontic work.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
 Myofacial pain. 
 Fibromyalgia. 
 Nocturnal and daytime clenching and bruxism.
 Periodontal problems associated with lower first molars and anterior teeth. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Periodontal treatment is required in the lower arch.




MARY ENBOM				11/14/2007				Page 3

Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Include the second molars in the archwire.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Include the second molars in the archwire.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly slightly and narrow it transversely.
Mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

