MERYL KOSSMEYER							05/13/2011

Meryl is 25 years old, birth date 11/16/1985.  Referred by Dr. George Duello, 3555 Sunset Office Drive, Suite C105, St. Louis, MO; he is a periodontist.  Also referred by Dr. Peter Crump.  

Meryl was diagnosed with acromegaly in 2005.  She had two transsphenoidal surgeries in March 2005 and May 2005.  She had a craniotomy in April 2006 and gamma knife radiation in 2006.  The tumor has been totally eliminated.  She takes the following medications:

Prednisone 4 mg q.d.
Desmopressin 0.5 mg q.d.
Synthroid 150 mcg per day.
Cytomel 75 mg per day.
Wellbutrin SR 450 mg q.d.
Desogen birth control.
Humatrope 1.2 mg per day.

Primary concerns that Meryl has include the following:

Jaws are misaligned at the bottom where one side is larger than the other.
Excessive growth of the lower jaw.

Meryl has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or pain around the head or neck area.  She rates her jaw function at 2, diet and disability at 0.  She gets no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing her teeth.  Meryl has no airway or sleep apnea issues.  

In frontal view, Meryl has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  The right eye is about 2 mm higher than the left one.  The maxillary midline and mandibular dental midline are pretty much on the facial midline.  The chin is shifted off to the right side probably about 5 or 6 mm.  Nasal tip is off to the left side 2 mm.  the right angle of mandible is probably 5 to 6 mm wider on the right side than the left side.  The inferior border of the mandible on the left side is longer vertically by probably 8 to 10 mm than the right side.  In profile, the maxilla appears to be retruded about 5 to 6 mm.  Chin has pretty good AP projection, but the lower lip is retruded about 4 or 5 mm.  The chin neckline has a reasonably normal length.  There is a small dorsal hump.  Intraorally, Meryl is missing the mandibular second bicuspids that are absent, but the first bicuspids are pulled back against the first molars.  There is a little bit of space between the cuspids and first bicuspids.  Third molars are gone.  The transverse width of the lower arch is extremely restricted.  She has had previous gingival grafting.  The lower teeth appear to be in lingual inclination.  In the upper arch, she is missing upper first bicuspid and the third molars, but has the rest of her teeth present.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the right of the maxillary midline.  She has an anterior cross bite with the maxillary left central and lateral incisor with a zero vertical over bite relationship.  She is basically Class I cuspid on the right side and Class III end-on cuspid on the left side by about 2 to 3 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear normal in size and there appears to be an adequate nasal airway.  To palpation, Meryl has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, she has a little bit of a very soft pop in the right side at about 25 mm of opening and closing at 20 mm.  The left joint seems to function relatively smoothly and there is a slight cant in the occlusal plane angle with the right side being about 2 mm higher than the left side at the cuspid area.  She has not tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  She does have a soft pop at about 25 mm of opening and 20 mm of closing with the left joint functioning smoothly.  The maximum incisal opening is 61 mm, excursion movement to the right 7 mm, to the left 9 mm.  Transverse width of the maxilla is also constricted.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars as well as the maxillary probably first bicuspids and the mandibular second bicuspids.  There is actually a retained maxillary left partially erupted third molar.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  There is some significant calcification of the styloid ligaments.

Coronal view shows that she has a significantly deviated nasal septum in the bony area off towards the right side.  The inferior turbinectomies are moderately enlarged.  The sinuses look relatively clear, but could be a little bit of fluid in the right maxillary sinus.

Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged and appear to be touching against the septum.  There is some increased thickness of the sinus membrane in the right maxillary sinus.  

Sagittal x-rays of the left TMJ show a well-balanced joint space around the condyle.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  The condyles appear relatively normal.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The lateral joint space is decreased.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to be slightly enlarged for the size of the fossa.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 or 3 mm.  There appears to be less vertical joint space in the side than the opposite side.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that oropharyngeal airway is good.  It appears her mandibular teeth are in pretty much vertical orientation.  She does have a Class III skeletal relationship and an end-on incisor relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway is about 13 mm at the base of the tongue and 10 mm at the soft palate level.
Basic diagnoses for Meryl would be as follows: 

Acromegaly secondary to pituitary tumor.
Left TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Maxillary hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Mandibular prognathism and asymmetry.
End-on incisor relation. 
Class III end-on cuspid relationship on the left side. 
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm shorter at the cuspid area than the opposite side.
Missing bicuspid from each quadrant removed during previous orthodontic treatment.
Retained maxillary left third molar.


Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Be sure that the maxillary lateral incisors 			are tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for 			interdental osteotomies.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Open space between the first bicuspids 			and the molars to equal the 6 or 7 mm like a second bicuspid.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back on the 			facial midline and level transversely.
	c.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance and level transversely.
	d.	External rhinoplasty.
	e.	Removal of malaligned maxillary left third molar.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
5.	Placement of bilateral mandibular implants.
6.	Restorative dentistry to place crowns on the bilateral mandibular dental implants.  
