MARK KRAMERPUGH							10/10/2011

Mark is 54 years old, birth date is 04/09/1957.  Referred by Max Ebrahimian, DDS. 

Mark’s primary concerns are as follows:

Severe sleep apnea.
Clicking in the left jaw area.

Mark was diagnosed with sleep apnea about 4 or 5 years ago.  He is aware of having clicking in his jaw joints up to10 years ago of unknown etiology.  He is on 3 medications that include:

Ambien.
Toprol (BP) 50 mg q.d.
Celexa 20 mg q.d.
Flonase nasal spray.

Mark does not really have any significant problems with headaches.  He rates his TMJ pain at about a level of 3, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 2, diet at 1, disability at 5.  He does have some joints that bother him including his knees, ankles, and feet, but he relates this to his physical athletic commitments.  He is aware of clenching at nighttime.  

In frontal view, Mark has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 27 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is probably about -2 to 3.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  

In profile view, Mark has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 to 5 mm.  The chin is retruded about 15 mm.  Chin neckline is short.  He has a chin postured forward neck position.  Mark tends to tilt his head upwards likely to help open up the airway.  Mark does have some crenations on his tongue.  In the lower arch, he is missing the mandible right second and third molar and on the left side probably the third molar.  He has all of his bicuspids present in the lower arch.  He has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch, but has adequate attached gingiva.  Slight accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.  In the upper arch, he is missing probably first bicuspids, but has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars.  He probably is missing his third molars.  He has got a Class I cuspid relationship and Class II molar relationship.  He has about a 3 mm anterior deep bite.  He is missing maxillary first bicuspids and all four third molars are absent.  Oropharyngeal tissues shows that the uvula is excessively enlarged probably to a moderate to severe category.  The soft palate is probably mild to moderately elongated.  The fascial pillars are mild to moderately constricted.  The tonsils are present and may be just mildly enlarged.  Nasal examination shows that the septum is deviated off towards the left side.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged anteriorly and may be more enlarged posteriorly creating some nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the retromandibular area, but nowhere else in the head and neck area.  On opening, he has an audible pop in the left joint at about 5 to 10 mm of opening and a closing click at 5 mm of closing.  The right joint seems to function relatively smoothly.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and mandibular right second molar as well as the maxillary first bicuspids.  He has a root canal on the maxillary left central incisor and a dowel and post on the left lateral incisor.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  He has some bulbous extensions of his septum.  The condyles appear to have reasonably good morphology.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The turbinates are enlarged on the right side and to a lesser degree on the left side.  The septum appears reasonably straight at the area of the current cut which appears to be posterior to the molar teeth.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear with just one little area that there may be a slight mucocele on the lateral sinus wall.  The septum deviates off towards the left side, but the posterior aspect appears fairly straight.  The turbinates are enlarged, more so on the right side than the left side and could be contributory to the airway deficiencies.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that there is some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with a slight increased anterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of sclerosis on the top and some slight anterior beaking towards the medial aspect of the joint.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  The lateral pole is lower than the medial pole.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width with a more even vertical position of the condylar poles.  There is decreased lateral joint space indicative of perhaps medial displaced articular discs.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are somewhat retruded.  The head is tipped up somewhat.  The oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures 5 mm, although at the base of the tongue the airway dimension is more normal.  The soft palate appears elongated.  He has a Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship.  

Basic diagnoses for Mark would be as follows:

Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Hyperplastic soft palate and uvula.
Severe sleep apnea. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction with pogonion moving forward 15 mm.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a 					counterclockwise direction about 6 to 7 mm at the incisal tips.
	d.	Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP procedure).
	e.	Bilateral reduction turbinectomies.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
