RENEE KRAPFF									03/23/2006

Renee is 32 years old, referred by Dr. Barry Rodgers.  He is at the Back and Posture Clinic, 6510 S. Western, Ste. 100, Oklahoma City, OK, 73139 and Dr. William R. Johnson who is a dentist in Oklahoma City.  She has had problems in the past with interstitial cystitis, she has had a fractured tooth, depression, neck and back pain, bronchitis, sinus infections and TMJ pathology.  She has had previous surgeries that include colonoscopy and laparoscopy.  She also has had some previous jaw surgery.  

HISTORY OF PRESENT ILLNESS
Renee believes that her TMJ problems began around the age of 12 to 13 when she became aware of clicking and popping in her joints of unknown etiology.  She developed pain and had difficulty chewing.  Her dad took her to a number of different doctors.  In 1987 she had bilateral TMJ arthroscopy by Dr. Jim Baker.  This did help her some but then she began developing significant problems again in high school and in college.  From 1990 to 1992 she had orthodontics by Dr. McCullough.  In 1993 she had her four wisdom teeth removed.  She continued on with lots of jaw pain and her lower jaw started to become more retruded.  She was involved in three motor vehicle accidents.  Then in April of 1999 a stage light fell and hit her on her head that significantly exacerbated her problems.  She has been in and out of splints numerous times through the years without effective improvement of her condition.  In May of 2003 she had bilateral TMJ arthroplasties performed by Dr. Steve Sullivan in attempts to place a very significantly degenerated and deformed disc back into position and this fell.  On February 28, 2005, she had bilateral TMJ total joint prostheses placed by Dr. Sullivan and she also had bilateral fat grafts with the fat being harvested from the abdomen area and he placed her on the prostheses.  She also had a Le Forte I osteotomy and she had arch bars placed.  He probably performed bilateral coronoidectomies.  She may have done better initially but her pain for quite some time now had been worsening.  She apparently developed Bells palsy on the left side of her face about two weeks after surgery.  Possibly it could have been viral related.

By history, Renee also has significant GI problems with "heartburn" and she was hospitalized at one time with diverticulitis.  She took Prevacid for about 6 or 7 years.  She got up to about 60 mg of Prevacid per day and was still having heartburn.  She finally went to another doctor who weaned her off of the Prevacid and her symptoms remain basically the same.  She also had problems with diarrhea and constipation.  The diverticulitis occurred in 2005.  After getting out of the hospital she developed a fairly severe colitis and was put on antibiotics for two weeks and had no effect and then she was put on another antibiotic that did help. She has been diagnosed with irritable bowel syndrome as well.  

Apparently she had some significant retrusion of the mandible with the TMJ pathology and may have had an open bite.  Apparently the surgery did bring her lower jaw back forward to a more normal position.  Currently Renee's back teeth do not come together.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Chronic severe headaches.
Pain through the jaws, neck and back.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
RENEE KRAPFF				03/23/2006					Page 2


TMJ pain. 
Does not sleep well. 

Renee states that the headaches are now worse than they were before the jaw surgery.  Renee does wake up with headaches and pain in the mornings.  She has extreme difficulty getting comfortable at night when she sleeps.  It hurts when she lays down and particularly if she lays on her sides and she has significant pain problems.  

In frontal view, Renee has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0.  Maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline, maybe just slightly to the left.  Chin is pretty much on the facial midline as are the lower incisors.   In profile view Renee has fairly good facial symmetry.  Intraorally, she is missing mandibular left and right first bicuspids and the left first molar.  Apparently the first molar was fractured perhaps when the light fell on her and could not be saved even though it had a root canal and had to be extracted.  In the upper arch she has had first bicuspids extracted as well.  She has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has bilateral posterior open bites.  Renee has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm but she has bilateral posterior open bites of about 2 mm bilaterally.  She has a hyperplastic uvula although a little bit anteriorly positioned in the soft palate compared to normal.  The soft palate may be moderately elongated but not too significant.  Faucial pillars appear somewhat constricted.  Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The septum appears relatively normal.  She does not know if she is a mouth breather or not.  Does not know whether she has any nasal airway breathing problems.  She has been told that she does snore some.  She is not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  She has difficult sleeping at night.  She gets up to urinate about 6 times a day. 

OTHER BODY SYSTEMS
She does have problems with her hip and knee joints.  She gets neck and back pain a lot and she has been diagnosed with scoliosis.  She gets foot cramps frequently as well.  She used to get a lot of urinary tract infections and in fact almost everytime she had a period she would get a yeast infection.  She has polyuria and nocturia x6.  She has been diagnosed as having interstitial cystitis.  She has difficulties starting urinating and difficulty emptying her bladder.  Her periods are quite irregular.  She was on the pill for a number of years but then went off it prior to her jaw surgery in 2002.  She went about 8 months without having a period.  When she does have her periods she has excessive pain.  She has no children, no miscarriages and she is not aware of any fertility problems.  She has not had endometriosis but has been diagnosed as having fibrocystic breast disease.  She had an abnormal Pap smear x1 but it was not treated.  She gets frequent vaginal yeast infections particularly when she would be on her period but more recently this has not been a problem.  She has had pink eye x1.  She wears no contacts.  She has no problems with sinusitis.  She gets occasional earaches, occasional tinnitus, occasional vertigo and has had occasional ear infections as an adult.  She feels she has a weak immune system and she does get more frequent colds and viruses than normal.  She gets recurrent sore throats.  She gets occasional chest pain that she feels may be related more to stress and anxiety.  
RENEE KRAPFF				03/23/2006				Page 3


She has had bronchitis x2 in the past two to three years and she had pneumonia once when she was in college.  She does have irritable bowel syndrome and she does get abdominal pain and cramping quite frequently, in fact, almost daily.  She gets heartburn on a daily basis.  She gets diarrhea and constipation problems.  She does have a history of diverticulitis and colitis.  She is not aware of any sexually transmitted diseases.  She does have fatigue problems but she relates this to her poor sleep pattern.  She does have thyroid problems and takes Levoxyl 0.75 mg for this.  She is not aware of any memory loss or heart problems.  She has been exposed to birds and particularly parakeets from a lady that she used to clean the house with when she was in college and also would clean the bird's cage.  This bird was a parrot.  She would handle it frequently as well.  She would then at times house sit for as much as three months at a time.  She had this fairly significant exposure for about five or six years.  She has not had exposure since she has moved to Dallas.  Renee does report that she had been bitten by the bird several times and on more than on occasion had broke the skin.  This lady also had a couple of cats but Renee is not particularly a cat person.  She has been around dogs some and had a dog growing up.  She is around horses occasionally but not very often.  She has no implants in her body except the TMJ total joint prostheses and the bone plates in the maxilla.  Of interest is a lot of her medical problems including the interstitial cystitis and her GI problems began around the same time that she was exposed to the bird.  She was diagnosed with OCD when she was in college and was placed on a number of different medications.  The first one she was on was Anafranil and then she was placed on lithium.  She stopped those on her own and then was placed on Zoloft.  She was then placed on Luvox, trazodone, Paxil, Depakote and then she had some problems and the doctor made her stop the medications rather abruptly and probably had some withdrawal problems and was placed on Benadryl and then she was on Effexor for a couple years. Then she was placed on Lamictal plus the Effexor and one other medication she was taking at the same time.  Then she got back on Zoloft and Lamictal and Wellbutrin.

To palpation, she has moderate to high moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters, medial pterygoids, TMJs, styloid areas, SCMs, posterior neck and mild tenderness of the shoulders.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is about 26 mm and she feels she gets locked in that position and cannot open any further.  Excursive movement to the right may be 1.5 mm and to the left 1 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids and the left first molar.  She has a root canal on the left second molar and right first molar.  She has four bone plates in the maxilla.  She has bilateral TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  Each prosthesis has 8 screws in it.  In the fossa component there are probably four screws present there as well.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  It is difficult to evaluate the airway. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows the presence of the TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis.  It appears to be in good position.  Good spacing between the metal components.  


RENEE KRAPFF				03/23/2006				Page 4


Right TMJ tomogram shows likewise the presence of TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis and good spacing between the metal aspects of the prostheses.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  Prostheses appear to be in place with good spacing.  Right turbinate appears somewhat enlarged.  The septum appears to be reasonably straight.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Renee has a Class I cuspid or skeletal relationship.  She has bilateral posterior open bites.  The oropharyngeal airway looks acceptable as best as can be evaluated.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Multiple TMJ surgeries including bilateral TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Myofascial pain throughout the head and neck area.
Headaches.
TMJ pain worse on the left side as compared to the right side.
Bilateral posterior open bites.  
Decreased incisal opening of 26 mm.  
Chronic myositis of all the muscles of mastication.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
Nocturnal and daytime clenching and bruxism.
Psittacosis (chlamydia psittaci.)
Celiac disease with gluten hypersensitivity. 
Metal hypersensitivity to materials in the prosthesis. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Medications.
Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s. to see if this can control the head and neck pain.
Medical workup for:
Psittacosis (chlamydia psittaci.)
Celiac disease (gluten hypersensitivity.)
Metal hypersensitivities.

I gave Renee a prescription for Klonopin 1 mg tablet dispensing 20 tablets 1 tablet q.h.s. refill x3.  

For Renee I ordered the following lab tests:
HLA typing.
Immunoglobulins.
Immunoglobulins for celiac disease to include IgG-AGA, IgA-AGA and EMA and also chlamydia antibody group titer.  


RENEE KRAPFF				03/23/2006				Page 5


Additional treatment for the jaw problem could include:
Treatment option #1:
Orthodontics to align and level the arch as well as close the posterior open bites.
Osseointegrated implant to left mandibular first molar area. 
Restorative dentistry to place the crown on the left mandibular implant. 

Treatment option #2:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch 
Surgery.
Le Forte I to close the posterior open bite. 
Placement of osseointegrated implant to the left mandibular first molar area. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to place the crown on the mandibular first molar tooth. 

Treatment option #3
Surgery.
Placement of osseointegrated implant.
Restorative dentistry to build up the posterior teeth as well as place a crown on the left mandibular first molar implant.
