
								
VIRGIE KRAUSS								03/30/2011

Treating Doctors:  Dr. Brian Darling, DDS, 3820 S. Fremont Avenue, Springfield, MO 65804, telephone #417-882-0948.  Her dentist is Dr. Stephen D. Maus, DDS, 258 US Highway 60 East, Republic, MO 65738, telephone #417-732-2823.  

Virgie is now 75 years of age, birth date 02/26/1936.  Surgery was 12/17/1990for placement of bilateral TMJ Techmedica total joint prostheses.   She is now 20 years 3 months follow-up. At the age of 72 in March 2008, she was having no headaches, no TMJ pain, no myofascial pain.  Her jaw function and diet were at about a level of 3 and disability at 0.  She had no pain no palpation around the head and neck area at that time.  She had no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  The only medicine she was taking at that time was Reglan which apparently caused her some significant difficulties.  She was doing extremely well at that time without any problems.  

 In the last 2 to 3 years, she has developed significant pain with the right side greater than left side.  She currently gets headaches at a level of 7 in the frontal, temporal, posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 6, diet at 8, disability at 8.  She has a Class I occlusion, but has an overbite of 6 mm.  Interestingly, in April 1996, her overbite was just 2 mm.  To palpation, she has severe pain over the right retromandibular area.  She has low severe pain over the masseter muscles, high moderate pain over the TMJs, temporalis muscles, left retromandibular area, and milder pain over the medial pterygoids.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her back, neck, and shoulders.  She currently takes the following medications:

Coreg 25 mg b.i.d. 
Zestril 40 mg q.d.
Norvasc 10 mg q.d.
MSM gel that she applies to her face to help with the pain.

The incisal opening is 33 mm and excursion movements are less than 1 mm.  Additional history that she gives is that her pain has increased during the last 2 to 3 years right side greater than the left side.  She took Reglan for 8 years and this apparently has caused her perhaps some irreversible stomach problems.  She injured her neck about 10 to 11 years ago and has neck problems.  She gets chiropractic treatment for that, but apparently has some arthritis and disc displacement in her neck.  Her neck problems are getting worse.  The chiropractor can manipulate her and she feels better for a while and then it gets bad again.  She feels best in the mornings relative to her pain.  Her pain in her jaws increases with talking, chewing, and stress.  She points to the pain being predominantly in the masseter muscle areas.  She is having increased blood pressure and is on medications for that.  She is getting ankle swelling.  She has significant problems with her stomach and cannot tolerate almost no medications and she feels this is a result of being on the Reglan for so long.  She does have some blurry vision and she has been told that she had eye disease.  She had cataract surgery 6 years ago bilaterally.  She at some point developed a gum problem and had burning in her eyes.  A dentist put her on some medication for her gum problems and it cleared up the burning in her eyes as well.  In 1995, she had colon cancer and had chemotherapy and surgery and has done well since then.  She had gallbladder surgery 7 to 8 years ago.  Her overbite is greater now than it was in 1996 going from 2 mm to about 6 to 7 mm.  Her lower teeth appear to have been intruded into the mandible, however, she claims that she does not clench or brux her teeth.

Radiographic evaluation shows that the Techmedica total joint prostheses are still in place.  There is still adequate space between the mandibular component and the fossa component.  She has crowns on most of her teeth.  She has decay associated with virtually every tooth in her mouth.  It very possibly could be that these teeth are causing her jaw pain.  She also has some periapical lesions.  She has seen Dr. Bryan Darling in Springfield, MO, who has examined her and recommended removal of all of her teeth.  I agree with this recommendation.  She has an appointment to have her teeth removed on April 20.  I assured her that this would be the best treatment for her to help get rid of her pain and chronic infectious process that she has ongoing.  This hopefully will help with her pain issues in her jaws and perhaps even in her neck area.  I do not know if it would have any positive effect on her abdominal problems.  She is to keep me informed of her progress.  She is having a lot of pain and has no pain medication.  Therefore, I gave her a prescription for Lortab 5 dispensing 10 tablets, 1 tablet q.6 hours p.r.n. pain.  