SANTOSH KRISHNAN							05/20/2011

Santosh is 34 years old, birth date 06/26/1976.  Santosh’s primary concerns are as follows:

Jaw hurts.
Jaw locks up occasionally.
Depending on the weather can have an adverse effect on his pain.  
Teeth sometimes hurt.

Santosh’s problems began when he was somewhere around age 14 as that is when he first noted that he was beginning to develop some facial symmetry of unknown etiology.  His jaws would lock up.  He has had no treatment to date.  He rates his TMJ pain at 1, average daily pain at 1.  He gets headaches at about a level of 5 in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally.  Jaw function is 5, diet at 5, disability at 2.  He has had no treatment for his condition to date.  He takes Nyquil and Mucinex as his only medications.  He gets occasional earaches and tinnitus, but no vertigo.  He has some problems with his feet, but nothing real significant.  He is aware of clenching at nighttime.  

CLINICAL ASSESSMENT.  Upper lip length is 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is -5 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandible dental midline is about 4 mm off to the left side.  The chin is probably 6 to 7 mm off to the left and nasal tip is about 2 to 3 mm off to the right.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded by probably 8 to 10 mm and chin is retruded about 15 to 20 mm.  Chin neckline is a little bit short.  There is a prominence of the nasal dorsum.  Intraorally, the lower first bicuspids are missing but the rest of the teeth are present back to the second molars.  There is residual placing between the cuspids and second bicuspids.  There appears to be adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he also is missing probably first bicuspids, but he has a reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch.  He has an anterior deep bite of about 5 to 6 mm.  Santosh has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and Class II end-on on the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  Uvula appears just slightly elongated.  Intranasally, he has a significantly deviated nasal septum off to the right side.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  Santosh recalls when he was about 3 years old he was riding his father in the car and he stopped suddenly and he ended up down on the floor and may have hit his nose at that time.  He does have a deviated nasal septum with it shifted significantly off to the right side.  To palpation, he has some vertical mild tenderness over the TMJs and rates it about a 1 throughout the head and neck area.  He rates his jaw function at 5, diet at 5, disability at 2.  He does get some headaches at about a level of 5 in the frontal and temporal areas.  He does have a loud audible click in the left TMJ at 20 mm of opening and 10 mm of closing.  The right side seems to function reasonably smoothly.  He has about 10 mm of excursion movement to the right and 7 to left.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four first bicuspids.  There is some spacing between some of the teeth.  He is missing the mandibular right third molar and all four first bicuspids, but all the rest of the teeth are present.  There may be some residual spacing between the cuspids and lateral incisors.  The right condyle looks quite large and the left one is quite small.

Coronal view shows that there is severe deviation of the septum off towards the right side.  The right turbinate is moderate in size, but appears to be pressing against the nasal septum.  The left turbinate appears relatively normal in size.  The sinuses are clear, although the left sinus is quite small due to intrusion of the lateral nasal wall.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear, although the left sinus is small than the right side.  The nasal septum is reasonably straight, although it goes off some to the right side.  Right turbinate, although relatively small, appears to be occluding almost against the nasal septum.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology and there may be some slight decreased posterior joint space.  The articular eminence is extremely vertical in orientation.  There is slight increased anterior joint space.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  There is a decreased joint space.  There is some anterior beaking beginning to develop on the condyle.  The condyle appears quite long the right side from the condylar head to the sigmoid notch.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The joint space is a little bit narrow vertically and at the lateral aspect.  The lateral tubercle is enlarged compared to normal.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite a bit larger than the opposite side both vertically and mediolaterally.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  There is an area of calcification within the condylar head.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Santosh has a retruded maxilla and mandible and vertical hypoplasia as well with both maxillary and mandibular arches.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Right mandibular condylar osteochondromas and medial displacement of the articular disc.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
Maxillary AP and vertical hypoplasia as well as transverse asymmetry. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and transverse asymmetry.
Missing all four first bicuspids extracted for previous orthodontic reasons. 
Deviated nasal septum with nasal airway  obstruction on the right side.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Right TMJ low condylectomy with articular disc repositioning and 				ligament repair with Mitek anchor. 
	b.	Left mandibular articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with 			Mitek anchor.
	c.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to level the mandible transversely 			and to advance it forward approximately 15 mm. 
	d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward about 8 to 10 mm 			and down graft it 6 mm anteriorly and 10 mm posteriorly as well as 
                        correct the transverse occlusal cant.  
	e.	Nasal septoplasty. 
	f.	Genioplasty.



