RACHEL KRIVIS									12/05/2005

Rachel is 16 years old, referred by Dr. William Hang.  Rachel has had previous orthodontics by Dr. Alan Licht in Tarzana, California.  Rachel is in good health with no major medical problems.  She takes the following medications:
Prozac 40 mg q.d.
Minocycline.
Yasmin.

Rachel's problems began at about the age of 12 of unknown etiology.  She had orthodontics at about the age of 12 to 14.  At the end of orthodontics, she feels her teeth fit together fairly well.  Since that time, her bite does not fit as good as it used to.  She has worn an occlusal splint for the past year and this has helped her some.  She does have a history of clenching and bruxism and that is reason her dentist made the splint for her. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS
When she talks, her jaw shifts off to the side.
Teeth and jaws do not fit together very well. 
Cannot find a comfortable bite relationship.
Facial asymmetry that has gotten progressively worse. 
Jaw joint on one side smaller than the other side. 
No comfortable position for her bite.
Bite keeps changing.

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo or hearing loss.  She does have some back problems but it may be involving her muscles more than the osseous structures.  She has no other joint problems.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime.  She has no problems with headaches.  She does get some TMJ pain with the right side greater than the left side at about a level of 5.  Average daily pain when she has pain is about a level of 4.  Her pain is not consistent and it comes and goes.  However, when it does come it can be there for several days before it leaves again, then she may go several days without any significant pain.  She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 2, disability at 2, average daily pain around 4.  

In frontal view, Rachel has some facial asymmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is 1.5 mm.  Left eye is about 1 mm or 2 lower than the right.  Maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline.  Nasal tip is off to the right side probably about 4 to 5 mm.  Mandibular dental midline may be just 1/2 mm off to the right side.  Chin is actually fairly close to being on the facial midline may be just a mm or 2 to the right.  In profile view, she has probably may be 2 to 3 mm deficiency of the maxilla.  The chin may be retruded approximately 12 mm.  As Rachel postures her mandible forward it does improve her facial balance particularly if the upper lip is filled out slightly and if the chin were more prominent.  Intraorally, Rachel has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Lower cuspids are blocked out of the arch.  She has some crowding there probably about 3 to 4 mm.  In the upper arch, Rachel has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally being probably about 3 mm Class II.  

RACHEL KRIVIS				12/05/2005				Page 2


She has about 1.5 vertical overbite.  She has about 2 to 3 mm overjet.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusion of about 1 mm with the right side being higher than the left side.  Intraorally, the oral mucosa appears healthy and normal.  The uvula may be mildly elongated but not too significant.  Soft palate looks relatively normal.  Faucial pillars may be somewhat constricted but this is probably due in part due to the tonsils that are present of moderate size.  She does have moderate snoring although it is not there all the time.  She does have some moderate daytime somnolence and she does have some moderate snoring.  She, however, is not aware of having any sleep apnea problems.  She does have daytime somnolence but she also states she feels she is probably sleep deprived because of her schedule.  Intranasally, she has a significant deviated nasoseptum off towards the left side.  The left turbinate is quite large and appears to obstruct the left airway significantly.  Right turbinate appears smaller in size and there does appear to be good airway on the left side.  To palpation, she has some mild to moderate tenderness over the right TMJ and mild tenderness over the masseters, styloid areas and shoulders.  Maximal incisal opening is about 52 mm and she could open to about 40 mm without real significant discomfort.  Excursive movement is about 8 mm in each direction.  On opening, the left joint functions smoothly but on the right side she has a loud audible click at about 40 mm of opening.  On closing I could not detect the closing pop.  The right cheek is about 3 mm AP deficient compared to the left cheek.  Nose is deviated off to the right side about 4 to 5 mm.  Shifting the nose back over towards the left side does improve the facial symmetry although there is still the deficiency in the right cheek area.  She does have a little bit of a yaw in the left side of the face and dental arches being about 1 to 2 mm off towards the left.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the presence of the bilateral maxillary third molars and maxillary left third molar.  The right third molar is absent.  The rest of the teeth are present.  Central incisors particularly on the right side appears to have had perhaps some root resorption occurring.  The left sinus appears more cloudy than the right side.  Left nasal airway appears to be pretty much obstructed.  The left sinus appears more cloudy than the right sinus.  The condyles appear arthritic with the left side looking worse than the right side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses actually look fairly clear.  She could possibly have a little mucous retention cyst in the right maxillary sinus.  Of interest is that back in the nasal bony septum area the right turbinate looks significantly enlarged and obstructing most of the airway.  The left turbinate appears small and narrow and with a good airway.  The septum appears a little bit deviated off towards the left side.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The right turbinate does appear significantly enlarged compared to the left turbinate. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows the condyle that appears arthritic.  There appears to be loss of vertical dimension.  Decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderate in angulation.  There is definitely decreased superior and posterior joint space.  



RACHEL KRIVIS				12/05/2005				Page 3


Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears smaller on this side than the opposite side.  Decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Some anterior beaking may be present.  On opening, there is good translation in both joints with it being just slightly greater on the right side compared to left.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible appear to be AP deficient.  Moderately high occlusal plane angle is present.  Some adenoid tissues present.  The turbinates extend just slightly down the posterior border of the hard palate.  The lower incisors appear slightly overangulated.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate of about 5 mm.  At the base of the tongue it is more like 10 to 11 mm.  There is an adenoid mass present and it comes in close approximation to the inferior turbinate.  There is a Bolton's discrepancy and tooth size with a difference of 4.5 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption and articular disc dislocation with significant deformation.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle angulation.
Impacted bilateral maxillary third molars and mandibular left third molar.
Deviated nasoseptum.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Snoring. 
External nasal deformity.
History of clenching and bruxism. 
TMJ pain. 
Myofascial pain.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4.5 mm. 
Moderate crowding of lower anterior arch. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing at least 3 mm of tooth structure. 
RACHEL KRIVIS 				12/05/2005				Page 4


Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it slightly and down graft it posteriorly and correct any transverse problems.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Nasoseptoplasty. 
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x3.
External rhinoplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

