NANCY KRUPP									06-30-03

Nancy is 44 years old and referred by Dr. Ron Groves, Southlake Blvd., Southlake, TX.

Patient History

She has had some previous surgery for ovarian cysts. She had some small breast tumors removed, and she has had an appendectomy. Nancy is predominantly a mouth breather. Nancy is in good health.

Nancy’s problems began in her teenage years of unknown etiology. She did have orthodontics from fifth grade through the ninth grade. She was a thumb sucker until about the age of 12. She gets earaches with the right side being greater than the left side, and she also reports tinnitus, and she does get frequent vertigo which she says could be related to low blood pressure. The only other joints that bother her right now are in her back, where she fell in October on a cement floor and has developed some right sciatica. She reports no history of clenching or bruxism. It is interesting her mother has TMJ problems also. She has two boys, ages 16 and 19, and neither has TMJ problems. 

The only medication she takes is Advil, but she does take a lot of this to control her headaches and problems. 

She gets daily headaches that occur in the temporal areas bilaterally at about a level of 6. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, overall pain at 6, jaw function at 3, diet at 7, and disability at 1.

Patient Concerns

Facial asymmetry (present since her teenage years and has only gotten slightly worse since then)
Earaches 
Teeth don’t fit together
Popping in the jaw joints
Pain in the jaw joints
Headaches (she has received Botox injections in the frontal area which have helped her headaches since, but they are still there)
Affects on speech with increased problems with lisping
Difficulties breathing through the nose
Predominantly a mouth breathing
Difficulties eating some foods
Chews only on the left side
Teeth on the right side don’t touch very well
Becoming more retruded in the mandible
Snoring

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Nancy has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1.5 mm. Maxillary dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted probably about 6 mm off toward the left side.

In profile view, she has fairly good projection of the upper lip. Obtuse nasolabial angle due to nasal tip being turned upward. Chin-neckline is a little bit short. Mandible is probably AP deficient by possibly 8 to 10 mm.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has crowns on the left first and second molars and right first molar. Some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. Adequate attached gingiva although could be a little bit thin around the central incisors. She has some lingual inclination of the posterior teeth on the left side. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. A little bit of malrotations of the central incisors. Transversely, however, the arch is fairly symmetric. In the lower arch, the left cuspid is about 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid. Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right maxillary cuspid being about 1.5 to 2 mm lower than the left cuspid, and the right lower cuspids are about 3 mm lower than the left cuspids. Right side of the face back in the frontal view appears a little bit more full by maybe 3 to 4 mm as compared to the left side. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side by about 3 mm, and on the left side she has a full Class II cuspid relationship. She has about a 2-mm overbite relationship anteriorly, and she has about a 3 to 4-mm overjet. The yaw in the lower and upper jaws may be rotated to the right about 2 mm. Oropharynx appears clear. She does have a hyperplastic uvula which may be accounting for some of her snoring.

Intranasally, her turbinates are fairly good size. Holding her nostrils opened enabled her to breathe a little bit better through her nose. She does have a moderately wide columella. 

To palpation, she has some moderate tenderness over the right temporalis, milder tenderness over the right masseter, and milder tenderness over the left TMJ. In function, the right joint has a little bit of a rubbing noise to it. The left side has a little bit of a squeaky kind of noise but functions reasonably smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is 58 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 8 mm and to the left 7 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates don’t look too large. Third molars are absent, and there are crowns on the left maxillary and mandibular first and second molars and on the right mandibular first molar. Right condyle appears as though it may be a little bit sclerotic but hard to tell if that it not just overlying bone structures. Left TMJ looks a little bit flattened on top but otherwise has some fairly good morphology. Right mandibular condylar head and neck appear a little bit larger than the left side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has extreme flattening and decreased posterior joint space. A little osteophyte going up off the posterior aspect of the condyle. Vertical joint space, however, looks fairly good. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows the head of the condyle is slightly flattened with some very mild anterior beaking present. Posterior joint space might be slightly decreased but not too significantly. Superior joint space looks more reasonable. Articular eminence is somewhat shallow but a little bit steeper than the opposite side. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Mandible is deviated off toward the left side. Turbinates appear larger on this view with the right side being fairly well obliterated and the left side having some airway.

Cephalometrically, Nancy has a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway is quite narrow being only about 3 mm at the superior aspect of the soft palate level and about 4 or 5 mm down closer to the uvula. From the base of the tongue, the posterior pharyngeal wall actually measures about 11 mm. Turbinates don’t look particularly large on the profile view. There is significant vertical differences in the height of the mandibular inferior border and slight cant in the occlusal plane angle. There is a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's discrepancy of 2 to 3 mm. Nancy also has some significant lingual tori in the lower arch particularly with the right side being much, much larger than the left side.

Basic Diagnoses

Right mandibular condylar hyperplasia (arrested)
Mandibular hypoplasia but with significant deviation of the mandible off toward the left side by 6 mm
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and with severe deformation
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction
Class II occlusion on the left side, Class II end-on occlusion on the right side
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Earaches 
Tinnitus
Vertigo
Hyperplastic uvula
Snoring

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Open up about 1 mm of space around each maxillary lateral incisor to help compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy 
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 1 mm to 1.5 mm of tooth structure to help compensate for the significant tooth-size discrepancy 

Surgery
Right TMJ reconstruction with sternoclavicular disc graft
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible and rotate it back onto the facial midline
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to correct the transverse discrepancy and establish a good Class I cuspid-molar relation as well as correct the transverse asymmetry
Uvulectomy

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
