ROSEMARY KUHLMAN								04-07-04

Rosemary is 50 years old and referred by Dr. Andrea Quaroni, an oral surgeon in Austin, Texas.

Patient Concerns

Severe pain in the TMJs
Difficulties eating and chewing
Teeth don’t fit together very well
Breathes significantly through her mouth particularly when sleeping
Snoring

Patient History

Rosemary’s problems began about three years ago when she was involved in an MVA, and an airbag went off and hit her in the jaws. This resulted in damage to both of her joints. The accident was in 04/2001. In 02/2002, she underwent bilateral TMJ arthroscopy, and initially this helped for a short time but then got worse. In 11/2002, she underwent bilateral TMJ probably meniscectomies and then tissue grafts using cadaver tissue. Initially the results were good, but she has gotten much worse to the point that her pain may be worse than it was before the surgery. She has worn a splint for about 2-1/2 years. She was able to go without it for a little while after the surgery, but she has reverted back to wearing it most of the time. 

She previously has been on a Durgesic patch and also has previously been on Vicodin but doesn’t use that anymore. She has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo and no hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her neck, right shoulder, fingers, and slight problems with her knees. She has no known allergies and no difficulties wearing jewelry. She has no problems with headaches per se. She rates her TMJ pain on a usual day at about a level of 6 but can easily escalate almost daily to a level of 10 and is usually worse when eating. Her average daily pain level is about a 7. She rates her jaw function and diet at 6 and disability at 5.  She has had one other treatment where she had an injection done to the left joint where they attempted to do a block in that left side, but the pain was excruciating, and she didn’t really realize any significant change. It is possible that the joint space wasn’t entered. She has had previous physical therapy with Mark Strickland.

Current Medications

Actiq 3 to 4 per day
Coral calcium
Tylenol or Advil for lesser pain
MSM

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Rosemary has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0. 

In profile, she has fairly good AP facial balance. Chin-neckline is moderately long, although chin-neck angle is not as clearly defined. 
Intraorally, Rosemary has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has some severe crowding, lower anterior arch. Some significant transverse deficiency in the lower arch particularly on the left side. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Transverse narrowness there. Slight decreased curve of Wilson in the upper arch and a significantly decreased curve of Wilson in the lower arch. She is actually a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side and closer to Class I on the right side. Maxillary dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted to the left probably about 3 mm. Chin, however, is pretty much on the facial midline. Nasal tip is deviated a little bit off to the left side a couple of millimeters. Rosemary has an anterior deep-bite of about 5 mm. On jaw function, Rosemary has significant crepitation in both joints. Maximum opening is about 37 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 3 mm and to the left 2 mm. Oropharynx appears clear. She has her tonsils present. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the medial pterygoids, styloid areas, posterior neck, and moderate pain to the palpation over the TMJs. Intranasally, she has deviation of the septum off toward the right side anteriorly in the cartilage portion. Turbinates just appear moderate in size. She can breathe better through the left side than the right side. With the scope in the right side, it improved her breathing abilities. She says she gets sort of constant drainage out of the left side but not out of the right side. She did sustain a broken nose in a car wreck. She has actually broken her nose three times.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows she has some stuff in her left sinus. Septum looks fairly straight. Right turbinate looks large compared to the left side. Missing all four third molars but has the rest of her teeth. Has a crown on the mandibular right second molar. Has severe arthritis in both joints. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows severe arthritis present. Appears to be reactive bone up in the fossa. Significant anterior beaking present and osteophytes sticking up from the posterior condyle area. This appears to be rather advanced osteoarthritis in this joint.

Right TMJ tomogram is not quite as clear, but there is severe arthritis in this joint as well. There is an osteophyte protruding from the posterior head of the condyle superiorly from the head of the condyle and some large anterior beaking present. Joint space is decreased. Appears there may be some reactive bone up in the fossa. Styloid process actually is quite long and extends down and overlaps the posterior border of the mandible. 

On opening, there is very limited translation in both joints. Arthritis is seen to be quite extensive in both joints. 

Waters view shows that there is probably a mucocele in the floor of the sinus on the right side. On the left side, the sinus actually looks a little bit clearer than it does on the Panorex. Nasal septum shows extreme deviation. The turbinates appear moderate in size. Ethmoid and frontal sinuses appear clear. 

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class II type appearance. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 to 9 mm at the base of the tongue.

Other Systems

She has problems with the bones in her neck, right shoulder, fingers, and knees. No urinary tract problems, but she does have polyuria and nocturia x 3, but she drinks a lot of water, probably 15 glasses a day. She has three children, ages 28, 22, and 20. She had 1 miscarriage. She had an ovarian cyst that ruptured about 9 years ago. She has fibroid tumors of the uterus. She may have had a sty x 1 but no other eye problems that she is aware of. She had Lasek surgery and now wears no corrective lenses. She does have some drainage from the left side of her nose at times but is not aware of any sinusitis problems. She smoked for about 18 years irregularly and stopped about three years ago, but she has lots of other family members including her mother, brother, and sister that smoke. Her mother actually smoked during Rosemary’s pregnancy. She has had lots of exposure to birds. She lived on a farm for about 5 years but also had some other pet birds. These included chickens x 20, guineas x 2, peacocks x 2, pet duck for a year, pet skunks x 2, raccoon pet, flying squirrel pets, parrot for about 2 years in her early 20s and it died, and had an owl that she had for about 2 years but if flew away. She had love birds for about 3 years; one died and then the other one died shortly thereafter. She raised some blue jays. She has had cats all of her life, and some of them did catch and eat birds. She has had dogs all of her life, and some of them did catch birds as well. While on the farm, she was around pigs x 6, horses x 4, and cows x 30.

Basic Diagnoses

Based on clinical, radiographic, dental model, and CAT scan evaluation, Rosemary’s diagnoses are as follows:

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis
Severe TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Masticatory dysfunction
Skeletal Class II jaw relationship
Class II occlusion on the left side, Class I on the right side
Anterior deep-bite 
Significant crowding, lower anterior arch
Deviated nasal septum
Hypertrophied turbinates
Partial nasal airway obstruction 

Recommended Treatment

CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen)
Application of arch bars