CYNTIA KUNG								08/12/2011

Cyntia is 44 years old, birth date 05/23/1967.  She was referred by Dr. Joao Goncalves.  

Primary concerns that Cyntia has include the following:

Clicking in the jaw joints.
Cross bite.
Muscle pain in the jaw areas.
Headaches.

Cyntia feels that her bite is changing.  

In frontal view, Cyntia has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about probably -1.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the right.  Chin is about 5 mm to the right.  In profile, she has fairly good facial balance.  Chin neckline may be just slightly short, but chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  She also has some crenations on her tongue.  In the lower arch, the bicuspid teeth are tipped out labially.  She has some dental implants present in the lower first molar area.  She is missing left second bicuspid and all the molars, but does have an implant in the second bicuspid position.  On the right side, she is missing all the molars and has an implant in the first molar area.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch and has adequate attached gingiva.  The lower anterior teeth are tipped where the incisal tips are angled towards the left and roots towards the right.  In the upper arch, she is missing the right first molar replaced by a 3-unit bridge and she is missing the right lateral incisor replaced by a dental implant.  On the left side, she is missing probably the first and third molar with the second molar in mesial inclination supporting the 3-unit bridge with the first bicuspid.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2.5 mm.  There is a cross bite on the right side and has basically a Class I cuspid position.  On the left side, she is pretty much Class I.  There is transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side.  She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  Cyntia has some mild tenderness over the TMJs, masseters and left temporalis muscles.  On opening, she has a pop in the left TMJ at 30 mm and closing at 20 mm.  In the right side, she has audible crepitation in the joints.  The maximal incisal opening is 50 mm, but only 18 mm without discomfort.  The excursion movement to the right is 6 mm and to the left 7 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy except her tonsils are of moderate size.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear fairly large and probably block a good portion of the airway.  At night when sleeping, Cyntia states she feels as though she breathes predominantly through her mouth at night.  Cyntia reports that the popping in her left TMJ has probably been present for about 20 years, but she is not sure exactly when it started.  The dental implants that Cyntia has had placed were done by Dr. Hilton Israelson.  

Cyntia gets headaches about two times per week in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally.  She rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 5 which is predominantly in the masseter muscles.  She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 3, disability at 3.  She has no trouble with earaches.  She developed tinnitus in approximately 2005.  She went to an ENT doctor and they told her there was not much they could do for her.  She has about a 25% hearing loss on the right side.  She rarely gets vertigo.  She has no other joint problems.  She is aware lf clenching at nighttime.  

It is unknown when Cyntia’s TMJ problems began.  She was in a major MVA in her twenties where she struck her left side of her face particularly in the temporal area.  She did not become aware of having joint problems until the 30s.  During the last couple of years, symptoms have gotten worse for her and she feels that her bite is changing.  The only treatment she has had so far was in 2002 she started with splint therapy with Dr. Steven Bender.  She has had her current splint for about 7 years and it was constructed by her dentist, Dr. James Watson, 291 W. Renner Parkway, Suite A, Richardson, TX 75080.  The only medications she currently is on are multivitamins and Motrin.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of mandibular left second bicuspid and all three molars with the second bicuspid replaced with an implant.  In the right mandible, she is missing all four third molars and has one of the molars replaced by a dental implant.  In the upper arch, she is missing maxillary right lateral incisor and this is replaced by a dental implant.  She is also missing the second bicuspid and probably the first molar with the second molar drifted forward into a better position.  She has a 3-unit bridge from the first bicuspid to the second molar.  On the left side is missing the second bicuspid, first and third molars.  Second molar is drifted forward.  She has a pontic on the maxillary left side with a 3-unit bridge extending from the second bicuspid to the second molar.  Right TMJ appears quite arthritic and condylar head and neck are shorter on the right side as compared to the left side.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight.  She has huge turbinates that may be blocking off the airway.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  A cross bite is noted in the mandible on the right side.  

Axial view shows that the septum appears reasonably straight.  The turbinates are huge and appear to block most of the airway.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  There is a little bit flattening on the anterior head.  There is decreased superior and posterior joint space, particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows that there is arthritic progression particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  There is significant beaking forward of the condyle.  There is decreased vertical and posterior joint spaces.  There could be some areas where there is bone-on-bone contact.
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is a little reactive bone build up at the lateral pole of the condyle.  There is decreased superior and lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has some advanced arthritis in it.  There is sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  There is some beaking of the condyle off the lateral pole.  There is decreased lateral joint space and superior joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Cyntia has a Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Cynthia is as follows:

Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation, severe degenerative changes, non-reducing and bone-on-bone articulation.
Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with reduction.
Mandible deviated to the right about 2 mm at the incisor level and 5 mm at the chin
Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Cross bite on the right side.  
Missing mandibular left molars and second bicuspid that has been replaced by a dental implant.
Missing mandibular right molars but the first molar replaced by an implant.  
Missing maxillary right lateral incisor replaced by an implant.
Missing the molars and missing the second bicuspid replaced by a 3-unit bridge.
Missing right second bicuspid, first and third molar but the second bicuspid replaced with a 3-unit bridge.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side.
Crowding of maxillary and mandibular anterior arches.
Mandibular dental transverse excess with the bicuspid teeth tipped bucally bilaterally.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Try to expand the maxillary arch some if 			at all possible.  Be sure to tip the right cuspid and first bicuspid labially.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Tip lower right cuspid and bicuspids 			lingually as well as the left bicuspids to eliminate the reverse curve of 			Wilson associated with those teeth.  May need to use some turbos to open 			the bite enough to clear  and protect the cuspid tips. 
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral mandibular reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint 				prostheses and shifting of the mandible towards the left side to eliminate 			the cross bites.  
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
5.	Consider reconstruction of any bridges or crowns that are out of alignment with 	the new jaw positioning  