SUSAN KUTSCHKE									01-04-05

Patient History

I originally saw Sue on 11/07/2001. Sue has a history of sinus problems and had sinus surgery actually before I saw her. Her sinus problems have not improved, and, in fact, if anything have gotten worse for her. Currently she has no problems with earaches but does have a constant bilateral tinnitus, and she gets occasional vertigo. She may have some hearing loss, but that has not really been evaluated. Joint wise, she has some problems with her neck but otherwise joints are in fairly good condition. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime. She did have a splint that she received in about 2000 and wore that for about one month. She apparently has a lot of food allergies and works extremely hard in trying to control her diet and has done her best to try to eliminate corn, wheat, dairy products, and alcohol, but she doesn’t do well with the white wine. She has received chiropractic treatment for about 18 months previously, and she is getting ready to treat chiropractic treatment again in the near future. The only place that she has numbness is the tip of her nose probably secondary to previous surgeries. Apparently the doctor that treated her did a rhinoplasty, sinus surgery, and deviated nasal septum correction.

She has a lot of problems with headaches. She gets usually about two per week, but it can escalate up to four to five per week. They occur predominantly in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area bilaterally at a level of 7. About every two months, she will get a really severe headache that creates nausea and vomiting. She gets some nose aching and pains when her headaches erupt.

Current Medicines

Lorazepam 1 mg q.h.s.
Sulfa Tri-Meth which she takes for acne
Mobic 1 q.d.

Patient Concerns

In frontal view, Sue has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is almost -4 mm. Maxillary midline may be about a millimeter off toward the left side. Mandibular dental midline is a millimeter or 2 off to the right side. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly well-aligned with each other. Sue has just constant irritation at the tip of her nose. It is quite possible that she may have some inflammation related to a permanent suture used there from her previous rhinoplasty. Sue would like for us to evaluate and examine the nose and remove any offending material that may be in there.

Clinical Examination

In profile view, Sue has some AP deficiency of the maxilla of probably about 3 mm at upper lip supralabrale. The mandible may be retruded about 8 mm or so. She has a significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of probably less than 3 mm at the base of the tongue. The soft palate dimension appears to be more around 4 mm. Sue has a Class II cuspid relationship on the right side and has a Class I cuspid on the left side. She has an anterior deep bite of about 5 to 6 mm. Sue has a transverse cant in her occlusal plane with the right maxillary cuspid being about 2 mm higher than the left. In the lower arch, the right cuspid is about a millimeter higher than the left one. Oropharyngeal tissues look good and healthy. Uvula, soft palate, and faucial pillars all look relatively normal. Maxillary left cuspid may be a millimeter posterior to the right cuspid. 

The right turbinate is hypertrophied, but there is a moderately good airway intranasally because the septum is deviated significantly off toward the left side. On the left side, the turbinate is a lot smaller, and there may be moderately adequate airway even with the deviated septum. Alar base is quite wide, and the nostrils are quite narrow. The luminal valves are fairly constricted. Opening up the luminal valves enables her to breathe much easier through her nose. Narrowing the columella did increase the width of the nostril somewhat; however, there did still appear to be some constriction in the luminal valve area, and Sue did not appreciate any improved breathing by constricting the columella. Intraorally, the uvula, soft palate, and faucial pillars all look relatively normal. Left turbinate is fairly normal in size, but the right is moderately enlarged. She has a fair amount of tiredness during the day. She is aware of having moderate snoring present. She does have daytime somnolence of probably moderate proportion. She may have some sleep apnea symptoms, and her husband has noticed her drawing in big breaths, but he can’t remember if she has any apneic episodes or not.

On evaluation of the nose, the nose is quite narrow, but Sue basically likes the form and shape. She does have significant depression along the lateral aspects of the nose. As she breathes in, even with gentle inhalation, the lateral nasal walls collapse inward, causing further obstruction. Using some Q-Tips and holding out the luminal valve area, her airway was significantly improved. She has very poor support in this area. Tip of the nose is quite red due to inflammatory process probably related to previously placed sutures with her nasal reconstruction.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except for the four third molars. Roots are fairly short on a number of the teeth, particularly the bicuspids in the upper arch. Right sinus looks a little bit cloudy compared to the left side but difficult to tell from this view. Difficult to evaluate the septum and turbinates. Condyles appear to have moderately good morphology. 

Waters view actually shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. Bony nasal septum is intact and fairly straight. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. Difficult to assess the anterior turbinates since this x-ray shows just the posterior aspect of the turbinates and the bony septum. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology and a little bit of flattening on the anterior head. Joint space appears reasonably well-balanced. Articular eminence is moderately steep and fairly short in vertical height. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a little more flattening in the posterior head of the condyle. There appears to be increased joint space in that area. Joint space could be a little bit decreased anteriorly but not too bad. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There is balanced joint space on this side as compared to the opposite side. 

Incisal opening shows good translatory movements in both joints.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations and arthritis
AP maxillary hypoplasia
Vertical maxillary hypoplasia
AP mandibular hypoplasia
Class II occlusion on the right side and Class I on the left side
Significant cant in the maxilla transversely with the right cuspid being 2 to 3 mm higher than the left cuspid and in the lower arch the right cuspid being 1 to 2 mm higher than the left cuspid
Maxillary asymmetry with the maxillary dental midline being shifted 1 mm to the left and the left cuspid being approximately 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid
Mandibular asymmetry with the mandibular dental midline being shifted 2 mm to the right and the right cuspid a millimeter or 2 posterior to the left cuspid
Crowding, lower anterior arch
Accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch
Mild crowding in the upper anterior arch
Accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch
Hypertrophied turbinates
Lateral nasal collapse of the luminal valves
Wide displaced alar feet at the columella base causing constricture of the nares
Anterior deep bite of about 5 mm
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm
Inflammation to nasal tip secondary to reaction to previously placed synthetic suture material
Nasal airway obstruction
Headaches
Myofascial pain
TMJ pain
Difficulties eating and chewing
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway
Sleep apnea symptoms 
Severe snoring

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 to 3 mm of tooth structure to help with the alignment, correct the tooth-size discrepancy, and prevent the lower anterior teeth from being flared any further forward

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible and level it transversely
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, downgraft it, and correct any transverse discrepancies that may be present
Reconstruct the nose with placement of ethmoidal bone grafts to the lateral aspect of the nose to correct the collapsed bilateral nasal valves
Reconstruct base of columella

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 