KALINA KWONG									11/07/2005
DOB:  08/05/1992. 

Kalina is 13 years old.  She is referred by Dr. George Adams.  She is in good health with no major medical problems.  

PRIMARY CONCERN
Headaches.
Pain in the jaw joints. 
Difficulty breathing through the nose.

She takes no medications and has no known allergies.  Kalina did injure her ankle two days ago and currently has a boot on for support.  Kalina has had headaches since about the age of 10.  During the past year, she apparently has developed some clicking in her jaws and maybe some increased occurrence of headaches.  Etiology is unknown.  She gets earaches occasionally and vertigo occasionally but tenderness or hearing loss.  She does have weak ankles and she tends to sprain them frequently and also she has previously fractured her right ankle and it appears she fractured the right wrist.  She has had difficulties wearing pierced earrings and wore them for about a year but had problems with infections and stopped wearing them about 2 years ago.  Kalina does give a history of clenching at nighttime and also during the daytime.  She gets headaches about once a week that she wakes up with at about a level of 4 in the frontal and temple areas.  She gets pain in the jaw joints 2 to 3 times per week and is usually present when she wakes up in the morning at about a level of 5.  Average daily pain is 3, jaw function at 3, diet at 1, disability at 0.  She did have a traumatic injury where she got hit in the mouth with a bowling ball that fractured off part of a tooth and it was replaced.  Kalina is aware that she tends to breath through her mouth at night.  However, she is not aware of any problems with snoring, daytime somnolence or sleep apnea problems.

In frontal view, Kalina has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 5 mm.  Maxillary midline is about 1 mm or 2 off to the left side.  Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly close to being on the facial midline or maybe just about 1 mm off to the right side.  Chin appears to be off to the right side probably about 2 to 3 mm.  Maxillary midline maybe 1 mm off to the left and mandibular dental midline 1 mm off to the right.  Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much aligned with each other.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance in the upper lips, cheeks and nose.  The chin appears retruded by probably about 12 to 15 mm.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has adequate attached gingiva of lower anterior arch.  She has anterior deep bite of about 5 mm.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally.  Class II is a little bit greater on the right side and she is closer to a Class I on the left side with only about 2 mm of Class II on the left and probably 4 mm Class II on the right.  Upper incisor crown length is probably about 8.5 mm.  When Kalina smiles she exposes about 6 mm of gingiva.  Intraorally, the soft tissues look healthy.  The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear relatively normal.  Tonsils appear fairly minimal in size.  Intranasally, the septum looks fairly straight.  The right turbinate appears relatively normal in size.  The left turbinate appears enlarged and appears to block a fair portion of the airway.  
KALINA KWONG				11/8/2005				Page 2

To palpation, she has some moderate tenderness over the TMJs and styloid areas.  Joints seem to function reasonably smooth.  The maximal incisal opening is about 50 mm.  Excursive movement is about 9 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of all 4 third molars as being impacted.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  Some dilacerations on the lower bicuspids.  Left maxillary central incisor has an opacified root.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  There may be some slight decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There may be some decreased posterior joint space.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles forward and anterior to the articular eminence.  

Waters view shows the sinuses look relatively clear.  Nasal septum is deviated just slightly off the left side.  The turbinate on the right side actually looks a little larger than on the left side, which is opposite the clinical impression.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is some adenoid tissue still remaining in the oropharynx.  The turbinate extends back towards the posterior aspect of the hard palate.  However, oropharyngeal airway appears acceptable with the dimension of about 6 to 7 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 to 9 at the base of the tongue.  She appears to have a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship.  Moderately high occlusal plane angle.  Lower incisors appear a little bit overangulated.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated anteriorly. 
Right TMJ arthritis and possible medial displacement of the articular disc. 
Vertical maxillary excess.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Class II end-on occlusion. 
High occlusal plane angle.
Anterior deep bite.
Impacted third molars x4.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Partial nasal airway obstruction.
Overangulation of lower anteriors. 
Crowding of lower anteriors.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
KALINA KWONG				11/8/2005				Page 3


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
MRI of left and right TMJs to include coronal views.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2.5 to 3 mm of tooth structure and close spacing.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors (dependent on MRI confirmation.)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies moving the anterior maxilla superiorly and posterior aspect inferiorly.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Anterior augmentation genioplasty with sliding genioplasty.  
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

               