CATHERINE LAMENDOLA 							07/24/2006
Age:  11 years old
Date of Birth:  02/06/1995

Catherine is 11 years old and is referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich, Plano, Texas.  She has had some airway problems and just this summer had her adenoids removed.  This was done on July 21, 2006.  Her tonsils apparently were okay and remained in place.  She did have jaundice when she was a baby.  She currently weighs 98 pounds and is 4 feet 10 inches tall.  Catherine does have difficulties breathing through her nose and breathes predominately through her mouth particularly when sleeping.  She does have some mild snoring.  She has some mild daytime tiredness but no apparent sleep apnea problems.  She has mild difficulty sleeping at night.  She does toss and turn a fair amount.  It is anticipated that the adenoidectomy may help some of these symptoms. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 4 to 5 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm to the right and chin is probably 3 to 4 mm to the right.  In profile, the maxilla may be retruded by 2 to 3 mm.  Chin is back probably about 12 mm.  Chin-neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the first molars present.  She has a retainer in the lower arch 6 x 6.  There appears to be some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the first molars.  She has bands on the first molars.  She has a 2 x 2 retainer around the maxillary incisors.  Catherine has almost a full Class III occlusion on the right side and on the left side.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  She has an overjet of about 4 to 5 mm.  She has a little bit of a tendency towards a buckle crossbite on the left side but certainly not a complete one.

Intranasally, the nasal septum is deviated a little bit off to the right side.  The right turbinate is moderately enlarged and seems to create significant obstruction in the airway on the right side.  On the left side, turbinates are slightly enlarged but there appears to be good airway basically due to the fact that the septum is deviated so far off to the right side.  Intraorally, the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars appear relatively normal.  The tonsils are hyperplastic.  The columella appears somewhat wide and the nostrils appear narrow.  She does have mild snoring and some daytime somnolence usually during the school year and not so much during the summer.  She does not have any sleep apnea symptoms.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 to 3 mm lower than the right side.  Catherine gives no history of trauma to the jaws.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The bony septum at least appears relatively straight and the turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  She has a retained primary C in the left maxillary arch but the rest of the teeth are present back through the first molars.  The second molars are unerupted but appear to be developing appropriately.  The third molars are not really identifiable at this time but could be in the early development stages.

CATHERINE LAMENDOLA 		07/24/2006				Page 2


The left condyle appears to have some abnormal architecture associated with it.  Maybe a little bit short in vertical height.  It appears to be ballooned out just below the condylar head.  Articular eminences appear relatively steep.  Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively equal in opacification.  The septum appears to have deviation associated with it.  The nasal airway appears fairly occluded bilaterally.  Both inferior turbinates appear quite large.

The left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle positioned in the fossa and it appears that there could be a decreased joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The top of the condyle appears somewhat flattened.  There may be decreased superior and posterior joint space but difficult to tell.  

Right TMJ shows a condyle that has some abnormal morphology associated with it.  There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle is sitting in the very back part of the joint space.  Anterior joint space actually appears increased.  The condylar neck seems quite broad and the distance in the condylar head to the sigmoid notch appears shorter than normal.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of the left condyle but on the right side there is minimal translation. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a Class II skeletal relationship.  There appears to be decreased dimension from the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall with airway dimension of only about 3 to 4 mm at the most.   At the base of the tongue, the airway measures about 6 mm.  She appears to have mild increased occlusal plane angulation and has a skeletal Class II relationship.  Interestingly, the inferior border of the mandible seems to line up reasonably well.  Maximal incisal opening is about 45 mm and the joints function relatively smoothly.  Excursive movement to the right is about 5 mm and to the left about 9 mm.  It was difficult for her to translate towards the right side.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
AP mandibular deficiency.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Class II occlusion.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 to 3 mm lower than the right side.
High occlusal plane angle.
Unerupted second molars.
Retained left primary cuspid but with the cuspid in good position for eruption. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Deformed right mandibular condyle.
  Deviated nasal septum off to the right side.
  Hypertrophied turbinates.
  Probable nasal airway obstruction.


CATHERINE LAMENDOLA 		07/24/2006				Page 3


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:  
Continue to monitor facial growth and development.
MRI of left and right TMJs.
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior part superiorly, level transversely and decrease the occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Consider possible augmentation genioplasty. 
Consider partial turbinectomies.
Consider nasal septoplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  

It would be best to delay treatment so that surgery is performed when she is 15 years old.  This will also give us a chance to monitor the TMJs.   I explained this should get her a good functional and esthetic result.  