MARGARET LAMORE								05/08/2006

Margaret is 44 years old and referred by Dr. David Ivey, One Mid Rivers Mall Dr., Ste. #310, St. Peters, MO 63376. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS: 
Limited opening.
Pain (can be constant and unbearable.)
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Tiredness in the jaws by the end of the day. 
Grinding noises in the right joint.

MEDICATIONS:  
Verapamil ER 240 mg.
Hydrocodone 7.5/500 as needed for pain.  She tries to limit it to 1 tablet at night. 

PREVIOUS SURGERIES:  
Closed reductions for her fractured jaws in August of 1970.  She had C-sections in March of 1988 and May of 1991.  She has had a tubal ligation and gallbladder removed in December of 1999 and a gastric bypass in August of 2002.  

She was involved in a bicycle accident when she was 8 years old.  She flew over the handlebars and landed on her chin and then the other person on the bike landed on top of her head and she sustained bilateral mandibular fractures that are believed to be subcondylar fractures.  Her jaws were wired together for 6 to 8 weeks.  She has had root canals done and some teeth removed and implants placed.  She had orthodontics to move maxillary posterior teeth forward to fill in the space of missing laterals most likely.  She had to wear orthodontic appliances for about two years from the age of 14 to 15.  

She gets some pain in the right ear area that are sometimes very sharp pains.  No tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She has had previous lower back problems but she believes that has healed itself.  She has an allergy to penicillin but no known food allergies and no known allergies to jewelry.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  She gets pain in the jaw joints on an average of about 2 but can easily exacerbate to a level of 8.  She feels best in the mornings and the pain usually gets worse as the day goes and if she uses her jaw more.  She rates her jaw function at 7, diet at 1, disability at 1.  

In frontal view, Margaret has a little bit more fullness on the left side of the face than the right side.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm.  Maxillary midline is about a mm off to the right as is the mandibular dental midline.  In profile view she has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks and nose.  Perhaps just a slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe 2 to 3 mm.  Chin is retruded by about 12 to 15 mm.  Chin-neckline and chin-neck angle are not well defined.  She has a head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids, right second and third molar and left third molar.  

MARGARET LAMORE			05/08/2006				Page 2


In the upper arch she is missing lateral incisors but has had the posterior teeth moved forward so that the cuspids are in the lateral incisor position.  She has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has a little bit of an overjet of about 2 mm.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 to 3 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  The uvula appears a little bit elongated.  The soft palate looks relatively normal in length.  Faucial pillars may be a little bit constricted in a mild to moderate degree.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged but it appears that there is passable airway bilaterally.  She has no daytime somnolence, no sleep apnea although she does say that she probably has some mild snoring.  To palpation she has some mild tenderness over the right TMJ but no other pain around the head and neck area.  Maximal opening is about 33 and she opened to about almost 30 mm without significant pain.  Excursive movement to the right 4 mm, to the left 1 mm.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 1 mm to perhaps a 1.5 higher than the left side.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, mandibular right second molar, bilateral mandibular first bicuspids and maxillary bilateral and lateral incisors.  She has an osseointegrated implant in the left central incisor and root canal on the right central incisor.  In the lower arch she has root canals on the right second bicuspid first molar.  Sinuses appear relatively clear though the left one is more cloudy than the right one.  The left condyle has a more normal architecture whereas the right side appears severely deformed with a significant amount of heterotopic bone surrounding the joint area. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit flattened on top.  Articular eminence is quite flat.  There appears to be some joint space present.  

Right TMJ shows a large mass of bone formed in the fossa along the posterior wall of the fossa area as well as on the condylar head.  It does appear that the articulation is between two fairly large sized heterotopic bone formation area.  There is one on the remaining condylar neck area and the other in the fossa.  There is some translation in the left joint but the right side does not appear to have any significant translatory abilities.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  Septum is relatively straight.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she does have an increased occlusal plane angle but not too significant.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm from soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall area and from the base of the tongue the posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 8 mm.  On functioning, the left joint seems to work relatively smoothly whereas the right one has some fine crepitus type noises present.




MARGARET LAMORE			05/08/2006				Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Right TMJ severe arthritis with significant heterotopic bone formation in the fossa and residual condylar stump.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Snoring. 
TMJ pain.
Missing maxillary lateral incisors, mandibular first bicuspids and mandibular right second molar.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch.
CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Right TMJ extensive debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis.
Left TMJ sagittal split osteotomy.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.
Right coronoidectomy. 
Right TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen.)
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.


