BRAIN LAMPING									11/07/2207

Brian is 26 years and is referred by Dr. Peter Crump.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS: 
Bite is incorrect. 
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints.

Brian's problems began at about the age of 23 in 2003.  He injured his jaw playing soccer and his problems began after that.  Brian has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He has a previous broken ankle from soccer but has no problems with that.  He is not aware of clenching and bruxing at this time.  He rates his TMJ pain, facial pain, jaw function and diet all at 0.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: 
Adderall.
Zyrtec. 
Flonase.

Brian did have pain following his injury in his TMJs for about 1-1/2 years but that pain for the most part has subsided.  He does have a history of snoring particularly when he forgets to take his Flonase.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:
In frontal view, Brian has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  The left eye may be just 1 or 2 mm higher than the right side.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin line are all pretty much along the facial midline.  In profile view, Brian has some AP maxillary deficiency.  The maxilla is AP deficient particularly at the lip probably about 6 mm.  Chin is a little bit AP deficient by probably 3 or 4 mm at least.  Chin-neckline is a little bit short.  He has some problems at the nasal dorsum.  Intraorally, Brian has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has some lingual tori present.  Teeth are actually fairly well aligned and leveled.  He has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch he has all of teeth back through the second molars.  He has a Class III end-on occlusion being probably about 4 to 5 mm Class III.  He has an end-on incisor relationship with a tendency towards a crossbite.  He has about a –2 mm overjet.  Oropharyngeal structures appear normal.  Brian does have a little bit of exostosis around his lower anterior teeth and around the cuspids and perhaps the bicuspids that he is going to have filed down by a periodontist.  Intranasally, the turbinates and septum appear relatively normal and no obvious evidence of nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, he has no particular tenderness around the head and neck area.  He is aware of some crunchy and popping noises in his TMJs.  He has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  Maximal incisal opening is 51 mm.  Excursive movements are probably around 6 mm in each direction.  Transversely the occlusal plane is fairly level.  Brian has had previous orthodontics from 1994 to 1996.  



BRIAN LAMPING				11/07/2007			Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The rest of the teeth are present.  He has some spacing around the upper lateral incisors and cuspids as well as the centrals.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The condyles appear relatively normal in morphology.  

Waters view show that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The septum may be deviated in the bony area.  The turbinates appear relatively normal in size.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  A little of sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  Articular eminence is moderate in inclination.  Joint space appears fairly well balanced.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on top and maybe a little bit of sclerosis on the superior cortical bone.  Articular eminence has some moderate inclination.  Joint space appears fairly well balanced.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Brian has a skeletal Class III occlusion and skeletal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway looks excellent.  He does have an upper lip supralabrale position posterior to subnasale by probably a good 3 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
AP maxillary deficiency.
Slight transverse maxillary excess.
Class III end-on occlusion.
Anterior crossbite. 
Diastemas around the maxillary anterior teeth.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3+ mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Maintain spacing around the upper centrals, laterals and cuspids but close the spacing between the cuspids and first bicuspids. 
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 5 mm.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to build up the lateral incisors. 