MERIDITH LANE									03/28/2006

Meridith is 14 years old.  She has a partial complex seizure problem.  She had her wisdom teeth removed in June of 2005.  She takes Trileptal 300 mg 2 times a day and Tylenol for headaches.  Meridith had one generalized seizure in November of 2004 and prior to that she was aware of having some staring types of problems but since being on the medication she has had no reoccurrences.  When Meridith was born she was a twin and it is thought that maybe her position on her jaw and face created some noticeable asymmetry at birth.  Some of this has resolved but there is still a component of that remaining.  Meridith has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo and no other joint problems.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  She gets headaches about 2 times per month in the temple areas about a level of 4.  She rates her TMJ pain at 0, average daily pain at 0, jaw function at 4, diet at 0 and disability at 3.  

In frontal view, Meridith has upper lip length of about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 to 5 mm.  The nasal tip is off to the right about 2 to 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is off to the right side about 1.5 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is off to the right about 2 mm.  Meridith has a lip incompetence of about 8 mm.  The right side of the mandible in the lower jaw appears to be about 4 mm more prominent in transverse projections as compared to the left side of the face.  There is a transverse yaw in the maxilla and mandible where the posterior aspect of the occlusion is 2 to 3 mm to the right.  This accounts for the frontal transverse asymmetry.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are all within normal range.  The tonsils are present and appear healthy.  In profile view she has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip.  Upper lip supralabrale is slightly posterior to the subnasale.  Upper lip appears to be retruded by about 4 to 5 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded by about 18 to 20 mm.  Chin-neckline is extremely short and chin-neck angle is not well-defined.  Lower third of the face appears long vertically.  Intraorally, Meridith has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars erupted in and they appear to be nicely aligned and leveled.  She has been wearing orthodontic appliances for approximately 3 years now.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth also back through the second molars present.  Meridith has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally being a little bit worse on the right side than the left side.  She is probably 4 to 5 mm Class II on the right side and probably a 3 mm Class II on the left side.  She has an anterior open bite.  She has an overjet of about 3 mm.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm lower than the left side in both upper and lower back.  Intranasally, the septum may be deviated off towards the right side as the entire nose is deviated off in that direction but relative to the nasal alignment the septum appears reasonably straight.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged but there appears at least anteriorly to be a passable airway.  The columella is somewhat wide.  The nostrils are somewhat constricted in width.  The luminal valves are mildly constricted.  She has mild snoring at night but no daytime somnolence and no sleep apnea symptoms.  She is predominately a mouth breather at night and also during the day.  She is fairly heavily involved in athletics including volleyball and tennis and she likes to run a lot.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the styloid area.  In centric relation as she opens she has to manipulate her jaw in order to get it open as she has a displaced disc in the right TMJ.  It reduces at about 15 mm of opening.  On closing back in centric relation there is a closing click at about 5 mm.  When she normally opens and closes, her mandible is postured forward some so that disc appears that a lot of her normal jaw function may be reduced.  It is only when she goes into centric relation that the right side comes out.  
MERIDITH LANE				03/28/2006				Page 2


The left side seems to function relatively smoothly.  So, the TMJ problem is unknown and etiology is unknown.  She is unaware of having any particular tenderness or soreness in that right TMJ.  Maximal incisal opening is about 45 mm.  Excursive movement to the right side about 8 mm, left side 7 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars but there is an area of calcification in the right maxilla a little bit distal to where the third molar would normally be seen.  It could possibly be a 4th molar or possible a root tip but unlikely with the 3rd molars being removed at this age.  The sinuses look relatively healthy.  The right turbinate appears large compared to the left one.  The condyles look a little bit arthritic particularly on the left side.  

Waters view shows that there may be a mucocele in the sinuses bilaterally being on the floor on the left side and it could possibly be one on the lateral aspect of the sinus wall on the right side.  The septum is reasonably straight with a few little curves in it.  The right turbinate appears enlarged compared to the left turbinate but there appears to be constricted airway.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit small so there may have been a little bit of erosion associated with it.  It is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is relatively normal in steepness.  There appears to be decreased posterior joint space on this side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have undergone some bony changes.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be a slight decreased posterior joint space and little bit of increased anterior joint space.  On opening, there is good translation in both condyles but both condyles do look somewhat arthritic.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Meridith has an anterior vertical maxillary excess, AP mandibular deficiency and a high occlusal plane angle.  There is vertical asymmetry present.  She was not in centric relation on the initial x-ray.  Oropharyngeal airway dimension is about 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  She carries her tongue relatively low in her mouth.  The turbinate extends back to the posterior aspect of the hard palate.  A little bit of adenoid tissue is still remaining in the nasal pharynx.  It appears that there is perhaps a mucocele in one of the sinuses.  There is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of only about 1.5 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES 
Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption and articular disc dislocations. 
AP maxillary deficiency.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess, posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
AP microgenia.
Anterior mandibular vertical excess.
MERIDITH LANE				03/28/2006				Page 3


Class II end-on occlusion.
Open bite tendency.
Lip incompetence. 
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm lower than the left side. 
Frontal facial asymmetry with the right side of the face being considerably fuller than the left side.
Yaw in both the maxilla and mandible with the jaws being shifted about 3 mm off towards the right side. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Retention cyst in the left maxillary sinus.
Moderately decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Snoring.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Predominate mouth breather. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1 to 2 mm.
Apertognathia with occlusion only on the second molars in centric relation and all other teeth are out of occlusion. 
External nasal asymmetry. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1 mm to 1.5 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward approximately 5 mm and move it upwards about 3 to 4 mm as well as down graft the posterior aspect 2 mm.
Advance the mandible in counterclockwise direction approximately 14 mm.
Vertical reduction AP augmentation genioplasty shortening the chin about 5 mm and advancing it 4 mm.
Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
External rhinoplasty. 
Remove mucus retention cyst in left maxillary sinus. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
