TRAVIS LANTZ								04/04/2011

Travis is 18 years old, birth date 12/17/1992.  Referred by Dr. Farhad Moshiri, 1320 E. Kingsley, Suite B, Springfield, MO 65804.

Primary concerns that Travis has are as follows:

Difficulties eating and chewing.  
Headaches. 
TMJ pain. 
Teeth and jaws are not lined up properly.

Travis’ TMJ problems began at about the age of 10 years old in 2001 when he began having clicking in his jaw joints of unknown etiology.  When Travis was 9 years old, he got shot in the mouth with a BB gun and it hit the maxillary left central incisor shattering it.  The tooth was extracted.  Also, about that same time, he had some orthodontic treatment consistently predominantly a maxillary expander.  He has had some other basic treatments done.  In December 2009, he got full orthodontic appliances on for the first time and continues to have them on.  On November 13, 2008, TADS were placed in the anterior maxilla so that a face mask could be used which he wore for 2 to 3 years, but this was ineffective as far as correcting his jaw malalignment problems.  

Travis gets headaches about 3 times per week in the temporal and posterior head area bilaterally at a level of 7.  He rates his TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 6, diet at 3, disability at 3.  He has no problems with earaches, but gets occasional tinnitus and vertigo but has no hearing loss.  There are no other joints that bother him.  He is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the daytime.  Travis does have problems with car sickness and it is thought it may be related to his jaw joint issues.  Travis is not aware of snoring, daytime somnolence, or sleep apnea.  He does have a moderate sleep disorder.  At nighttime and also during the daytime, he breathes a lot through his mouth.  

In frontal view, Travis has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 17 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 2.5 mm.  The mandibular dental midline and chin are pretty much on the facial midline.  The maxillary dental midline is shifted about 2 mm to the left.  In profile view, Travis is about 6 mm AP deficient.  The chin may be retruded about 8 mm.  The chin neckline is a little bit short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined with some increased fullness in the submental area.  He has a basically a Class III cuspid relationship by about 3 mm.  There is an anterior cross bite of probably 5 mm.  He has crenations on the borders of his tongue all the way around.  He has about a 0.5 mm anterior open bite.  He has an anterior cross bite, but the maxilla may be slightly transversely hyperplastic.  Oropharyngeal airway looks like the tissues are all healthy.  He has a moderately enlarged uvula.  To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the left styloid area, but other no tenderness to palpation.  Right joint function smoothly.  The left joint has a click at about 35 mm of opening and 10 mm of closing.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows absence of the mandibular left central incisors.  He has TADS in bilaterally that extend down just mesial to the lateral incisors.  The third molars are missing, but all the rest of the teeth are present.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight.  The inferior turbinates are quite enlarged blocking most of the functional airway.   There is some significant increased thickness of the sinus membrane in the left maxillary sinus compatible with sinusitis.  

Axial view shows that the turbinates are fairly significant in size and could be blocking a significant part of the airway.  The septum is fairly straight.  The inferior turbinates are hyperplastic and appear to block some of the functional airway.  The left sinus has some significant thickening of the mucosal lining indicative of likely sinusitis.  The right sinus looks fairly clear with just some very minimal elevation and thickening of the mucous membrane.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The condyle is larger than the opposite side.  The joint space is fairly well balanced.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination, but is fairly short in length.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head.  The joint space, however, looks reasonably good.  The articular eminence is relatively short in length.  Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width.  The lateral pole is significantly lower than the medial pole.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 mm.  There is decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint between the condyle and the lateral rim of the fossa.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has very good width, although not quite as large as the opposite side.  The lateral pole is lower in vertical position compared to the medial condylar pole.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves fairly significantly probably 4 or 5 mm and there is decreased joint space there. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Travis has a very low occlusal plane angle.  He has a Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway looks very good.  


Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia but transverse hyperplasia.
Mandibular AP hyperplasia (prognathism).
Mandibular microgenia.
Anterior cross bite extending from cuspid through cuspid. 
Class III end-on occlusion being approximately 3 mm Class III.
Missing maxillary left central incisor.  
Over-angulation of maxillary incisors and mandibular incisors.
Excessively expanded maxillary arch.  
Increased curve of Wilson in the bicuspid molar area.
Mild form of hypernasal speech quality.  
Hypertrophied turbinates with nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Extract maxillary right first or second bicuspid (the second bicuspid may be a 	better selection for extraction).
2	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Loose some posterior anchorage, but 			retract the bicuspid and incisors approximately 4 or 5 mm.  Open up 1 mm 		of space between the upper cuspid and lateral incisors.  Center the 				maxillary left lateral incisor between the right central and left cuspid so 
                        that there is a span of 8 mm from the mesial of the right central to the 
                        mesial of the left cuspid.  Tip the left cuspid root mesially and first 
                        bicuspid root distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Narrow 			the transverse width of the upper arch some if possible particularly in the 			bicuspid and molar areas.
	b.	Continue to align and level lower arch.  Slenderizing the lower anterior 			teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.  
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to correct the transverse width.
	c.	Bilateral mandibular rams osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly. 
	d.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
	e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
5.	Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary left lower incisor that will now be 	functioning as a central incisor.  Lateralize the left maxillary cuspid to make it 	appear more like a lateral incisor.  