TRACEY LAPEKAS								08/04/2011

Tracey is 40 years old.  Birth date is 02/10/1971.  Primary concerns that Tracey has are as follows:

Anterior open bite that seems to be getting progressively worse.
Jaw discomfort.  
Inability to bite food properly.
Clicking noises in the jaw joints. 
Over bite. 

She is taking no medications.  She believes the onset of her problems were in 2011 of unknown etiology.  She has some minimal TMJ pain at a level of 1.  Headaches when the occur usually under stress at about a level of 1.  She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 1.  She takes no medications.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her wrists.  She has hypothyroidism but apparently cannot take Synthroid as it makes her feel bad.  She is aware of clenching her teeth at nighttime.  When she wakes up in the morning, she is aware of the tightness in her jaws from her nocturnal clenching.  

In frontal view, Tracey has fairly good left-to-right symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline may about 1.5 mm off to the right side.  The mandibular dental midline may be slightly to the left about 1 mm.  Chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Upper lip at point A is deficient about 2 mm.  Upper lip vermilion appears to have a good projection.  The chin may be retruded 8 to 10 mm and chin neckline is short.  Chin neck angle is not defined.  Intraorally, Tracey has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She may have some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has real thin attached gingiva around the lower central incisors.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  In centric relation, her lower incisors may be pretty much on the facial midline.  She has an over jet of probably about 3 to 4 mm.  She has a Class II end-on occlusion being probably a good 5 mm Class II.  She has about a zero vertical overbite relationship.  Occlusal plane is transversely level.  When she postures forward into her more comfortable bite, she is Class I on the right side, but still end-on Class II on the left side as she shifts the mandible slightly off towards the left side.  Tracey has no difficulties breathing through her nose.  Maximal incisal opening is 58 mm and excursion movements are about 12 mm in each direction.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has a dental implant replacing the mandibular left first molar.  She has root canals on the other three first molars and on the left maxillary lateral incisor.  Condyles look a little bit arthritic.  Styloid processes are moderately elongated.  The septum appears straight and turbinates appear relatively normal.  
Coronal view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear with just some slight thickening in the left sinus floor.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  The right turbinate appears somewhat enlarged, although the left one appears more normal. 

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is straight and the right turbinate is moderately enlarged with the left one being relatively normal.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that the condyle is small in an anteroposterior direction.  Articular eminences are relatively shallow.  There is some slight anterior beaking present.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little bit larger in anteroposterior width compared to the left side.  The joint space appears reasonably well balanced.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow.  Out laterally, there appears to be some flattening of the condylar head.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking present. 

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The joint space appears fairly even, but maybe somewhat narrow.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 2 to 3 mm.  this condyle appears a little bit shorter in vertical height compared to the left side.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Tracey has a moderately high occlusal plane angle with a skeletal and occlusal Class II jaw relationship.  The oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 mm at the base of the tongue and about 6.5 to 7 mm at the tip of the soft palate.  She has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.  

Diagnoses on Tracey would be as follows:

Maxillary posterior vertical and transverse hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle of 16 degrees (normal 8 degrees).
Class II occlusion on the left side, Class II end-on occlusion on the right side.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3.5 mm (normal is 11 mm).
Bilateral TMJ arthritis. Possible articular disc dislocations.
Mandibular left second bicuspid rotated 90 degrees.
Lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.  


Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1. 	MRI of left and right TMJs.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 			removing about 2 mm of tooth structure.  Keep the mandibular left second 			bicuspid in its 90 degree rotational position.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction and expand.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction and advancing pogonion approximately 10 			mm.  
	c.	Consider possible bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament 			repair if discs are noted to be displaced on the MRI. 
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine and retain the occlusion.
5.	Consider a crown on the mandibular left second bicuspid.  

Tracey has the clicking and popping in her joints and pain in her TMJ areas as well as headaches.  She has taken Motrin for 6 months without relief.  She took 4 tablets 2 times per day.  She has discontinued Motrin as she found it ineffective.  
