LAURA LABARQUILLA-BASADA						09/22/2006

Laura is 42 years old.  She had her first orthodontic treatment when she was 14 years old.  Her bite resolved and was reasonably good but by the age of 22 her bite had changed significantly.  At the age of 31, she had orthodontics done and had double jaw surgery in February of 1995.  There were some relapse problems and so she underwent surgery again in 1998 to include surgery on both jaws.  Again there were relapse problems and so she underwent orthodontics for the fourth time and in 2004 had double jaw surgery once again.  In 1987, she did have a rhinoplasty and some eye work performed.  She has no pain problems currently in the TMJs and on an average day really does not suffer from any pain.  She gets headaches about 2 times per month but relates these more to her menstrual period than to the jaw situation.  She has some significant decreased sensation to the lower lip and chin area and some decreased sensation to the upper lip as well.  She gets occasional right earaches but has no problems with tinnitus or vertigo.  She may have some mild hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  

In frontal view, Laura actually has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetrical.  Upper lip length is about 26 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0.  Lower lip to lower tooth relationship is almost 7 mm.  Nostrils are wide and alar bases are flared.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Nasal tip is a little bit off to the right side maybe 1 to 2 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the right.  Chin is to the right probably about 3 mm or so.  When Laura puts her lips together she has hyperfunction of the mentalis muscle.  Chin appears narrow and tapered.  In profile view, Laura has an obtuse nasal labial angle.  AP-wise, the upper lip actually looks like it has fairly good projection.  Mandible appears retruded by 10 to 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is short although the chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined but with some fullness in the submental area.  She has limited protrusion abilities.  She has probably about 5 to 6 mm of lip incompetence due mostly to ptosis of the lower lip.  Intraorally, Laura has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth appear to be reasonably aligned and leveled.  She has some exposure of the root.  This very well could be related to perhaps extrusion of the teeth or long-term Class II mechanics that may have caused the gingival recession.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being 4 to 5 mm Class II on the right side and probably 2 to 3 mm Class II on the left side.  She has barely 1 mm of vertical overbite.  There is an overjet of about 2 mm.  The oral mucosa looks healthy.  Uvula may be a little bit elongated.  The soft palate looks relatively normal, as do the faucial pillars.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the left side.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The left airway appears fairly well blocked.  The right side turbinate is enlarged but there may be some airway at least anteriorly because the septum is deviated off towards the left side.  She reports no problems with snoring, daytime somnolence or sleep apnea.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  She seems to have some crepitus in the joint on opening.  Maximum opening is 38 mm.  Excursive movements are 5 mm to the right and 7 mm to the left.  





LAURA LARABARQUILLA-BASADA		09/22/2006			Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows that she has bone plates in the maxilla x4 with 16 bone screws.  She has plates bilaterally in the mandible with 4 screws in each plate.  She in addition has screws or remnants of screws x5 on the right side and x5 or 6 on the left side.  She has wires in the chin area.  She is missing maxillary left first molar with a pontic replacing it and the third molar.  On the right maxilla, she is missing the third molar.  On the mandibular right side she is missing the first molar but the second and third molar had been moved forward into the first and second molar position.  On the left side, the third molar is absent.  She has a root canal in the maxillary right central incisor and the mandibular left first molar.

Condyles look quite arthritic and resorbed with perhaps a little bit greater loss of bone structure on the left side as compared to the right side.  Turbinates appear enlarged.  Difficult to evaluate the sinuses.  

Waters view shows that she does have a deviated nasal septum in the bony area.  Turbinates appear quite large and the airway appears fairly well blocked.  Sinuses look as though there may be some sinus problems as they are not very opacified.  Frontal sinus is quite large and appears clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic with a little sclerosis on top.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be decreased joint space vertically and posteriorly as well as anteriorly.  Styloid process appears moderately elongated.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has severe arthritis.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be some decreased joint space vertically, posteriorly and anteriorly.  On opening, there is restricted translation bilaterally although there is some.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Laura has a high occlusal plane angle. She has a Class II skeletal relationship.  She has a Class II occlusion.  Perhaps some upward and forward rotation at the angles of the mandible more so on one side than the other side.  She has had previous chin surgery.  Lower teeth appear to be almost pulled through the anterior alveolar bone in both the maxilla and the mandible.  The tongue fills a good portion of the oral cavity although there is space anteriorly.  Posterior airway space is decreased some but not too significant.  Laura does tend to breathe mainly through her mouth and because of difficulties breathing through the nose. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Status post double jaw orthognathic surgery x3.
Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption with non-salvageable discs.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
High occlusal plane angle.


LAURA LARABARQUILLA-BASADA		09/22/2006			Page 3


Class II end-on occlusion being worse on the right side as compared to the left side.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Deviated nasal septum.
 External nasal deformity. 
 Ptosis of the lower lip.
 Malposition and dysfunction of the mentalis muscle.
 Generalized decreased sensory innervation to the lower lip and chin and to a lesser   
       extent the upper lip and cheeks.
 Missing maxillary right first molar (replaced by a pontic), mandibular right first molar  
             with the second and third molar forward into the first and second molar position.
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about approximately 2 mm. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
CT scans of TMJs and jaws.
Presurgical orthodontic.
Continue to try and align and level maxillary arch.
Continue to try and align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advance with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Nasal septoplasty. 
External rhinoplasty to lengthen the nose with cartilage grafts (harvest from the septum.)
Re-suspension of the mentalis muscles.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to eliminate spacing in the upper arch that will be created with the surgery because of the tooth size discrepancy.

