MELISSA LA ROCHE								04/09/2008

Melissa is 20 years old.  Referred by Al Bishop, DDS, 3001 Brown Trail #101, Bedford, TX 76021.  Melissa has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain.  She first become of having a jaw problem in the fifth grade.  In the sixth grade, she was placed in a face mask device to try to advance the maxilla forward, but this did not work.  She also had maxillary expansion done.  She currently takes no medications except an occasional Advil.  She has no problems with earaches, vertigo, or hearing loss, but does get occasional tinnitus.  Her left wrist bothers her at times and her knees occasionally. She does have scoliosis.  
CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Melissa has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 0.5 mm.  Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Nasal tip may be just slightly to the right 1 or 2 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is to the left probably about 2 mm.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are pretty much aligned with each other.  There is some slight increased fullness on the right side of the face by probably 2 to 3 mm.  In profile, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe 3 mm.  Chin is in fairly good AP balance.  Lower lip is protrusive.  Vertical facial heights appear fairly well balanced.  The infraorbital area appears well balanced.  Intraorally, Melissa has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars.  She has slight accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.  There is mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.  She has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars.  She has an accentuated curve of Wilson in the posterior occlusion with the molars particularly flared out significantly.  Her molars are not at crossbite, but she has a crossbite from about the first bicuspids on around including the incisors.  She has about a 2 mm anterior open bite.  Melissa is about 4 mm Class III on the left side and 6 mm Class III on the right side.  She has just a minor transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being about 1 mm lower than the left side.  She has a slightly reversed curve of Spee in the upper arch.  Uvula, soft palate, and fascial pillars are relatively normal.  Tonsils are moderately enlarged.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated in the very anterior aspect off towards the left side.  Further back it may be deviated just slightly to the right side.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  She has moderate nasal airway obstruction.  Nostrils were normal as is the columella and luminal valves.  To palpation, she has some high mild tenderness over the right TMJ and mild tenderness over the left styloid area.  Joints function relatively smoothly.  Incisal opening is 50 mm.  Excursion movements are 4 mm in each direction.  Melissa has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2.5 mm.
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that the maxillary third molars are still soft tissue impacted.  Mandibular third molars are erupted, although may have some soft tissue coverage over them.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Septum appears deviated and turbinates appear moderate in size.  
Waters view shows she might have a little mucous retention cyst in the right maxillary sinus.  Sinuses otherwise look clear.  The bony septum appears relatively straight.  Turbinates appear moderate in size and fill a good part of the nasal cavity.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  The condylar head and neck appear elongated.  Joint space looks relatively normal.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  Condylar head and neck is excessively long.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space looks reasonably good.  On opening, there is restriction in both joints, but this does not correlate to the clinical evaluation. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Melissa has a skeletal Class III jaw and occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good.  
Basic diagnoses for Melissa would be as follows:
Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.  
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Maxillary AP deficiency.
Transverse maxillary excess.
Class III occlusion being worse on the right side than the left side. 
Slight cant in the occlusion with the right side being 1 mm lower than the left side.  
Deviated nasal septum.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Impacted maxillary third molars.
Malaligned and partially soft tissue impacted lower third molars.
Anterior open bite.
Accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.
Slightly reversed curve of Spee in the upper arch.
Accentuated curve of Wilson in the maxillary arch.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2.5 mm.
Speech defect secondary to jaw deformity. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Try to decrease the transverse width in the upper second bicuspids and molars by narrowing the arch, if possible.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Open up about 1 mm of space between the maxillary lateral incisors and cuspids to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
Align and level the mandibular arch and try to decrease the accentuated curve of Spee.  
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchors. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly and rotate it superiorly to help close the open bite.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance slightly, level the curve of Spee, and correct any residual transverse arch imbalances.
Surgical removal of the maxillary impacted third molars x2 and the malaligned mandibular third molars x2.  
Partial turbinectomies.
Nasal septoplasty. 