JOAN LASHLEY									12-01-03

Joan is 40 years old and referred by Dr. Duane Keller, 3929 Bayless Ave., St. Louis, MO 63125.

Patient History

Joan does have mitral valve prolapse with regurgitation. Otherwise she is in good health except for the jaw joint problems. She takes nadolol 20 mg tablets, ½ tablet daily. This medication is to control an irregular heartbeat that she has also had in the past. She also take Tylenol when needed for pain.

Joan has been aware of clicking and popping in her jaw joints for as long as she can remember, particularly on the left side. In January of 2003, she developed some significant pain. She was in an auto accident in the summer of 2001 but didn’t really experience any significant increase in pain or jaw dysfunction after that accident, and it wasn’t until January of 2003 that the problems began. She has received physical therapy for her jaw problem. Her pains were getting much worse, and that is when she went to see Dr. Keller, who made her a mouth guard in May of 2003. This helped decrease the pain significantly. 

She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is allergic to PENICILLIN but is not aware of any other allergies and has no problem wearing jewelry. She is aware of clenching during the day, but she is in a fairly stressful job. She really doesn’t have any problems with headaches. She rates her TMJ pain with the splint at about a level of 3 and without the splint at about a level of 6. She rates her overall facial pain and headaches with the splint at a level of 2 and without the splint at a level of 6. She rates her jaw function at 8, diet at 7, and disability at 1. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Joan has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. She has a little masseteric hyperplasia on the right side, and the right side of her face is more full than the left side by probably a good 4 mm. In profile, she has some good facial balance.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has a crown on the mandibular right first molar. Some very minimal crowding, lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has basically about a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles with it being a little bit greater on the left side than the right side. Otherwise she has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is 30 mm but only 25 mm without significant pain. Excursive movement to the right is 1 mm and to the left 5 mm. Joan can protrude about 2 mm, but her mandible deviates significantly off to the left side as she does that. She cannot get her teeth edge to edge.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear relatively small in size, and septum appears relatively straight. All four third molars are absent, and she has a crown on the mandible left first molar. Left condyle appears a little bit arthritic. Right side looks a little bit more normal. Articular eminences appear steep on both sides. No other significant pathology noted. 

Cephalometrically, she appears to have a Class I occlusion and just a slight skeletal Class II relationship. Slightly high occlusal plane angle perhaps but not too significantly. Oropharyngeal airway looks adequate.
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears flat on top with a little bit of beaking anteriorly. Decreased posterior joint space and superior joint space. Relatively shallow articular eminence. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has more of a hockey stick shape to it. A fair amount of anterior beaking appears to be present here, a little bit more so than the opposite side. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is steeper on this side than the opposite side.

Open views show minimal translation in the both joints with just a little bit of greater translation on the right side as compared to the left side. Some significant anterior beaking is noted in the open view on the left condyle, which is significantly greater than the right condyle.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are all clear, and nasal airway appears to be clear, although there may be some septal spurring present. There is increased width of the mandible on the right side as compared to the left side by about 3 mm. Bilaterally she demonstrates outward turning of the inferior border of the mandible. 

Other Systems

She has no other joint problems. She had a urinary tract infection in about 1989, but that was the only one. Has been diagnosed with fibrocystic breast disease but no other female reproductive system problems. She does not have any children and has not had any miscarriages and is not aware of any fertility problems. She about two or three times has had vaginal yeast infections but usually associated with being placed on antibiotics. She has been told she has gingivitis but a relatively minor degree of problem. She occasionally gets dry eyes. She occasionally will have some sinus problems but not too often. She has had bronchitis x 2, and she had pneumonia one time at the age of 11. She gets an occasional cough. She gets occasional diarrhea. No known STDs. She does have heart problems with mitral valve prolapse. She has not been associated with birds. She has had minimal contact with cats. She has had dogs most of her life, and this includes three dogs. She is not aware of any other them catching and eating birds. She has had minimal exposure to horses, perhaps one time per year for just a few hours at a time. She has no implants.

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with adhesions
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction
Closed lock in the left TMJ
Relative mandibular hyperplasia

Recommended Treatment

Application of orthodontic appliances to the teeth and placement of stable arch wires suitable for surgery

Surgery
Left TMJ reconstruction with one of the following techniques:
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor and left TMJ sagittal split osteotomy
Left TMJ condylectomy and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Right mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy with bone screw stabilization
Abdominal fat graft to left TMJ

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
