APRIL LASSITER								02/18/2011

April is 39 years old and referred by Dr. Stephen Smart in El Dorado, AR.  April’s TMJ problems began probably when she was a teenager and she first recognized that she was developing facial asymmetry when she was about 20.  The etiological factor was a right mandibular condylar osteochondroma.  Prior to that, she had had orthodontics from the age of 13 to 14.  On October 9, 1991, she underwent a right mandibular condylectomy for removal of the osteochrondoma and reconstruction with a rib graft.  For the most part, she has done well since then.  She does gets headaches one to two per week predominantly in the frontal and temporal areas.  She does not report any TMJ pain, but average daily pain is around a level of 4.  She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 3, disability at 2.  She says that she has grinding noises in the right joint and occasionally popping noises in the left.  She gets earaches 3 to 4 times per year predominantly the right side.  She has no tinnitus, some vertigo, and no hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at night.

In frontal view, April has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm and tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  The maxillary midline may be just about 1 mm to the left.  The mandibular dental midline is just a little bit towards the left as well and the chin is about 8 mm to the left.  In frontal view, there is some transverse asymmetry with the right inferior border being probably 5 to 6 mm lower than left side, but the left mandibular angle area is at least 5 mm more prominent in the transverse dimension as compared to the right side.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 3 to 4 mm lower than the left side.  Intraorally, April has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch and the lower four incisors are in significant right-sided inclination at the coronal area.  She has a slight increased curve of Wilson in the mandibular right posterior teeth and an accentuated curve on the left side.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship bilaterally.  April believes over the years that her mandible has shifted more towards the left side, but not too much in the last few years.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  she does have a slight yaw in the maxilla and mandible with the jaws being shifted about 2 mm to the left side.  Maximal incisal opening is 29 mm, excursion movement to the right 7 mm, to the left 1 mm.  On opening, she deviates towards the right side about 5 mm.  To palpation, she has some moderate tenderness over the right medial pterygoid muscle and mild tenderness over the right masseter.  She has no pain over the TMJ area.  The right commissure is about 3 mm lower than the left commissure.  In profile, the maxilla appears to be retruded about 3 to 4 mm.  The chin is prominent compared to the position of the lower incisors, but it appears to be in reasonably good AP position.  The lips appear to be somewhat retruded.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of a large bony mass in the right TMJ area extending forward beyond the fossa by at least 1 cm.  Remnants of the rib graft are seen posterior.  There are four wires along the inferior aspect of the ramus that were used to suture the rib graft in position.  In the left TMJ, the fossa and condyle appear relatively normal.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The sinuses are clear.  There is a definite transverse cant to the occlusal plane with the right side being probably about 4 mm lower than the left side. 

Axial view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side and the turbinates are of moderate size.  The sinuses are clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow.  Joint space looks reasonably good.  The architecture for the most part is fairly normal.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a large mass measuring almost 30 mm in AP dimension and probably 15 to 18 mm in vertical dimension.  This large bony growth appears to be anterior to where the rib graft was placed.  The articular eminence is shallow.  There is some very prominent styloid mandibular ligament present.  There does appear to be some soft tissue between the large mass and the articular eminence.  The large mass appears to be articulating beneath and towards the anterior aspect of the articular eminence.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology and width.  There is decreased lateral joint space where there could be almost bone-on-bone contact in some areas.  The lateral pole of the condyle is positioned lower than the medial pole by 3 to 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows some significantly abnormal morphology.  Rib graft is positioned posteriorly and there are some calcifications coming up along the medial aspect of the condyle in that area.  There is a significant anterior extension of this bony mass, but it is relatively narrow mediolaterally measuring only about 7 mm anterior to the condylar neck and extends further forward becoming a little bit more tapered.  In the fossa, the lateral rim inferiorly probably a couple of millimeters, but other areas show that it is fairly flat.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is vertical AP asymmetry with the inferior border being about almost 9 mm longer vertically on the right side compared to the left side.  Occlusal plane likely shows a difference in the molar area of about 5 mm.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Right mandibular condylar osteochondroma (35 mm x 18 mm x 10 mm) with fibrous ankylosis.
History of previous right TMJ reconstruction with rib graft.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and asymmetry.
AP macrogenia with asymmetry.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 3 mm lower than the left side.
Crowding of the lower anterior arch.
Limited incisal opening of only 29 mm.
Posterior yaw with maxilla and mandible being shifted towards the left about 2 mm.  
Right inferior border of the mandible 9 mm lower than the left side.
Myofascial pain predominantly on the right side.  
Headaches.
Nasal septal deviation.
Hypertrophied turbinates with nasal airway obstruction. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to correct the accentuated curve of 			Wilson on the left side and reverse curve of Wilson on the right side by 			perhaps using cross arch elastics on the left to tip the posterior teeth 			slightly lingually, but on the right side use cross arch elastics from the 			lingual lowers to the buccal of the uppers to try to upright the molars over 			basal bone.  
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints. 
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Removal right TMJ osteochondroma. 
b.	Right TMJ reconstruction and mandibular repositioning with TMJ 				Concepts total joint prostheses.  
	c.	Right TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Left mandibular ramus osteotomy to help shift the mandible towards the 			right side. 
	e.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level and advance as well as correct the 			occlusal planes and yaw.
	f.	Anterior and mandibular horizontal osteotomy to improve chin symmetry.
	g.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	h.	Nasal septoplasty.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  