MELANIE LASSITER							03/14/2011

Melanie is 42 years old, birth date 05/05/1968.  She is a self-referral.  We are not exactly sure when Melanie’s TMJ problems began.  At age 13, she was running around a swimming pool and fell and hit her jaw on the edge of the pool.  She hit the underneath part of her chin.  She was in an MVA when she was 18 when she hit broadside into a truck.  Then at age 31, she was in an MVA where she hit by an 18-wheeler and was hit actually several times by that truck during the process of the accident.  At age 18 is when her headaches developed.  In her 20s is when her pain really began to escalate and then the accident at the age of 31 just exacerbated the situation even more.  In 1994 is when she first began wearing splint type of devices.  To date she has had 7 different splints.  The doctors who have made the splints for her have been Dr. Mitchell Collins in Conway, Arkansas; Dr. Rick Roblee in Fayetteville, Arkansas; Dr. William Morrison in Jonesboro, Arkansas; Dr. John Dean from North Little Rock, Arkansas; Dr. Kyle Dalton; and there were probably at least a couple other doctors that made splints for her.  She has had physical therapy and facial tensing exercises.  

She takes the following medications:

Norco 10 six to eight per day.
Phenergan 25 mg p.r.n. 
Klonopin 1 mg t.i.d. 

Melanie rates her headaches at a level of 7 and they occur throughout the head.  She rates her TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 9, diet at 9, disability at 9.  She gets severe earaches, moderate tinnitus, and moderate vertigo.  Other joints that bother her could include her neck or back, but it is not clear cut.  Additional problems she has include GI reflux and polyneuropathy in her legs.  She may have back issues.  She is also borderline diabetic.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and she clenches significantly during the day as well.  She also has moderate snoring, but snores all night long.  She has severe daytime somnolence, probably moderate sleep apnea.  She also has a sleep disorder that is probably moderate to severe as she will have episodes where she goes 48 hours at times with severe pain where she cannot sleep.  She is also predominantly a mouth breather at nighttime and also during the day.  

In frontal view, Melanie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -3 mm.  The maxillary midline is on the facial midline.  The mandible dental midline and chin are shifted a little bit towards the left side about 1 to 2 mm.  In profile, Melanie has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 10 mm of AP mandibular deficiency.  Chin neckline is not defined.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has pegged and malrotated upper lateral incisors.  She is pretty close to being Class I cuspid on the right side and slight Class II end-on on the left side by probably 2 mm.  She has bilateral posterior open bites.  She can almost get her back teeth together if she really stresses.  When she is in a more relaxed position, then the back teeth are apart by probably about 2 mm.  She has about a 2 mm over bite relationship in her maximum occlusal position, however, this is an uncomfortable position for her.  On her posterior teeth, she has lost a lot of vertical height of those teeth.  It in part has to do with loss of enamel from the teeth as well as probably intrusion of the teeth from her bite splint and the chronic clenching and bruxism.  The splint that she wears currently does open her bite just ever so slightly, maybe 1 to 2 mm is all.  This splint that she currently is wearing does try to posture her lower jaw forward some.  It is very difficult to see the oropharyngeal airway.  The uvula may be somewhat elongated.  The soft palate could be mild to moderately elongated but again very difficult to tell.  I could not really assess the fascial pillars nor could I see the tonsils.  Intranasally, the nostrils are little bit small in size.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The septum may be deviated some.  She probably has at least moderate airway obstruction which could get worse when she lays down.  To palpation, she has severe pain over the masseter muscles, TMJs, styloid areas, high moderate pain over the medial pterygoids, left SCM, moderate pain over the right SCM, and milder pain over the posterior neck and shoulders.  The maximum incisal opening is 32 mm, opening without severe pain 16 mm.  The excursion movements are only about 1 mm in each direction.  In the past 2 years, Melanie has gained 60+ pounds.  Two years ago she had to quit work because of her pain issues.  

RADIOGRAPH EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Severe attrition of the posterior teeth is evident and pegging of the lateral incisors in the maxilla are noted, although she does have good root formation on those teeth.  The condyles have a hockey stick shape to them and appear arthritic.  The turbinates appear enlarged.  The bony septum is reasonably straight.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good width.  There is some sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  The joint space looks fairly reasonable.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width.  There is a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle, but not as significant as the opposite side.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  The joint space appears fairly reasonable. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a hockey stick shape to it.  There is fairly good joint space surrounding it.  The articular eminence is short in length and has just a moderate inclination.  The condyle has some anterior beaking at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The joint space in these joints may be affected by the splint that she has been wearing for the last 15 months that does tend to posture her mandible forward. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with a hockey stick shape to it.  The confirmation is a little bit better on this condyle compared to the opposite side.  The joint space appears reasonably balanced.  
Coronal skull view shows that the nasal septum is deviated off towards the left side.  There is a septal spur coming off the septum on the left side that further decreases the functional aware  the turbinates are moderately enlarged and create a very narrow passageway.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The turbinates are moderate enlarged particularly on the right side.  On the left side, the septum deviates a little bit towards the left side and there is a septal spur that impinges directly into the turbinate.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is AP maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia.  The oropharyngeal airway measures 3 mm from the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall area and it is about 3 mm also for the airway from the base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall.  There is a double image there with the first image measuring 3 mm and the second one measuring about 6 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Melanie would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction with significant inflammatory disease (reactive arthritis).  
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and vertical hypoplasia.
Severe TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
Enamel dysplasia. 
Chronic clenching and bruxism.  
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 11 mm).
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal septal deviation with spurring off to the left side. 
Sleep apnea symptoms. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Sleep study.
2.	Consider bilateral TMJ blocks with Marcaine to assess effects on reduction of 	pain. 
3.	Testing at the Environmental Center for hypersensitivities to materials in the TMJ 	Concepts total joint prostheses.  
4.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
5.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	c.	Consider possible coronoidotomies.
	d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and down graft it.
	e.	Bilateral partial turbinectomies. 
	f.	Nasal septoplasty.
6.	Restorative dentistry to rebuild the dental arches. 