EMILY LATHAM 									01/03/2007

Emily is 12 years old and is referred by Dr. George Adams.  She has been diagnosed with juvenile absence epilepsy.  She takes Depakote ER 500 mg twice daily.  She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofacial pain, earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, hearing loss or other joint problems.  

In frontal view, Emily has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is about 1 mm to 1.5 mm off to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are actually pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency by about 3 mm or so.  Mandible appears to be in fairly reasonable AP position.  Nasal tip is slightly elongated and rotated downward creating a slight acute nasal labial angle.  Chin-neckline and chin-neck angle look reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, Emily has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars.  She has a 6 x 6 retainer to hold the anterior 6 teeth forward.  The first and second bicuspids are erupting in but are not all the way in yet.  In the upper arch on the left side, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars but on the right side, the upper cuspid and second bicuspid have not erupted in yet.  The upper second molars have not erupted in yet either.  She has a vertical overbite of about 2.5 mm.  She is basically a Class I cuspid on the left side although she has some spacing that is a little bit more Class III in the bicuspid and molar area.  On the right side she is also a little bit Class III in the bicuspid in the molar area.  She has a slight tendency towards crossbite on the left side more than the right side.  Joints function smoothly.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows that the maxillary right cuspid and second bicuspid are unerupted as well as the maxillary second molars.  She has impacted mandibular third molars but does not appear to be developing maxillary third molars.  Difficult to evaluate sinuses and nasal airway.  She has a 6 x 6 retainer in the lower arch.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  Turbinates on the left side may be a little bit enlarged compared to the right side.  

Let TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that seems to have reasonably good shape and somewhat narrow joint space with relatively decreased inclination of the articular eminence. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be postured forward slightly in the fossa.  There appears to be some increased joint space.  Articular eminence is quite shallow.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class III occlusion.  Maxillary incisors appear to be over angulated.  Oropharyngeal airway appears adequate although she has her tongue postured posteriorly.  Mandible might be a little bit strong.  Unable to see the oropharynx because of her gag reflex.  Tooth size analysis shows that there is a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.  The primary cuspid on the right side has been out for about a year.  The second primary molar has been out at least 6 months or longer.  The cuspid tip of the right cuspid has erupted through but not much more.  The second bicuspid is still up above the soft tissues.  
EMILY LATHAM 				01/03/2007				Page 2


Emily's mother had mandibular prognathism and Dr. Lamar Byrd did surgery to set the lower jaw backwards and advance the upper jaw.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
AP maxillary deficiency.
Mandibular prognathism. 
May possibly develop bilateral condylar hyperplasia.
Class I cuspid but Class III bicuspid and molar relationships.
Tendency towards bilateral posterior crossbite.
Significantly over angulated maxillary incisors.
Unerupted maxillary right cuspid and second bicuspid.
Unerupted maxillary second molars.
Impacted mandibular third molars.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics stage 1.
Placement of maxillary orthodontic appliances.
Placement of mandibular orthodontic appliances.
Surgery stage 1.
Uncover maxillary right cuspid and second bicuspid and luxate the teeth.  Place brackets on the exposed teeth.
Consider uncovering maxillary second molars.
Use orthodontic mechanics as necessary to erupt the maxillary right cuspid and second bicuspid into position.
Monitor facial growth and development. 
Presurgical orthodontics stage 2.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery stage 2.
Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies if condylar hyperplasia develops.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly and alter the occlusal plane.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and upright the incisors.
Surgical removal of impacted mandibular third molars.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
