DEBORAH LAUFER									11/14/2005

Debbie is 42 years old, referred by Dr. Dennis Smiler, 16661 Ventura Blvd., suite 606, Encino, CA, 91436.  Debbie has had previous surgery that includes the following:
Rhinoplasty.
Chin implant.
Left knee surgery for a torn meniscus.

Other than that, Debbie is in good health.  

MEDICATIONS
Calcium 600 mg q.d.
Loratadine 10 mg q.d. (generic for Claritin.)
Multivitamins. 

ALLERGIES:  None.

Debbie's problems began about 25 years ago of unknown etiology.  She had orthodontics at the age of 12 for 1 year and then again at 14 for 1 year.  Her joints became quite symptomatic about 19 years ago.  In approximately 1986, she had some splints made at that time that did not seem to help her.  She had another splint made about 3 years ago that she wore for 2 years from 2002 to 2004 but this one did not help her and may have exacerbated her pain problems some.  

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother include her fingers and her wrists occasionally.  She does have some seasonal allergies but that is all.  She is aware of clenching at times during the day but does not feel she does it at night.  She has difficulty breathing through her nose so she is predominately a mouth breather and sleeps with her mouth open.  She rally does not have problems with headaches although she used to back in the early days of her joint problems but the headaches went away after wearing the initial splints.  She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 8.  Her average daily pain is at 5, jaw function at 7, diet at 7, disability at 5.  When she is sleeping and rolls over on her side, it causes a significant increase in pain and it usually wakes her up.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Severe TMJ pain.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Snoring. 
Predominately a mouth breather.

Debbie had a medium sized chin implant placed about 19 years ago and at that time along with a rhinoplasty she felt that her profile looked quite good.  Since that time she feels as though the lower jaw has become more retruded.  In frontal view, Debbie has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is almost 0 on the left and about 1.5 mm on the right.  Maxillary midline is shifted about 1 mm to the left.  Chin is predominately about 6 mm to the left.  
DEBORA LAUFER				11/14/2005				Page 2


In profile, Debbie has fairly good balance of the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  The chin is about 12 to 15 mm AP deficient.  Chin-neckline is short a little bit.  Chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Lower two-thirds of the lower third face appears perhaps a little bit shorter in vertical dimension.  Intraorally, Debbie has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  There is some adequately attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She is slightly Class II end-on on the right side by probably about 4 mm and the same on the left side.  Right cuspid may be about 1 mm anterior to the left cuspid.  The upper appears a little bit more symmetric.  She has a very significant cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 2 mm higher than the right side.  The uvula appears relatively normal in size.  The soft palate appears significantly elongated and there seems to be very short dimension between the posterior aspect of the soft palate and the posterior pharyngeal wall area.  The faucial pillars appear relatively normal although they could not be visualized very well.  Intranasally, it appears that the septum is deviated off towards the left side and both turbinates are quite hyperplastic and appear inflamed.  They appear to block the nasal airway.  Columella base is relatively wide and the nostrils are somewhat narrow.  Luminal valves appear constricted as well.  To palpation, Debbie has some mild tenderness over the right styloid area but no other real significant pain.  She has bilateral crepitation being worse on the right side as compared to the left side.  Maximal incisal opening is about 30 mm and opens without significant pain 25 mm.  Excursive movement to the right about 2 mm and to the left 3 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Debbie is missing all 4 third molars.  She has root canals on the 2 central incisors.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  The turbinates appear quite large and the septum appears deviated quite a bit.  She has severe arthritis in both TMJs with a greater loss of volume and vertical height on the left side as compared to the right side.

Waters view shows that she has a relatively large septal spur in the bony aspect of the septum.  The turbinates appear fairly large particularly on the side where it seems to almost touch against the septum itself.  The sinuses appear clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows the presence of severe osteoarthritic changes within the joint.  There is significant loss of vertical height in anteroposterior dimension of the condyle.  The articular eminence is quite shallow.  There could be a slightly increased joint space posteriorly.  

Right TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle with severe osteoarthritic changes.  Articular eminence is even flatter on this side than the opposite side.  The condyle appears almost excessively wide anteroposteriorly although there is significant loss of vertical dimension.  On opening, there appears to be a little bit better translation of the left joint as compared to the right side.  Both joints seem to demonstrate significant restriction.  The degenerative changes appear far greater on the left side as compared to the right side. 


DEBORAH LAUFER				11/14/2005				Page 3


Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Debbie has a high occlusal plane angulation.  She has some decreased oropharyngeal airway but does not appear to be quite as severe as her symptoms would indicate.  She has almost a 6 mm airway space at the soft palate level and probably about 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  She has a chin implant that is probably about 5 mm in thickness.  She has a real high occlusal plane angle.  There is a vertical difference at the inferior border of the mandible with the left side being shorter vertically as compared to the right side.  Tooth size analysis reveals basically no significant tooth size discrepancy although the upper right lateral incisor appears quite small in size. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with the left side being worse than the right side.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Transverse asymmetry with the left side of the face being shorter than the right side.
High occlusal plane angle.
Class II occlusion.
Moderate crowding of lower anterior arch.
Mild crowding of upper anterior arch.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasoseptal deviation and septal spurring.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Severe snoring. 
Predominately mouth breather. 
TMJ pain.
Masticatory dysfunction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.) 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance maxilla and decrease the occlusal plane as well as correct the transverse asymmetry.
Bilateral TMJ coronoidectomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Nasoseptoplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
