LAUREN LAUGHEAD								07/17/2006

Lauren is a 26-year-old female, referred by Dr. Jim Billie of Little Rock, Arkansas.  She has pain due to an injury that occurred on June 17, 2006.  She has TMJ pain of a moderate amount.  She has popping in the right TMJ.  She gets headaches at about a level of 8 to 9 and they are worse in the evenings.  She gets about two headaches per week occurring in the right temple area, back of the head and on the top of the head.  She also gets some neck pain.  She is aware of clenching her teeth at night and also during the day.  She has no problems with earaches, lightheadedness but does get ringing in the ears on occasion.  She is under treatment for depression.  Other joints that bother her include her ankles, feet and hands occasionally.  She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 6 to 7, headaches 8 to 9, average daily pain at 7.  She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 4 on the left side and 9 on the right side, disability at a level of 4.  She has difficulty breathing through her nose and always breathes through her mouth when she is sleeping.  She has moderate problems with snoring and she has significant trouble with tiredness during the day.  Her problems are related to a softball injury to the right cheek, nose and jaw.  Dr. Jim Billie from Little Rock, AR, referred her to us to examine her jaw function, numbness of her teeth and cheek indentation.  She does have difficulties breathing through her nose.  

MEDICATIONS:  
Ortho-TriCyclen (BPB.)
Celexa 10 mg.

She has had no previous TMJ treatment or surgery and she did have her wisdom teeth removed in 2000.  

I originally filled out the blue forms on July 8, 2006.  It is now July 17.  Some of her evaluations have changed.  She still gets headaches in the right temple area that she rates at about a level of 7.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 7, jaw function 6, diet at 2, disability at 1.  Most of her levels have improved since that initial evaluation.  By history, her problems started on June 17, 2006, when she was back in some trees trying to catch a high-fly and missed judged it and the ball hit her in the right cheek bone.  She went to the emergency room that day to get 
x-rays.  She had a significant amount of swelling at that time.  She was not knocked unconscious.  She had no changes in her vision.  Her EOMs are intact.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Difficulty breathing through the nose (was preexisting but appears to be increased in difficulty.)
She has seen her CAT scans and it appears that the right cheek might be a little bit wider than the left side.
Numbness in the teeth.

Lauren is not aware of any significant changes or alterations in her occlusion but does notice a little bit of difference that could be in part due to the numbness of her teeth.  She appears to have fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Pupillary levels equal.  


LAUREN LAUGHEAD			07/17/2006				Page 2


To palpation, frontal suture area appears in good position.  She has just a slight palpable change in the right infraorbital rim where there is probably little osteoid formation around the area of the fracture.  There is minimal displacement at that area.  The area is still tender to palpation for Lauren.  She has no tenderness to palpation over the zygomaticofrontal suture line.  She does have a little bit of tenderness over the right zygomatic arch.  Intraorally, the area of the fractures could be palpated in the left maxillary lateral wall and this was a tender area for Lauren as well.  Intraorally, Lauren has all of her lower teeth except she is missing the right cuspid and has the rest of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has considerable spacing in the lower left area between the cuspid and the first bicuspid of probably at least 2 to 3 mm.  On the right side she has probably at least 3 mm of spacing between the right cuspid and first bicuspid.  She apparently is missing a lower incisor probably the right lateral incisor.  In the upper arch Lauren has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  There is basically a Class I molar relationship but a slight Class III cuspid relationship because of the spacing.  She has about 1.5 vertical overbite anteriorly.  Intraorally, she has healthy looking tissues.  The uvula is a little bit elongated.  The soft palate looks relatively normal as do to the faucial pillars.  She has tonsils present which are of moderate size.  Intranasally, the septum looks reasonably straight with maybe just a slight deviation off to the right side but not too significant.  The turbinates appear quite large and hyperplastic.  They appear a little purplish in color.  Perhaps when lying down she may have some increased swelling that could block off her airway.  The columella is normal in length and nostrils have plenty width.  Lauren does have some moderate snoring problems and she has moderate daytime somnolence.  She is not aware of having sleep apnea problems.  To palpation, Lauren has some mild to moderate discomfort in the right temporalis, right masseter, right TMJ and right shoulder area.  The left side evoked no tender areas.  On jaw function, the right joint actually functions relatively smooth.  Left TMJ functions smoothly on opening but there is consistent clicking on excursive movements.  Maximal incisal opening is 47 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 10 mm, to the left 8 mm.   Lauren at times wakes up with headaches in the morning but more consistently does have headaches in the evening.  She will wake up during the night and feel that she has been clenching.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the mandibular right lateral incisor.  There is significant spacing between the lower cuspids and first bicuspids.  Sinus appears relatively clear.  Turbinates appear large.  Condyles appear relatively normal except the right one may appear slightly arthritic but not too significant. 

Waters view shows that there may be perhaps a slight separation at the frontozygomatic suture line but not too significant.  Infraorbital rim could be just slightly inferiorly positioned though not too significant.  Vertical orbital dimensions appear fairly identical bilaterally.  The nasal septum appears reasonably straight.  The turbinates appear quite large.  Both maxillary sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Right TMJ shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  There may be some slight anterior beaking present.  Joint space appears reasonable.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
LAUREN LAUGHEAD			07/17/2006				Page 3


Left TMJ condyle appears relatively normal.  There appears to be reasonable space and articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Lauren has good facial balance.  Oropharyngeal airway appears to be about 8 mm at the soft palate level and about 7 to 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  The tongue to the palate level measures almost 12 mm.  Soft palate does not appear to be excessively long.  Turbinates appear to extend slightly beyond the posterior aspect of the palate but do appear to be perhaps vertically elongated. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Fractured relatively nondisplaced right zygomatic orbital complex.
Residual numbness in the maxillary teeth. 
Hypertrophied nasal turbinates. 
Nasal airway obstruction.
Hyperplastic uvula.
Snoring.
Daytime somnolence.
Right-sided headaches.
Right-sided myofascial pain in predominately the temporalis and masseter muscles.
  Right TMJ discomfort.
  Clicking in left TMJ on excursive movements only.
  Nocturnal clenching and sometimes during the day. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:  
Medications.
Klonopin 1 mg tablet dispensing 30, one tablet q.h.s. refill times four.
Consider surgery for the following.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Uvuloplasty to decrease the size of the uvula. 
 Continue to monitor the patient as necessary for management of nocturnal clenching. 

