GWEN LAU									02/15/2011

Gwen is 33 years old, birth date 03/23/1977 and referred by Dr. Christine Coke.  Gwen has had clicking and popping in her jaw joints since the first or second grade of unknown etiology.  She had orthodontics from the third through the tenth grade including four bicuspid extractions.  She went back into braces in February 2010 and had them removed in December 2010.  She had her braces mainly to get the lower teeth lined up properly.  She was actually treated with Invisalign.  Gwen gets headaches at about a level of 3 in the left temporal frontal area.  She rates her TMJ pain predominantly on the left side at 3 and left-sided overall pain at a level of 3.  She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 6, disability at 4.  She takes no medications.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime, but she is under a lot of stress as she has two children, a 2-1/2-year-old girl and an 8-week-old girl.  This keeps her quite busy and quite stressed and she does not get much sleep.

Intraorally, Gwen is missing the lower second bicuspids, but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch, she may be missing probably the first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth.  Gwen when she bites together hits only on her central incisors and she has bilateral posterior open bites of almost 3 mm on the left and perhaps 2 mm on the right.  She has very small upper lateral incisors and probably has a tooth size discrepancy.  She has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship.  The mandibular dental midline and chin are shifted about 2 mm to the right.   As Gwen forces her teeth together, her midlines do line up a little bit better and her right side comes fairly closely together with only about 1 mm open and the left side remains about 2 mm.  If she bites down as tight as she can, she has about a 2.5 mm vertical over bite relationship. Actually, the maxillary left lateral incisor is quite small in size, but the right one appears more normal in size.  Both maxillary and mandibular incisors are in a little bit of a lingual inclination particularly the maxillary incisors.  The oropharyngeal tissues are relatively normal with just some mild enlargement of uvula and soft palate fascial pillars.  Tonsils are moderately enlarged.  Turbinates are quite large.  The septum may be deviated a little bit towards the left side and there is probably some moderate nasal airway obstruction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary first bicuspids, mandibular second bicuspids, and all four third molars.  She has some arthritis in both of her temporomandibular joints.  The condyles are postured forward almost beneath the articular eminences.  Turbinectomies are moderate in size.  

Left TMJ sagittal views show that the condyles are postured quite forward in the fossa.  There is some anterior beaking present and a little sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  The articular eminences are relatively flat.  

Right TMJ likewise is postured way forward in the fossa with some decreased joint space that appears between the condyle and the articular eminence.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow and sloped.  The condyle is postured forward significantly in the fossa sitting at the inferior posterior slope of the articular eminence.  There is a little sclerosis on top and a little bit of anterior beaking present.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good mediolateral width.  The condyle is postured a little bit more towards the lateral aspect of the joint and is not centered, but may be due to the forward posturing of the condyle.  There is excessive joint space by the medial side of the condyle and perhaps some slight decreased joint space at the lateral rim of the fossa.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit smaller in size than the opposite side.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  The condyle also is somewhat postured towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Coronal view shows that the bony septum is deviated off towards the left side.  The turbinates are quite large.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Axial view shows at the particular cut that the septum deviates a little bit off towards the left side.  The turbinates are quite large and appear to block a good part of the airway.  The sinuses are clear.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she is postured end on in this particular radiography and she is not close to being in centric relation.  Upper incisors are in lingual inclination.  Oropharyngeal airway is quite narrow at the base of the tongue with an airway dimension of slightly less than 4 mm (normal dimension is 11 mm).  At the soft palate level likewise, the airway dimension is only about 3 mm as compared to the normal dimension of 11 mm.  The tongue appears to be postured down and back.  She does have a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  

Basic diagnoses for Gwen would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with closed lock situation. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia. 
Bilateral posterior open bites.
Bilateral TMJ significant intracapsular edema.  
High occlusal plane angle.
Missing maxillary first bicuspids and mandibular second bicuspids. 
Lingual inclination of maxillary incisors. 
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal dimension 11 mm).
Hypertrophied turbinectomies.
Partial nasal airway obstruction. 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and  right TMJs.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	If articular discs are salvageable (dependent on MRI evaluation), perform 			bilateral disc repositioning with Mitek anchors.  
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies if joints are 				salvageable. 	
	c.	Consider bilateral TMJ total joint prostheses if joints are non-salvageable. 
	d.	Advance the mandible forward approximately 12 to 15 mm.
	e.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction to see 			if the incisors come forward probably 6 to 8 mm.  
	f.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts if total joint prostheses are performed.
	g.	Possible bilateral coronoidotomies if bilateral TMJ joint prostheses are 			used.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.