MELISSA LAU									06-20-03

Melissa is 17 years old and referred by Dr. Tom Pitts, 4786 Caughlin Parkway, Reno, NV  89509.

Patient History

Melissa is in good health with no major medical problems. She has no problems with earaches and tinnitus. She more recently has developed some problems with vertigo. Sometimes she has some decreased hearing loss. Her hips pop, but she has no other joint problems. She cannot wear cheap earrings as these cause her some problems. She is not aware of clenching or bruxing her teeth at night. She rates her headaches that she gets about three or four times a week anywhere from about a 2 or 3 up to an 8. She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 3, and her average daily pain is about a level of 3. She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 2, and disability at 5. The only medications she takes are Aleve for her headaches and she just recently started taking Vioxx for her menstrual cycles. 

Melissa started her orthodontic treatment in January of this year. Melissa is aware that during the past five years her lower jaw is becoming much more prominent compared to the upper jaw. 

Patient Concerns

Teeth and jaws are not aligned
She gets pain in her jaw areas
Headaches 
Clicking noises in the joints at times

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Melissa has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. In the lower third face, she has asymmetry with jaw structures being shifted off toward the right side. Upper lip length is 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 to 2.5 mm. Maxillary midline is shifted about 1 mm off to the right side. Mandibular dental midline is shifted at least e mm off to the right side, and chin is probably about 5 mm off to the right side. As Melissa shifts her mandible toward the left side about 3 mm, it improves her facial symmetry. 

In profile view, the lower two thirds of the lower face appear somewhat elongated compared to the upper third. She is AP maxillary deficient by probably 4 or 5 mm. Chin is strong. Has a high mandibular plane, high occlusal plane angle facial morphology. Chin-neckline looks relatively normal, and chin-neck angle is relatively well-defined. Somewhat of an obtuse nasolabial angle. Balance between the cheeks and nose appears to be reasonably good.

Intraorally, Melissa has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Some lingual inclination with an increased curve of Wilson on the left side that is quite marked. Has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. Teeth are fairly well-aligned but still some mild crowding anteriorly. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. Has an increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch. On the right side, she is probably 5 mm Class III and on the left side is probably 6 to 7 mm Class III. She has a crossbite that extends from the left cuspid anteriorly and includes the entire right side. Transversely, the mandibular arch appears fairly flat. Maxilla on the left side appears vertically short by probably 1.5 to 2 mm. Transversely, the alignment of the lower cuspids appears pretty well balance. Likewise, in the upper arch, AP position of the cuspids appears fairly well-balanced. She has a 0 vertical overbite relationship. 

Maximal incisal opening 57 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 6 mm and to the left 7 mm. Incisal opening without much discomfort is about 42 mm. To palpation, she has some tenderness over the masseter muscles, TMJs, styloids, and SCMs. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly at this time. 

Previous history that she mentioned is that she had orthodontics from the fourth grade through the seventh grade when she was about 10 years old to about 13. Teeth were fairly well-aligned. The ortho was done by Dr. Lohse. She began ortho again in January of 2003 with Dr. Tom Pitts.

Intraorally, her oropharynx is clear, and tissues look normal. 

Intranasally, the airway looks good. Turbinates are moderately enlarged with the left side being a little bit larger than the right side but may not be causing any significant airway embarrassment. She says that when she sleeps, she usually goes to sleep breathing through her nose but may wake up breathing through both her mouth and nose. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that she has impacted mandibular third molars but no upper third molars. She has a root canal in the mandibular left second molar and a crown on that tooth. All other teeth are present. Turbinates look moderately enlarged with the left one being slightly larger than the right one. Sinuses look relatively clear. Condylar heads and necks both look a little bit long, but the left side looks quite a bit longer than the right side. No other significant findings noted. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph demonstrates what appears to be AP maxillary deficiency and slight mandibular prognathism. Occlusal plane is slightly steep. Mandible appears long vertically. Oropharyngeal airway looks clear. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Decreased joint space may indicate either an extremely thin disc or disc may be displaced. 

Right TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa with a decreased vertical joint space. Joint film is not quite as good on this side. Articular eminence is a little bit on the shallow side.

Opening views show good translation of both condyles with them both coming out beyond the articular eminence. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses have about the same radiolucency. Turbinates are moderate in size. The left side is slightly larger than the right side with a slightly greater decreased airway on the left side compared to the right side. Asymmetry in the mandible is seen and appears to be worse on this AP view as compared to one taken a couple of years ago. 

A PA ceph taken 04/23/96 by Dr. Lohse shows that the midlines were well-aligned at that time. 

Panographic x-ray shows that the condyles appear to be about equal in length. 

On 01/23/96, she had a Class I skeletal relationship with normal overbite/overjet relationship. She was skeletal Class I at that time. Dr. Pitts had a lateral ceph taken on 04/04/01. At that time, she was almost end-on incisor relationship. At that time, point B may have been about 2 mm anterior to the NA line. Two years later, point B is 4 mm anterior to the NA line. Melissa has definitely been getting a more Class III jaw relationship.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral mandibular active condylar hyperplasia with the left side greater than the right side
Left TMJ medial displacement of the articular disc 
Right TMJ anterior and medial displacement of the articular disc 
AP maxillary deficiency
Mandibular deviate prognathism with it being shifted off toward the right side
Anterior vertical mandibular hyperplasia
Class III occlusion being worse on the left side as compared to the right side
Anterior and right-sided crossbites
Bilateral mandibular impacted third molars
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Tip the lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies if they are necessary
Continue to align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it and correct any vertical or transverse problems
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to realign the mandible 
Removal of impacted mandibular third molars x 2
Anterior mandibular horizontal ostectomy to vertically shorten the chin

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
