McKenna Lautenbach                                                   2/20/06


McKenna was 9 years 4 months at the last photographic records (11/30/2005.)  She has a fairly significant dental facial deformity related to TMJ pathology.  Radiographic assessment (Panorex) shows that her condyles have a sigmoid notch area and they are articulating beneath the articular eminence well anterior to the fossa.  It is not known if she has any pain problems, other joint problems, sleep apnea problems etc.  These will be important factors in planning the actual timing for treatment.  Based on photographs, lateral cephalometric taken 12/07/2004, Panorex taken 11/02/2004 and 11/16/2005 as well as dental models taken 01/04/2005 and a CT scan taken of the jaws, her diagnoses would be as follows:
Rule out connective tissue autoimmune disease such as rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, or other pathological process.
Evaluate for other joint involvement. 
Evaluate for sleep apnea symptoms.
Posterior maxillary deficiency. 
Severe AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia. 
Anterior open bite. 
Extreme high occlusal plane angle.
Severe crowding of lower anterior arch.
Moderate crowding of upper anterior arch.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Possible nasal airway obstruction. 
Evaluate for TMJ pain, myofascial pain, headaches, earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, etc.  
Lip incompetence.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.
Extract the maxillary first bicuspids and mandibular first or second bicuspids depending on orthodontic requirements.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Retract upper teeth so that they have an actual decreased inclination (the angle will be increased significantly with the counterclockwise rotation of the maxilla.)
Align and level mandibular arch.  Keep the lower incisor teeth over-angulated and in fact if they came forward slightly more than they are now that would be fine as the angulation of those incisors will significantly decrease almost 17 mm with the counterclockwise rotation of the mandible. 
Continue to monitor facial growth and development.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen or buttock.)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and down graft the posterior aspect. 
Augmentation genioplasty.
RE:  MCKENNA LAUTENBACH
February 20, 2006
Page 2


Any intranasal surgery that may be required to maximize the airway such as turbinectomies or nasoseptoplasty. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I believe this treatment plan can get McKenna the best possible functional and esthetic result.  It would be best to delay her surgery at least for a few years until she is closer to the age of 13 or 14.  The reason for this is because of the subsequent effects of maxillary growth and development and the alteration of facial growth factor with this type of surgery.  However, if she does develop significant sleep apnea problems then it may be an advantage to proceed earlier on with the treatment.

I suggested taking bicuspids in all four quadrants.  The upper incisors can actually be retracted and be in a more vertical inclination because the incisor angulation will increase about 10 degrees with the counterclockwise rotation of the maxilla at the time of surgery.  Likewise, the lower incisors can be significantly over-angulated since the lower incisor angulation will decrease approximately 17 degrees with the surgery.  
