NICHOLAS LAVINE								05/05/2008

Nick is 19 years old.  On March 2, 2008, he was involved in a 4 wheeler accident where he hit an oil line pipe.  He was unconscious for about 2 days.  He suffered a fractured skull.  He has had three cranial surgeries, the last one on April 10th where they put the skull bone back in position.   He has lost considerable vision in the left eye, and he also has developed some discoordination of his ocular muscles in the left eye.  He is seeing Dr. Gilliland in reference to the eye problems.  By palpation, the infraorbital rim and orbital lateral rims are intact, so I do not believe there was any trauma to that area.  He has had a CAT scan done, although not available to me today.  He may have had fractures of the zygomatic arch on that side, but I do not have radiographs to evaluate that.  He may have a little bit of a fluid level in the left maxilla sinus.
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that the maxilla and mandible appear to be intact.  I do not see evidence of a subcondylar fracture or any mandibular fractures or maxillary fractures on the Panorex.  Condyles appear to have relatively normal shape and size.  He has an impacted mandibular left third molar.
Waters view shows he does not appear to have any fractures of the zygomatic orbital process.  The zygomatic arch cannot be adequately evaluated.  There may be a little bit of a fluid level in the left sinus, but not too different from the right side.  There is evidence of bone plates supporting the cranial bone structures.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  There is perhaps a little bit of flattening in the anterior head.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  Joint space looks fairly well balanced.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be postured slightly forward in the fossa.  Joint space looks pretty good.  Articular eminence is steep.  Posterior joint space appears increased.  I do not know if the radiograph was taken in centric relation or not.  On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints with it being a little bit greater on the left side than the right side.    
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he is perhaps just a slight Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal.  
On the CT scan taken March 20, 2008, it does state that there was a tripod fracture of the left orbital area.  Apparently, the left maxillary sinus was opacified at an earlier x-ray, but this CT scan shows that it had improved by that time.  Although he had an air fluid level on the right sinus, it had improved as well.  
Nicholas does not really have any problems with headaches, but will get an occasional mild one.  With TMJ function, he will have some discomfort in the left joint at about a level of 2.  Average  daily pain is about a 2 primarily with jaw function.  He rates his jaw function at 6, diet at 2, disability at 2.  Occlusion is Class I.  He does not feel his occlusion has changed significantly.  On opening, his mandible deviates towards the left side about 8 mm.  Maximum incisal opening is about 33 mm.  Excursion to the right is about 4.5 mm and to the left 9 mm.  His jaw function has improved significantly during the past 2 weeks.  Currently, the only medication he takes is Keppra 500 mg b.i.d.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  No other joints bother him at this time.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  Due to the fact that the left temporalis muscle was severely traumatized in the injury plus there have been three surgeries in that area where that muscle has been detached and reflected from the bone and the fact that the bone was not there for a while, would indicate that the temporalis muscle on that side is not functioning normally.  The muscle is likely foreshortened and will need to be rehabilitated to regain more normal function.
Basic diagnoses:
Posttraumatic injury with fracture of the skull in the left temporal area resulting in three operations including removal and replacement of the bone.
Left temporalis muscle myositis.
Possible left masseter myositis.
Deviation of the mandible on opening to the left side 8 mm.
Relatively nondisplaced right zygoma fracture.

Recommended treatment:	
 
Jaw exercises to try to improve the jaw function.
Observation at 1 to 2 months.
Continue with other required treatments. 