CHERYL LAXTON									02-07-03

Cheryl is 27 years old and referred by Dr. George Adams, 3115 W. Parker Road, #538, Plano, TX  75023.

Patient History

Cheryl is in good health with no major medical problems. She takes no medications. She has had an adverse reaction to BACTRIM in the past. 

Cheryl had orthodontics from the ages of 12 to 15. That first round of orthodontics she had her upper first bicuspids extracted and had all four third molars removed. She then again had orthodontics done from the ages of 25 to 27. About midway through the orthodontic treatment, she began developing clicking and popping in her jaw joints. She was on no interarch mechanics that she is aware of when the condition developed. 

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. She has some problems with her neck but is not sure if it is muscular or bony, but has no other joint problems. She can not wear earrings of any type as any of them make her ears itchy. She may have nocturnal clenching, but that is not definite. She rates her headaches at a level of 7 in the temporal area, and these occur on a daily basis. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, overall pain at 2, jaw function and diet at 7, and disability at 2. 

Patient Concerns

Feeling of fluid running through her ear
Does not know where her bite should be
No comfortable place to put her bite
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Chewing difficulties

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Cheryl has fairly good facial symmetry and balance. Right side of the face may be just a little bit vertically longer than the left side by maybe 2 to 3 mm. Upper lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is 5 to 6 mm. Maxillary dental midline may be just a little bit off to the left side by about a millimeter as is the mandibular dental midline. Chin is probably about 3 mm off toward the left side. Right eye is about 2 or 3 mm higher than the left eye.

In profile view, she may have about 2 to 3 mm of AP maxillary deficiency. Chin may be retruded by probably approximately 8 mm. Chin-neckline is a little bit short, although chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined. 

Intraorally, Cheryl has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth appear to be nicely aligned and leveled. She has a 3 x 3 retainer. Has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. Has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids and has some residual space between the cuspids and second bicuspids. In centric relation, mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm off to the right of the maxillary midline. May be Class II end-on cuspid relationship being about 3 to 4 mm Class II. She has an overjet of about 2 to 3 mm. Right side is probably about 2 mm lower than the left side in the cuspid area. She has a vertical overbite of about 2 mm.

To palpation, Cheryl has no tenderness around the head and neck area. On opening, she has a definite click in the left side at about 20 mm and on closing at about 10 to 5 mm. Maximum incisal opening is about 35 mm. Excursive movements are about 9 mm in each direction. In excursive movements, she has significant popping particularly on the left side. 

Cheryl has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of almost 2.5 mm. This is probably due to small upper lateral incisors. However, hand articulating the models does not seem to demonstrate quite as significant of a tooth size difference. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the maxillary first bicuspids. Roots of the maxillary molars appear a little bit short. Sinuses are clear. Nasal airway looks reasonably good. Condyles appear to have a little bit of chance in their morphology.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Increased anterior joint space. Slightly decreased vertical joint space as well as the posterior joint space.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is significantly posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Appears to be a little bit more degenerative changes in the bone on this side as compared to the opposite side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are all clear. Turbinates are moderately large, but it appears that there is adequate airway. Septum appears reasonably straight in the bony area. Vertical asymmetry is seen. The vertical difference in the orbits is also noted. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class II relationship and significant vertical inclination of the maxillary incisors. Oropharyngeal airway looks very good.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction
AP maxillary deficiency
Anterior vertical maxillary excess
AP mandibular deficiency
Transverse occlusal asymmetry with the right side being 2 mm lower than the left side
Class II end-on cuspid relationship
Severe vertical inclination of the maxillary incisors
Missing maxillary right first bicuspids with approximately 2 mm of residual spacing bilaterally 
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Orbital dystopia with the right orbit being 2 to 3 mm higher than the left orbit

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up first bicuspid space to equal approximately 6 or 7 mm by tipping the upper anterior teeth forward and slightly distalizing the posterior teeth
Align and level mandibular arch

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect superiorly, advance it slightly, and level it transversely

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

Restorative dentistry for placement of osseointegrated implants in the maxillary first bicuspid area and placement of crowns