CHRISTOPHER LAY							10/12/2011

Chris is 16 years old, birth date 06/23/1995.  Chris’ TMJ problems began about 8 months ago.  Actually in January or February, he began to have some symptoms, but in March is when they became more exaggerated.  He is aware that his bite is changing.  He had orthodontics from 2008 to 2010.  He had a very good bite relationship when the braces came off.  His TMJ problems have escalated since then.  He was placed in a splint on March 21, 2011, and continues to wear it; however, it is not providing any relief for him at this time.  Primary concerns that Chris has at this time are as follows:

Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Pain through the jaws, neck, shoulders.
Difficulties breathing through the nose.
Mouth breathing.  

Chris gets daily headaches at a level of 7 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area.  He rates his TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 3, diet at 5, and disability at 7.  He takes fish oil and glucosamine chondroitin.  He gets occasional earaches, frequent tinnitus, and occasional vertigo.  He has no hearing loss.  The only other joints that really bother him are his wrists.  He has been diagnosed with Tourette syndrome.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxing.

In frontal view, Chris has good facial symmetry balance.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline.  In profile view, Chris has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Chris has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars as well.  Chris has fairly close to a Class I cuspid relationship.  He has got open bites posteriorly.  He has got about a 2 mm vertical over bite relationship.  The bilateral posterior open bites are probably related to the splint therapy.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy with the uvula just slightly elongated.  Chris has high moderate pain in the TMJ areas and moderate pain in the left retromandibular area.  The maximal incisal opening is 50 mm, but he cannot open at all without pain and discomfort.  The excursion movement to the right is 6 mm and to the left 7 mm.  Chris states that he feels best in the morning when he wakes up and then during the day with jaw function, his pain increases.  He has soft opening clicks at roughly around 20 mm of opening and probably 10 mm of closing.  

Basic diagnoses for Chris would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ articular disc displacement.
Relative mandibular hyperplasia.
Impacted third molars x4.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Bilateral nasal hypertrophied turbinates with nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics:  Place brackets on maxillary teeth and mandibular teeth.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion and create 			space in the joint area to accommodate the disc.
	c.	Removal of impacted third molars x4.
	d.	Bilateral partial nasal turbinectomies.  
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 