GAYE LEBLANC								09/18/2011

The patient presents for evaluation.  Primary concern she has is she has whistling in her nose that wakes her up at night and she also has snoring that wakes her up at night.  She really has no other complaints.  She has a normal upper lip length and normal tooth lip relationship.  The maxilla appears to be AP deficient by 4 or 5 mm and the mandible appears to be deficient by probably 8 to 10 mm.  She is basically a Class I occlusion, however, has had previous bicuspids extracted.  She has an oropharyngeal airway dimension of 4 mm.  She has an elongated soft palate with a small uvula.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  She is missing probably first bicuspids.  She has a bump on her nose created by elevated septal cartilage at the junction of the nasal bones and the septal cartilage.  I believe this is a more recent development.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  She has no pain to palpation around the head and neck area.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that she is missing probably maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids, but she has all four of her third molars.  She appears to have a little arthritis in both joints and her condyle appears larger than the left.  The septum appears straight.  The turbinates appear moderate in size and the sinuses appear clear.

Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight and turbinates are moderate in size, but there appears to be adequate airway.  The sinuses are clear.

Axial view shows that the septum is fairly straight and the turbinates are of a moderate size.  The sinuses appear clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The joint space looks reasonably good, although towards the lateral aspect of the joint, the condyle appears posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Towards the medial side, it is more centered.  The articular eminence has a moderate to steep inclination in places.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has anterior beaking.  The anterior joint space is somewhat narrowed towards the medial side of the joint, but towards the lateral side the posterior joint space is decreased and anterior joint space is increased.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of unusual morphology coming out towards the lateral pole of the condyle.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 4 mm depending on the area being evaluated.  The joint space may be a little bit narrow.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that may have a slight bit of sclerosis on top.  The joint space is fairly well balanced, but there may be some decreased space at the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the patient has a high occlusal plane angle and retruded maxilla and mandible.  The oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 mm.  The soft palate is quite long.  The occlusal plane angle is increased.  

Basic diagnoses for Gaye would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis (rule out articular disc dislocation).
Maxillary AP but posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia. 
High occlusal plane angle of 17 degrees.
Missing all four first bicuspids but retaining all four third molars.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 4 mm (normal 11 mm).
Hyperplastic soft palate.
External nasal deformity secondary to displaced septal cartilage.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	MRI of left and right TMJs.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible 9 mm in 			a counterclockwise direction.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it and down graft it posteriorly. 
	c.	Possible TMJ surgery depending on MRI evaluation.
	d.	Partial reduction turbinectomies.
	e.	Uuvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) procedure.
	f.	Removal of malpositioned nasal septal cartilage.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  

This treatment plan should get us the best possible treatment outcome.  	