RONDYLYN LEE									05-03-04

Rondylyn is 20 years old and referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich, 3105 Legacy Dr., Ste. A, Plano, TX  75023.

Patient History

Rondylyn had previous problems with leukemia but has been free of problems for 15 years. She only takes birth control pills and albuterol as needed. It is not known if Rondylyn’s problem is getting worse or if her jaw problem has been fairly consistently in its current position. Rondylyn had cranial radiation at 1 year of age. This may account for some of the underdevelopment of the upper jaw and the small teeth in the upper jaw and also some small teeth in the lower jaw as well. Rondylyn was released from St. Jude’s Hospital for care of her leukemia in 2002. Rondylyn is not really aware of having any significant difficulties eating and chewing. 

Rondylyn has depressions in the temple area probably from the cranial radiation. Transverse width of the cranium is somewhat narrow compared to the other facial structures. 

She usually wakes up two to three times at night.

Clinical Examination

Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -6. Mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Maxillary dental midline is difficult to tell because she has a very large diasthema of almost 7 mm at the incisal edge. Chin is pretty much on the facial midline.

In profile view, with her jaws apart to where her lips just begin to separate, she has an obtuse nasolabial angle. Upper lip projection looks reasonably good. Chin may be slightly deficient. Chin-neck length is fairly good, and chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined although submental area is somewhat full. She has some lower lip eversion with the lower lip being almost 12 mm anterior to the chin. When she bites down, she does have vertical overclosure in the obtuse nasolabial angle increases significantly, and the protrusion of the upper lip is increased as well. As she smiles, the upper lip does retract back behind the cheeks. 

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Lower bicuspids are extremely small in size. Anterior teeth may be a little bit small in size but not as significant as the cuspids. There are some spaces between the cuspids and bicuspids bilaterally as well as between all the anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has her teeth back through the first molars, although the bicuspids and molars are quite diminutive in size. She has a large labial frenulum that comes between the incisors and inserts on the palatal aspect. The size of the diasthema is almost 7 mm at the incisal edge. 

Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off toward the right side. Turbinates are of moderate size with the left one being larger than the right one. However, there is a little bit greater decreased airway on the right side because of the slight deviation of the nasal septum. Oropharynx looks clear. She has her tonsils present. Has a tremendous gag reflux. Tongue is quite large compared to the available volume in the oral cavity. She doesn’t have any trouble with earaches per se, but she does get ringing in her ears and gets it almost every day, but it comes and goes. She doesn’t have any significant problems with light-headedness or dizziness. She is not aware of having any hearing loss. She has no problems with headaches. She has no pain or problems in her jaw joints.

To palpation, Rondylyn has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Incisal opening is 49 mm. Excursive movements are at least 10 mm in each direction. She has no problems with headaches, no TMJ pain, rates her pain around the head and neck at 0, jaw function, diet, and disability all at 0. She recently had surgery on her left ankle because of a trapped nerve which she developed from twisting her ankle several times. Is not aware of any problems with clenching or bruxism.

On opening, she does have a click that I believe is in the left joint at about 15 mm of opening and closing click at about 10 mm. The right joint seemed to function relatively smoothly, although she felt that the click was coming from the right side. She has an anterior open bite of 2 mm. She has basically a Class III occlusal relationship. She has a reverse overjet of probably about 5 mm. She had an anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary second and third molars and mandibular third molars. The rest of the teeth are present, although many of them have extremely short roots including the lower incisors and bicuspids as well as the maxillary incisors, cuspids, and probably the first and second bicuspids as well. The only maxillary molars present are quite small in size with conical-shaped roots. Sinuses are almost nonexistent but extremely small in size. They are very rudimentary. Condyles appear to have flattened anterior heads on them. Condylar heads and necks look quite long. The nasal floor area directly over the incisors is a bilateral radiopacified area. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle head and neck that are quite long in length. Articular eminence is about moderate in size, a little toward the shallow end. Some flattening present on the anterior head of the condyle. Superior joint space might be just slightly decreased, and the anterior space might be just slightly increased. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle head and neck that are extremely long. The articular eminence is extremely flat. A little bit of flattening in one view of the superior anterior head of the condyle. Joint space appears somewhat diminished particularly superiorly and posteriorly. 

Open views show good translation of both condyles. Flattening on the anterior heads is seen and a little bit of peaking is seen on the left greater than right condyle. 

Waters view shows that the left turbinate is quite large. Bony septum is relatively straight. She has some lateral extension of the maxillary sinuses to just to around where the infraorbital nerve is bilaterally with no evidence of sinus extending lateral to that area. Small frontal sinus is seen on the right side but none on the left side. Jaws look relatively symmetrical. Nasal airway on the right side appears better than the nasal airway on the left side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a severe skeletal Class III jaw relationship. She has significant maxillary dentoalveolar protrusion with extreme overangulation of the maxillary incisors. Mandibular incisors appear fairly good angulation relative to the inferior border of the mandible. There is a difference in vertical height of the occlusal plane and the inferior border of the mandible which appears evident on this radiograph but not as much clinically. The tongue fills almost the entire oral cavity area here. Appears to be a high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate of the posterior pharyngeal wall is about 2.5 mm in dimension. At the base of the tongue, it is closer to 8 mm. Transversely, the occlusal plane looks fairly level except the right cuspid appears to be a little bit extruded, maybe an extra millimeter or two, as compared to the left side, and, thus, using a tongue blade makes it appear more asymmetric than perhaps it really is. There is an anterior tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of almost 3 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Severe maxillary hypoplasia vertically, transversely, and anteroposteriorly
Mandibular prognathism
Class III occlusion 
High occlusal plane angulation
Large diasthema between the maxillary central incisors of approximately 6 to 7 mm 
Multiple diasthemas between essentially all the upper teeth and the lower anterior 10 teeth
Hypoplastic maxillary bicuspids and first molars as well as the mandibular bicuspids
Missing maxillary second and third molars and mandibular third molars
Dentoalveolar maxillary protrusion
Overangulation of the lower incisors and overangulation of maxillary incisors
High occlusal plane angle of 15 degrees (normal 8 degrees)
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of about 3 mm at the soft palate level (normal dimension 11 mm)
Macroglossia
Maxillary labial frenulum attaching onto the maxillary midline crest and anterior palate area
Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation 
Sleep disorder
Daytime somnolence 
Sleep apnea symptoms 
Tinnitus
Severely hypoplastic maxillary sinuses

Recommended Treatment

Surgery, stage I
Reduction glossectomy
Removal of labial frenulum and muscle in the maxillary anterior arch

MRI of left and right TMJs

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Close the diasthema between the central incisors. Leave approximately a millimeter of space around the upper lateral incisors to correct the significant tooth-size discrepancy. If upper posterior six teeth are salvageable and usable, then adjust the spacing from the cuspids to the first molars appropriately so that these teeth can be built up later on to equal more normal crown size
Align and level lower arch. Close the spacing between the incisors from cuspid to cuspid. Adjust the position of the bicuspids evenly in the space between the cuspid and first molar bilaterally or consider retracting the hypoplastic mandibular first bicuspids back against the second bicuspids and consider placing an osseointegrated implant between the cuspids and first bicuspids

Surgery, stage II
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, downgraft (approximately 7 mm), and expand it approximately 10 mm
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors if it is confirmed via MRI that the discs are out of place

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
 
Restorative dentistry to build up the bicuspids in the lower arch and bicuspids and first molars in the upper arch
