SONIA LEE										06-04-04

Sonia is 59 years old.

Patient History

She has had some previous surgery with her uterus being removed. She also has had all of her teeth removed at about the age of 32 to 34. She smokes about half a pack of cigarettes per day and has done this for 43 years. She has some hay fever problems. She apparently has arthritis in her fingers. Apparently she was told about 10 years ago that her left leg is about 2 inches shorter than the right leg. She does have high blood pressure. She was told that perhaps the pain in the jaw areas is creating the high blood pressure. 

Sonia’s problems began about 12 years ago in reference to her TMJ problems but became much more severe during the past three years. The etiology is unknown. The only treatment she has had to date has been denture adjustments and medications. 

She gets earaches, tinnitus, no vertigo, and has some hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her neck, back (may have lordosis/kyphosis), shoulders, elbow, wrist, hands, fingers, hips, knees, ankles, feet, and toes. She has a black floater in her right eye and said she was given glasses to help correct that problem. She is not aware of clenching and bruxism. She gets headaches about three times a week in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area at a level of 8 on the left side and 6 on the right side. These usually last at least an hour or so. She takes Norvasc for her headaches, and it seems to help her. She rates her TMJ pain on an average day at 4, but it frequently will escalate to 10 particularly when she eats. Average daily pain is about a level of 4 but can escalate to 10, jaw function is at 9, diet at 9, and disability at 9. 
 
Current Medications

Norvasc 5 mg per day for her blood pressure 
2.	Benadryl for allergies

Allergies

SULFA. MOTRIN upsets her stomach but is not aware of any other allergies. She has difficulties wearing cheap earrings.

Patient Concerns

When she bites, she can get shocks through her jaws
TMJ pain
Ear pain
Pain that extends from the temple area to the neck, being worse on the left side as compared to the right side
Difficulties eating and chewing
Wakes up at night from the pain
Bone loss in the mandible
Headaches
Ringing in the ears
Tapping noise in the joints, particularly on the left side
Snoring

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Sonia has good facial balance and symmetry. Maxillary dental denture midline is off to the left probably 3 or 4 mm. Mandibular dental midline of the denture is off to the left probably a couple of millimeters. Upper lip length is 25 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is -4. Dentures do not fit very well. Alignment is Class II end-on on the right side, and on the left side it is Class III end-on. In the lower arch she has a significant alveolar ridge atrophy. Likewise, in the upper arch, she has significant alveolar ridge atrophy. She has some significant snoring problems also now. Sonia didn’t sleep very well last night, and her husband said that he noted this morning that she had some episodes where she wouldn’t breathe for a short time.

In profile, she has fairly good facial balance. Has an acute nasolabial angle due to some nasal tip ptosis. She has full dentures in place that look like they have both been relined. 

Intranasally, she has fairly good size turbinates, and they do look a little bit boggy, but the airway looks adequate. 

Oropharynx looks clear, and the tissues look fairly healthy. However, her posterior faucial pillars insert into the posterior pharyngeal wall area. When she says “Ahh,” she has some significant constricture transversely of the posterior faucial pillars. The oropharyngeal opening appears somewhat constricted. Sonia gets headaches about three times per week, and they can last for an hour or so, and they occur at about a level of 8 on the left side in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area, and on the right side in the same locations but at a level of 6. She rates her TMJ pain at 4 but can escalate to 10, average facial pain is at a level of 4 but can escalate to 10, jaw function, diet, and disability are all at a level of 9. Incisal opening is 42 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 8 mm and to the left 6 mm. To palpation, she has high moderate to severe pain over the TMJs, left masseter, left temporalis area, moderate pain over the right temporalis, right masseter, left SCM, left posterior neck, and milder discomfort over the left shoulder and left styloid area. She gets occasional numbness in the left cheek area. 

TMJs seem to function reasonably smoothly. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses are clear. Turbinates are large, but there appears to be some airway present. She is totally edentulous. Significant loss of alveolar bone in both the maxilla and mandible. Condyles appear to have reasonable shape to them as best as can be seen on this x-ray. Articular eminences are fairly steep. 

Waters view shows that she has multiple bobby pins in her hair. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Septum has a little bit of deviation but not too bad. Turbinates are moderate in size and appears to be a little bit blocked on the left side. Has a small radiopaque area along the right medial sinus wall. It is well-defined.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head and a little bit on the anterior aspect. Could be a little bit of anterior beaking present. Decreased posterior joint space. However, the anterior superior joint space looks good. Articular eminence is moderately steep and about average in length. Difficult to tell if there is an osteophyte coming off the anterior aspect of the condylar head. 

Right TMJ shows an increased joint space vertically. Condyle is postured down almost to the level of the articular eminence. Articular eminence is moderately steep. A little flattening on the superior head of the condyle. Appears to be some anterior beaking present. 

Open views show moderate translation of the condyles with both condyles coming direct beneath the articular eminence. Could be some decreased vertical joint space in those areas. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is severe loss of alveolar bone on the anterior aspect of the maxilla and also significant and almost total loss of alveolar bone in the mandible. Tongue postures relatively low with a vertical distance from the palate to the tongue of almost 15 mm. Oropharyngeal airway space at the soft palate level is 11 mm and at the base of the tongue is about 7 to 8 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis inflammation and possible disc dislocation (diagnosis will be dependent on MRI evaluation)
Severe atrophy of the maxillary and mandibular alveolar ridges
Severe headaches
Severe TMJ pain
Severe myofascial pain
Earaches 
Tinnitus 
Polyarthritis affecting practically every joint in her body
Severe masticatory dysfunction

Recommended Treatment

STOP SMOKING

MRI of left and right TMJ

Surgery, stage I
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction depending on MRI evaluation with one of the following methods:
Disc repositioning and ligament repair
Total joint prostheses
Bone grafting to anterior maxilla and sinuses

Surgery, stage II
Osseointegrated implants
Prosthetic reconstruction of maxilla and mandible

I gave her two prescriptions:
1.  Lortab 7.5 mg, disp. 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.4-6h. p.r.n. pain, refill x 3
2.  Celebrex 200 mg tablets, disp. 20, 1 tablet q.d., refill x 3