TUCKER LEESON									02/27/2007

Tucker is 19 years old.  He has had previous torn ACL, appendectomy and has had previous jaw surgery.  Tucker apparently had a skeletal Class III jaw relationship.  He has had orthodontic treatment x3.  When he was about 10 or 12 he was placed in a facemask treatment where the apparatus was applied to the chin and forehead and then elastics to try to advance the maxilla.  He had orthodontics from about the 5th through the 8th grade.  Each time the jaw would relapse.  Then, he had surgery on December 16, 2005.  He had ortho for about a year prior to the surgery and then for an additional 4 months postsurgery. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Jaw pain and face pain.
Facial swelling.
Teeth and jaws do not fit together properly.

Tucker gets headaches 7 days per week and they occur predominately in the temple and posterior head area and neck area at about a level of 5 on the average.  His average daily TMJ pain is at 6, average daily pain 6, jaw function 7, diet at 3, disability at 6.  He gets earaches predominately in the a.m. when he also has his worse situation with his headaches and TMJ pain.  He has no problems with tinnitus or vertigo nor hearing loss.  The only other joint that he really has problems with is his left knee.  He is allergic to morphine.  He is very much aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime.  

In his history, when he was a senior in high school, he would get open lock problems with his jaw.  Since his jaw surgery, his jaw pain, headaches and TMJ pain have gotten significantly worse to where they are almost unbearable for him.  His pain is worse on the left side and particularly it comes down the posterior head area into the neck on the left side and that is where his pain is the worst.  

In frontal view, Tucker has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about –3 mm.  As Tucker smiles, he just shows the inferior half of the crowns of his incisors.  Maxillary midline, mandibular dental midline and chin are all fairly well aligned to the facial midline.  In profile view, he has good facial balance and symmetry.  Intraorally, Tucker has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  The lower teeth have been tipped lingually fairly significantly.  In the upper arch he has all of his teeth back through the second molars present.  As Tucker bites his teeth together he seems to hit predominately on his incisors.  As he closes, he hits predominately on his second molars on the left side and his incisors.  He does not feel his right side touch at all.  The maxilla seems fairly solid.  He had good attached gingiva around his teeth.  He has increased pain and discomfort on the left anterior and lateral maxillary wall area.  He has sort of an annoying knobby kind of pain in that left cheek area.  It also comes down along the anterior aspect of the masseter muscle.  Tucker has a slight Class III end-on occlusion and in the molar area he is about 2 mm Class III in the cuspid probably about 2 mm.  To palpation, he has moderate pain over the left styloid area, masseter areas and milder pain to palpation over the temporalis, posterior neck and right styloid area.  The TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly.  As he opens wider, he does pop out of the articular eminence particularly in the right joint.  
TUCKER LESSON				02/27/2007				Page 2

I do not believe the popping at that point of opening is related to the disc but more to the articular eminence.  Maximal incisal opening is 51 mm but he had significant pain associated with that.  Opening without significant pain was on 24 mm.  Excursive movements are about 9 mm in each direction.  In opening and excursive movements, the TMJs seem to function relatively.  The uvula is a little bit elongated.  Soft palate looks relatively normal.  Faucial pillars maybe a little bit constricted but not too bad.  Tonsils are of moderate size.  Intranasally, the septum appears straight.  The turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  There does not appear to be any significant airway obstruction intranasally.  He does have a history of snoring.  He sleeps about 12 to 13 hours per day.  To palpation, he has tenderness over the left cheekbone at about a level of 3.  The worse pain he has is just above the left alar base area where there may be a palpable screw present.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  He has 4 bone plates in the maxilla with 2 screws below and 2 screws above the osteotomy site on each plate.  The top pole on the nasal plate is void of a screw.  He has a 2 x 2 retainer on the maxillary incisors and a 3 x 3 retainer on the mandibular anterior teeth.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  There may be a little bit more cloudiness on the right side than the left side.  Difficult to tell if any of the bone screws are loose.  He has some deviation of the bony nasal septum with it tilting off towards the right side.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Unfortunately, it appears that Tucker was postured forward when the tomograms were taken as the posterior teeth are parting these x-rays.  It does show that he has an increased posterior joint space again probably due to the mandible being postured forward.  Also, the bone screws in the upper part of the bone plate on the left side adjacent to the nose may be somewhat loose.  This may correspond to the area that he feels is tender on that side. 

In right TMJ, cannot see the teeth to see if these are occluding or not but the condyle appears to be in a little bit better balanced position.  On opening, there is good translation in both joints.  

Cephalometric x-ray also is not taken in centric relation and he is postured forward in an end-on incisor relationship and has bilateral posterior open bites.  He appears to have good oropharyngeal airway.  I cannot tell if there are any screws extruded on this film.  Therefore, the tomograms and the ceph are nondiagnostic.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Vertical and AP maxillary deficiency. 
Right posterior open bite.
Class III end-on occlusal relationship.
Severe myositis and myofascial pain affecting the masseter muscles, temporalis muscles, posterior neck and shoulder muscles.
Severe clenching and bruxism.

TUCKER LEESON				02/27/2007				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications.
Klonopin 1 mg 1 tablet q.h.s.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Place appliances on the maxillary arch.
Place appliances on mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Maxillary osteotomies to down graft and advance into a Class I relationship.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I believe this will be our best approach to help him. 