LIZ LEGER										11/17/2008

The patient presents for followup evaluation.  She is now 15 years post bilateral TMJ reconstruction.  Previous CAT scan revealed the possibility of having heterotopic bone formation around both of her joint prostheses.  She gets these periodic severe headaches predominantly in the right temporal area that have occurred three times since August.  They last 12 to 24 hours.  They are the same type of headache she had when she had the Proplast Teflon implants in that Dr. Jack Kent placed.  They come up around the right ear from posterior to the ear around in front and into the temple area.  They are quite debilitating for her.  They just started within the past year.  

She has a lot of medical problems.  She was on statins for a while, but found out she cannot take those and they actually make her quite sick.  She is on a vegetarian diet now and this seems to help her.  She has a significant headache problem.  She gets numbness down her left arm.  She does have three herniated discs in her cervical area.  If she extends her head, this sets off the severe headaches.  It is quite possible that the neck problem could be generating these headaches or also could be the TMJ situation.  As previously mentioned she does have some heterotopic bone particularly around the left joint and I suspect it around the right joint.  We will try to get an I-CAT to see if we can better determine the extent bone formation around the prostheses.  Her incisal opening is decreased to about 25 mm.  She rates her TMJ pain on the average day at 4, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 5, diet at 6, disability at 1.  Occlusion is stable.  To palpation, she has moderate tenderness over the TMJs and high moderate over the right styloid area.  She has mild pain to palpation over the masseter muscles and minimal tenderness over the temporalis muscles and posterior neck area.  She has no earaches, but have tenderness and some vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her neck, shoulders, left hip, left knee, and left ankle.  She currently takes the following medications:

Mobic b.i.d. 
Nexium b.i.d. 
Flexeril 10 mg q.h.s.
Coreg q.d.

We will try to schedule her for an I-CAT to look at her joints better.  She does plan to have an ENT evaluation of her neck.  If so, we can hopefully rule out whether the neck is a major contributing factor.  If the neck proves not to be any significant, we may entertain the following procedures:

Exploration and debridement of the bilateral temporomandibular joints.
Placement of fat grafts in the bilateral temporomandibular joints.
Harvest fat from the abdomen.

She has lost a significant amount of weight since I last saw her and she is feeling much better.  She is getting around much better, but does use an arm cane on her right side. 