BOOMER LEGRAND								05/09/2007 

Boomer is 23 years old.  In June of 2005, he was getting in his car and someone struck him from behind on the left side of the jaw fracturing the mandible in two places on the left side.  He was treated by Dr. Drinkard in Corpus Christi where Boomer was wired together for 6-1/2 weeks.  The mandibular left first molar was involved in the area of fracture and it was removed at some point after jaws were unwired.  Eventually an implant was placed into that area but it caused a lot of pain and discomfort and did not do well.  It failed and it was removed.  Boomer has been in severe pain ever since the incident.  His pain is worse on the right side currently than the left side.  Boomer rates his TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 9, jaw function and diet at 3, disability at 1 and his headaches are at 9 throughout almost all the head.  His headaches occur daily and he frequently wakes up with headaches in the morning.  On reevaluation with Boomer, Boomer rates his jaw function at 7, diet at 9 and disability at 7.  He had been misinterpreting the scale thus the change.  Boomer has had to drop out of school because of his pain problems.  About a month ago he was admitted to the hospital because he had been throwing up for about 24 hours, was dehydrated and could not keep anything in his stomach.  That problem was corrected.  

Before the injury, Boomer weighed 170 pounds and now he weighs 130 pounds.  The only other joints that bother him are his elbows.  He is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime and during the day.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Celebrex.
Soma.
Hydrocodone.
Seroquel.
Zyprexa.
Cataflam.
Topamax. 
Axiom.
Kadian.

Other previous surgeries he has had include a hernia repair in 2000 and tonsils in 2002.  Then of course, the surgery for the mandible fractures and the implant placement and subsequent removal.

Boomer feels that while his teeth were wired together that caused some misalignment of his teeth particularly with the lower front teeth being pushed inward.  

In frontal view, Boomer has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 0.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much aligned with each other.  In profile view, Boomer has good facial balance vertically and anteroposteriorly.  Intraorally, he has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars except he is missing the left first molar and both bicuspids.  He has some mild crowding and lingual inclination of lower incisors.  
BOOMER LEGRAND				05/09/2007			Page 2

In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  Small upper lateral incisors bilaterally.  Pretty close to a Class I cuspid relationship bilaterally.  He has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  Uvula is slightly elongated.  Soft palate and faucial pillars appear relatively normal.  Tonsils have been removed.  

To palpation, he has moderate pain over most of the right side of the head, jaw and neck area and on the left side he just has moderate pain in the posterior neck area.  Maximal incisal opening is only about 25 mm.  He could open to about 20 mm without too much discomfort.  Excursive movement to the right about 5 mm, left less than 2 mm.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit to the left side.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  There may be a little bit more airway dimension on the right side than the left side.  It appears there should be real significant obstruction.  Nostrils may be a little bit narrow and the columella is slightly wide.  He has no problems with snoring or sleep apnea.  He does have some daytime tiredness that could be due to lack of sleep and also could be due in part to the medications.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars and mandibular left first molar.  Previous areas fracture appears to be well healed.  Sinuses look clear.  

Waters view shows that the bony nasal septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side. Turbinates appear moderate in size with the right side actually appearing larger than the left side.  Clinically it appears that there is adequate airway.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good shape.  There may be a little bit of sclerosis on top.  Articular eminence is moderately steep and slightly elongated but not too bad.  Joint space may be decreased vertically and posteriorly.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit more sclerosis on the very top of the condyle.  Joint space actually looks like it may be a little bit larger on this side as compared to the opposite side.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is restricted translation bilaterally with may be just a slightly greater amount of restriction on the left side as compared to the right side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a Class I occlusion and skeletal relationship.  He has good oropharyngeal airway.  

Boomer has had splint therapy previously.  He had a splint made by Dr. David Curtis.  Second splint was made by Dr. Ron Avenshine and then he had a third splint by Dr. Prehn.  These have been ineffective in helping Boomer.  Boomer also has had arthrocentesis to the right joint without any improvement.  He has had a lot of physical therapy performed and this has involved such techniques such as jaw manipulations, TENS, ultrasound, etc.  



BOOMER LEGRAND			05/09/2007				Page 3

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Victim of aggravated assault in June of 2005.
Previous fracture of the mandible on the left side in two places treated with closed reduction and wiring of the jaws for 6-1/2 weeks. 
Right TMJ articular disc dislocation with closed lock.
Possible left TMJ articular disc dislocation.
Relative mandibular hyperplasia.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Severe masticatory dysfunction. 
 Crowding of lower anterior arch.
 Small upper lateral incisors.
 Tooth size discrepancy.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Placement of orthodontic appliances to the maxillary and mandibular teeth.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion and created joint space for the articular discs.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Align and level maxillary arch. Consider opening space around the small upper lateral incisors for subsequent bonding to make them more normal size.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider slenderizing lower anterior teeth slightly to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy. 
Replacement of missing mandibular left first molar.  
Place bonding on the maxillary lateral incisors if indicated. 
