REBECCA KIRSHINGNER								06/22/2009

Rebecca is 43 years old and referred by Dr. Bill Hang.   Rebecca is in good health.  Her primary concerns are:

Tongue is too forward.  She feels that she has no room for her tongue.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Jaws and teeth do not fit together properly.
Fatigue.
Sleep apnea.
Prominent labiomental fold.
She feels she has difficulty getting enough oxygen when breathing and daytime tiredness.

Rebecca has had previous treatment for her jaws and joint issues.  In 2006, she had a lower jaw splint to bring the lower jaw forward.  She then received braces in May 2007.  In December 2007, she had:

LeForte I maxillary osteotomies. 
Bilateral mandibular sagittal split osteotomies.
Genioplasty.

She then finished her orthodontic treatment.  As a child, she had braces x2 including removal of 4 bicuspid teeth.

Rebecca rates her TMJ pain as 7, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 3, diet at 2, disability at 9.  She gets headaches in the temporal, posterior head, and top of the head bilaterally at about a level of 7.  She gets some earaches, occasional tinnitus, and some vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her hands, fingers, hips, and feet.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day.  Rebecca feels worse at night when she is laying down and sleeping and feels better during the day when she is up and moving around.  However, if she does talk a lot or uses her jaw significantly, this worsens her pain levels.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, she has reasonably good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are pretty much aligned with each other and maybe just slight to the left about 1 mm.  In profile view, she has reasonably good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  Upper lip could be just slightly AP deficient by 2 mm at stomion.  Chin appears to be retruded by about 10 mm.  Chin neckline is shorter, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Rebecca is missing all 4 first bicuspids.  She has a Class II end-on occlusion being about 3-4 mm Class II on the right side and probably 2 mm to 3 mm Class II on the left side.  She has an overjet of about 2 mm.  Transversely, the maxilla is fairly level.  Arches are somewhat constricted transversely.  Oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal.  Tonsils are moderately enlarged with the left one larger than the right one.  At least anteriorly, the turbinate on the left side appears a little bit enlarged as her right one appears more normal in size, but this is just at the anterior aspect of the nose.  Septum looks reasonably straight.  Occlusally, she has about a 1 mm of vertical overbite, but a 2 mm overjet.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over most of the head and neck area.  As she opens her jaws, she has crepitus in both joints.  The mandible deviates to the left about 3-4 mm on opening.  Maximum opening is 30 mm, but only 25 mm with comfort.  Excursion movement to the right 6 mm, to the left 7 mm.  Rebecca’s pain is worse in the mornings and in the evenings and usually feels a little bit better once she gets up and moving around.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the evidence of previous orthognathic surgery including 4 bone plates in the maxilla with 3 of the plates having 4 screws each and a left maxillary plate having just 3 screws.  Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies were performed with 3 bone screws in each side.  Genioplasty was performed with 2 bone screws stabilizing the chin.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  
Coronal view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates are a little bit enlarged and actually more so on the right side than the left side.    
Axial view shows that she has a bone spur sticking off towards the left side of the nose.  Turbinates do not appear to be significantly enlarged.  
Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show condyle with significant arthritis present.  The arthritis is worse at the last aspect of the joint than medial.  There is anterior beaking present.  There is flattening of the posterior head.  There is decreased joint space in some views.  Articular eminence has moderate inclination. 
Right TMJ shows a condyle with significant degenerative changes present and perhaps slightly more progressive than the opposite side.  There is anterior beaking and sclerosis at the lateral head of the condyle.  There are areas that show what appear to be bone-on-bone contact with significant decreased joint spaces superiorly and posteriorly.  Articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat sclerotic and degenerated.  There is an extension of the lateral pole of the condyle out laterally.  There appears to be decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.   
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with significantly degenerated changes, more so at the lateral aspect of the condyle.  There is decreased vertical and lateral joint space with what appears to be bone-on-bone contact.  There is a pseudocyst in the head of the condyle. 
Lateral cephalometric evaluation shows that the AP airway dimension at the soft palate measures 6 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 3.5 mm.  Occlusal plane angle is high and the mandible appears to be retruded.  Posterior maxilla appears to be vertically deficient.  Chin may be slightly strong compared to the rest of the skeletal structures. 

Basic diagnoses for Rebecca would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis. 
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia and slight AP hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3.5 mm (normal dimension 11 mm).
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
Previously extracted maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids.
High occlusal plane angle. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.    
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses in a counterclockwise direction.
Maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect of the maxilla and advance it slightly forward.  
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral coronoidotomies.
Genioplasty to decrease prominence of the labiomental fold. 
