NETTIE KORNELSEN								07/13/2009

Nettie is 40 years old.  Referred by Dr. Wayne D. Scott, 707 Lamar, Suite M, Paris, TX 75460.  
Nettie is in good health and is not aware of any major medical problems.  

Nettie feels that her problems may have begun as long as 20 years ago when she had a flare-up of the tissues around the wisdom teeth on the lower right side.  At that time, the lower wisdom tooth and the ear bothered her.  Approximately 6 years ago, she had a lower tooth extracted, not the third molar, and an upper left tooth extracted.  After that, she had some problems with her jaw joint.  Her problems have continued since that time.  In August 2007, she had a maxillary right wisdom tooth taken out and this made her joint situation worse and it has continued since that time.  The mandibular right wisdom tooth was finally extracted in January 2008.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Nettie has good left-to-right facial balance.  The upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about zero.  In profile view, Nettie has average to really good facial balance.  Intraorally, Nettie is missing mandibular right first molar and the second molar is drifted forward slightly.  Third molar is absent.  In the left side, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper right side, she has all of her teeth back through the second molar present.  On the left side, it appears that the first molar was extracted and the second and third molars have drifted forward with some significant mesial tilting.  She has a Class I occlusion with about 1 mm of vertical overbite of the left central incisor, but the right central incisor is almost end on to the lower right central incisor.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Nettie rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 4, diet at 2, disability at 3.  She has no problems with headaches.  Incisal opening is 44 mm and she has about 8 mm of excursion movement in each direction.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the TMJs, right masseter, left SCM, and milder pain over the posterior neck area.  The only medications she takes are Advil and occasionally Tylenol.  She gets right earaches, but no tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her fingers, knees, and elbows.  Her husband states that she used to grind her teeth, but she does not do that any more.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular third molars and right first molar as well as the maxillary right third molar, left first molar.  The left second molar and third molar have drifted forward significantly into the first molar space.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints in these films.  
Coronal view shows that the turbinates are moderate in size.  
Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderate in size and the septum is reasonably straight.  Sinuses appear clear. 
Right TMJ sagittal view shows what appears to be some decreased joint space vertically.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  
Left TMJ sagittal view likewise shows what appears to be some decreased joint space.  
Right TMJ coronal view shows that the vertical joint space is narrowed particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint indicative of probably a medial disc displacement.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that shows some decreased vertical and particularly lateral joint space.  On both sides, the lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm.  
Basic diagnoses for Nettie would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular discs probably medially displaced. 
TMJ pain, being worse on the right side. 
Occasional headache.
Myofascial pain affecting predominantly the right masseter, left SCM, and left posterior neck.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

MRI of left and right TMJ. 
Consider TMJ bite splint to unload the joint some.
Surgery option 1.
Consider bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor if the discs are identified as being displaced on the MRI.
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to maintain a Class I occlusion, but create space within the joint to accept the articular disc.  
A second surgical option if the discs are displaced and nonsalvageable would include the following:
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

I believe either of these treatment plans could work very well for her depending on what the MRI assessment reveals.  
