STACY KRAUSE									10/29/2008

Stacy is 35 years old and referred by George Q. Adams, DDS, 2845 Parkwood Blvd., #100, Plano, TX 75093.  Stacy is in good health for the most part.  Most of her problems are concerned around the jaw and jaw joint area.  Primary concerns she has are as follows:

Clicking and popping in the jaw joints. 
Pain in the jaws. 
Malalignment of the jaws.
Difficulties eating and chewing. 
Breathing difficulties.
Loud snoring.
Chronic mouth breathing secondary to inabilities to breathe through the nose. 
Feeling of restricted airflow particularly with exercise. 

Stacy’s problems began when she was about 15 years of age.  When she was 16 playing basketball, she struck her chin on the head of another player and was taken to the emergency room.  She had orthodontics from the age of 13 to 18 and had retainers from the age of 18 to 22.  Dr. Simmons in Kokomo, Indiana, performed the orthodontics.  He did mention to her that she would likely need some surgery.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo and no other joints bother her.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 5, diet at 2, disability at 1.  She rates her headaches, which she gets in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area, at about a level of  7.  
  
CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Stacy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  She has a little bit more fullness in her left cheek than her right cheek.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 8 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline, although the upper lip is rotated just slightly to the right side about 1 or 2 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Stacy’s upper lip supralabrale is about 3 mm posterior to subnasale.  She is probably a good 8 mm AP maxillary deficient.  The mandible is at least 25 mm AP deficient.  There is no chin neck line or angle.  Intraorally, Stacy has a quite restricted lower arch transversely.  She is missing probably the lower second bicuspids and has the rest of her teeth through the second molars present.  In the upper arch, she is missing probably first bicuspids and has likewise a narrow transverse arch.  She has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally by maybe 2 mm.  She has about a 1 mm vertical overbite.  She has a 3 to 4 mm overjet relationship.  She has a just slight transverse occlusal cant with the right side being about 1 mm higher than the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy and normal.  She does have moderately enlarged tonsils that do occupy a fair amount of space in the oropharynx.  Intranasally, she has fairly enlarge turbinates.  The septum has a spur off to the right side and anteriorly is deviated off towards the left side.  There appears to some at least moderate nasal airway obstruction.  Columella is wide and nostrils are somewhat narrow.  To palpation, Stacy has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, she has some crepitation in the TMJs which becomes much more evident on excursal movements.  I do not see any indication of disc reduction.  Maximal incisal opening is 43 mm.  Excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars as well as the mandibular second bicuspids, upper first bicuspids.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  The condyles appear a little bit arthritic, but not too significant.  
Waters view shows that the bony nasal septum is reasonably straight.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged with the left side being larger the right with some significant nasal airway obstruction.  The transverse width of the nose is constricted.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla is significantly AP deficient and she has vertical maxillary hyperplasia.  The mandible is significantly AP retruded.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  Vertical height of the mandible is elongated.  The oropharyngeal airway measures about 2 mm at the most at the soft palate level and probably about 3 to 4 mm maybe at the posterior aspect of the tongue.  

Basic diagnoses for Stacy would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations, severely degenerated and non-salvageable.
Severe AP mandibular hypoplasia.  
Anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia.  
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia. 
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle. 
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Missing mandibular second bicuspids and maxillary first bicuspid.
Significantly narrow transverse dimension of the maxillary and mandibular arches.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm (normal 11 mm).
Sleep apnea syndrome. 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.
Hyperplastic tonsils. 

Recommended treatment for Stacy would be as follows:

Sleep study to evaluate for sleep apnea syndrome.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to expand the bicuspids and molars buccally to place them in better orientation over the basal bone. 
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, move the anterior aspect superiorly and the posterior aspect inferiorly to level the occlusal plane as well as correct any transverse discrepancy.  
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). 
Bilateral mandibular coronoidotomies. 
Bilateral partial nasal turbinectomies. 
Bilateral tonsillectomy.
5.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

 
