AMANDA KRETZER								05/27/2009

Amanda is 28 years old.  Referred by Jeffrey Rockacy, DDS MD, 591 Horsebarn Road #100, Rogers, Arkansas 72758.

Amanda’s TMJ problems began when she was about 14 years old in 1995.  She had some sinus surgery and immediately after that developed joint problems which could be associated perhaps with the intubation.  She has had orthodontics twice, one from age of 11 to 13 and then again from age of 18 to 20.  She has been in splint therapy almost since 1995 and has had 4 splints since that time.  She had her thirds removed in December 1998.  She has had 3 surgeries; May 1996 left TMJ arthrocentesis, June 1966 arthroscopy of the left joint apparently with the disc being sutured into position.  A year later, however, the MRI was taken showing that the disc was displaced.  In June 2001, she had orthognathic surgery that involved just maxillary osteotomies probably just to get the occlusion together.  

Amanda’s current concerns and problems include the following: 

Bilateral TMJ pain with the left being the worst.
Neck, shoulder, and upper back pain. 
Frequent and severe headaches. 
Clicking and popping in both joints with crepitus sounds in the left joint. 

Amanda takes the following medications:

Celexa 40 mg tablets q.d.
Lisinopril/HCTZ 20/12.5.
Bontril SR 105 mg q.d.

The medications p.r.n.:

Flexeril 10 mg.
Meperidine 50 mg.
Trazodone 150 mg.
Hydrocodone 7.5 mg.

Amanda has had previous shoulder surgery in March 1999 and then in December 2002. 

Amanda gets headaches 4 to 5 times per week with the average headache being at a level of 8 in the temporal and posterior head area bilaterally, but the pains frequently escalate to 10.  She frequently wakes up with headaches in the morning.  She rates her TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 5, diet at 2, and disability at 9.  She has no earaches, but does have tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime.  She has lost 40 pounds in the past year, but this was intentional.


CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Amanda does have some facial asymmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The nasal tip is off to the left side probably about 2-3 mm.  The maxillary dental midline is off towards the left side about 2 mm as is the mandibular dental midline which may be 3 mm off to the left.  Chin is probably almost 8 mm off towards the left side.  The mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty well aligned with each other.  In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably 2-4 mm.  Amanda probably has about at least 6, perhaps 8, mm of AP deficiency in the maxilla.  She is probably 15-18 mm AP deficient.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, Amanda has all of her teeth back through the second molars present in both the upper and lower arch.  She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  She has about a 2mm vertical overbite.  She has a transverse cant in the maxilla and mandible with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side.  There is some slight orbital dystopia with right side being about 2 mm higher than the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Cartilaginous septum appears to be deviated off towards the right side a little bit.  Turbinates appear relatively moderate in size.  She does have a little bit of bleeding inside her nose, particularly on the right side.  Amanda is having a particularly good day today.  To palpation, she has some moderate pain over the masseter muscles and milder pain to palpation over the temporalis, TMJs, retromandibular area, SCMs, and posterior neck area. 
Maximal incisal opening is 46 mm, but she can only open to about 5 mm without experiencing pain.  Excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction, but those movements are painful.  Amanda probably has at least 4 mm of increased fullness in the right side of the mandible as compared to the left side in frontal view.  She does have some masseteric hyperplasia bilaterally with maybe the right side being a little bit greater than left side.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has bone plates in the maxilla.  The first molar roots in all 4 arches and maxillary right second bicuspid appear to have short roots.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Left joint appears quite arthritic.  There are 3 bone plates, two on the right side and one on the left side, as one was removed because it came loose.  
Coronal view shows that the bony septum is fairly straight and turbinates are relatively normal in size.  Sinuses appear clear.    
Axial view shows the sinuses are clear and turbinates are moderate in size..  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes with loss of vertical volume.  There is significantly decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm.  
Right TMJ coronal view shows decreased vertical space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  There is a little osteophytic kind of bone development off the lateral pole of the condyle.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm. 
Left TMJ sagittal view shows significant loss of condylar volume vertically and anteroposteriorly in this joint.  Articular eminence is relatively flat.  There is actually some increased vertical joint space.  The condyle appears quite arthritic.    
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with a little bit better morphology.  In one view, there appears to be a little bit of erosion on the anterior head.  Joint space, however appears a little more balanced.  A little touch of anterior beaking is present.   
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Amanda AP maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway measures less than 5 mm at the soft palate level and also at the base of the tongue.  She is basically skeletal and occlusal Class I.  

Basic diagnoses for Amanda would be as follows:    

Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction and severe deformation.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. 
AP maxillary hypoplasia and transverse asymmetry with the left side being shorter vertically. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia and transverse asymmetry with the left side being shorter than the right side. 
High occlusal plane angle. 
Transverse cant in the occlusion with the left cuspid being 2-3 mm higher than the right cuspid. 
Maxillary dental midline shifted 2 mm to the left, mandibular dental midline shifted 3 mm to the left, and chin shifted about 6-8 to mm to the left. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm (normal 11 mm).
Severe TMJ pain. 
Severe headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints. 
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral coronoidotomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the it and level the transverse cant in the occlusion.  
External rhinoplasty straightening the nose onto the facial midline.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I gave her 2 prescriptions today:  

Klonopin 1-mg tablets, dispensing 30 tablets 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x5.  
Hydrocodone 7.5 mg, dispensing 60 tablets, 1 tablet q. 8 hours p.r.n. pain, refill x3. 