ANNE LANGHAM									12/29/2008

Anne is 41 years old, referred by Dr. Duane Keller.  Anne is in good health except for her jaw joint problems.  She takes Aleve and Advil during the day for pain.  

Her TMJ problems began at an unknown age, but by 25 she was aware of joint issues.  The etiology is unknown.  She has had splint therapy in the past from about 1995.  She wore a splint from about 1995 to 1997 and then had some improvement at that time.  This past year, however, her pain has gotten significantly worse.  She saw Dr. Keller in September 2008 because of severe pain.  He made a splint for her that has helped her some, but she still continues to have significant pain problems.  

Anne rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 5, headaches at 5 that occur predominantly in the left temple area.  She rates her jaw function at 9, diet at 7, and disability at 7.  She gets occasional earaches and tinnitus but no vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She does suffer from mild depression that in part is unrelated to the joint issue.  She finds that she does clench her teeth during the day, but she is not aware of that at night.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Anne has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2  mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Nasal tip is deviated just a bit towards the left side 1 to 2 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is off to the right side about 2 mm.  The mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other.  Therefore, the chin is also deviated a little bit off towards the right side 2 mm.  In profile view, Anne has fairly good facial balance.  Chin neckline appears relatively normal in length, and chin neck angle appears relatively normal.  Intraorally, Anne has all of her maxillary and mandibular teeth back through the second molars.  There is a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the left side by about 2 mm.  It is closer to Class I on the right side. In the lower arch, the right cuspid is about 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  As Anne shifts her mandible off towards the left side 2 mm, it does improve her facial symmetry, and articulating her dental models gets her into a pretty good Class I cuspid-molar relationship bilaterally with the lower dental midline being just 1 mm off towards the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal, although the uvula is slightly elongated, but not too significant.  Intranasally, she appears to have good airway, but greater on the left side than the right side.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 1 mm.  Maximal opening is 25 mm, opening without severe pain 17 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 3 mm, to the left 4 mm.   
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Axial views show that the sinuses are clear, but the right turbinate appears quite large.  
Coronal view shows that the left nasal airway appears quite good.  The turbinates are relatively normal in size.  The right turbinate appears enlarged.  
Panorex shows that all 4 third molars are absent, but the rest of the teeth are present.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  She appears to have significant arthritis in both jaw joints.  
Right TMJ tomograms show that she has severe arthritis in her TMJ joint.  There appears to be significant loss of condylar volume and degenerative changes present.  There is anterior beaking.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that likewise has undergone significant arthritic changes.  There is flattening on the head of the condyle and some sclerosis there.  The joint space actually appears increased on this side.  There is some anterior beaking present.  The condyle appears to have lost volume.  
Right TMJ coronal view shows significant degenerative changes in the condyle and significant decreased vertical joint space.  The condyle appears to have lost vertical volume.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has developed significant degenerative changes.  There is a significant erosion towards the lateral aspect of the condyle and also more over towards the medial side as well. There appears to be some degenerative changes in the fossa as well.  There is decreased vertical joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she is basically a skeletal and occlusal Class I jaw relationship.  There is some decreased oropharyngeal airway, but probably may be postural.  She appears to have her head pulled way back over her body, and her neck appears to be actually retro-inclined.  Airway dimension at the base of the tongue is about 4 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Anne would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
Bilateral TMJ severe pain. 
Significant masticatory dysfunction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth to keep from flaring them too far forward.
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol). 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstructions with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
4.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

