PAMELIA LEE									05/13/2009

Pam is 43 years old.  Referred by Dr. Jay Lustig, 2550 Hospital Drive, Bossier City, LA 71111.  She was also referred by Dr. Lisa Matthews, 4440 Viking Drive, Bossier City, LA 71111.  

Pam had no TMJ problems or issues until she was injured on the job as a police office on May 30, 2008, at the age of 42. She received trauma to the jaw and it is believed that her jaw became displaced on the left side.  She was able to at least partially reduce it.  She continued to have problems, and she did see an oral surgeon, Dr. David Kim.  The following surgeries have been done so far on Pam by Dr. Kim:  

7/29/2008, left arthrocentesis.
9/15/2008, left intraoral vertical oblique osteotomy. 
11/14/2008, left intraoral vertical oblique osteotomy.

These procedures have failed to correct Pam’s problems.  The main concerns that Pam has at this time include the following:

Left jaw dislocation. 
Unable to open and use the jaw properly. 
Jaws and bite are shifting.
Pain is increasing.
Scar tissue problems in the joint.

Pam currently takes the following medications:

Lisinopril 5 mg q.d.
Zyrtec 10 mg q.d.
Tylenol p.r.n. 

Pam in addition has environmental asthma.  She has high blood pressure that just was initiated from her injury; she had no problems with that before that time.  She also has arthritis in some other joints.  Other joints that bother her include her left knee, left ankle, and wrists.  She gets occasional earaches.  She has left-sided tinnitus, but no vertigo and no hearing loss.  She gets headaches in the left temporal area at about a level of 8.  She gets her headaches about 3 times a week at a level of 8.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8 in the left joint which is worse on the right side.  She rates her average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 8, diet at 7, disability at 9.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Pam has reasonably good facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all fairly well aligned with each other.  In profile, the maxilla may be just slightly AP deficient by 2-3 mm and chin by 5-6 mm, but nothing real significant.   Intraorally, Pam has all her lower teeth beck through the second molars.  There is some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.  She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  Sometimes Pam feels that her right teeth do not touch as well as the left side does.  As Pam opens her jaws, she opens fairly symmetrically.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy.  Intranasally, turbinates appear relatively minimal to mildly large with the left side being slightly larger than the right side.  It appears that there is adequate airway.  To palpation, she has high moderate to low severe pain in the left masseter area and left retromandibular area.  She has moderate pain over the left temporalis, left medial pterygoid, and high moderate pain over the left TMJ with relatively mild pain over the right masseter muscle.  Maximal incisal opening is 28 mm.  Opening without significant discomfort 20 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 3 mm, to the left 5 mm.  Other joints seem to function relatively smoothly, although she states she does hear sort of a squishy noise in the joints on the left side when she opens. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of impacted maxillary left third molar, but all other teeth are erupted and she is missing the left mandibular third molar and the right maxillary and mandibular third molars.  She appears to have probably a mucocele in the maxillary right sinus with a bulbular mass there.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  Septum appears relatively straight.  Left mandibular ramus shows a wire at the inferior border with evidence of probably previous vertical mandibular osteotomies, but it appears that the condyle may have rotated significantly including likely the whole section.  On the right side, it does appear as though the condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. 
Coronal view shows that the turbinates are moderate in size.  There does appear to be some fluid versus some sinusitis of the tissues on the floor of the sinus.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  
Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderate in size.  Sinuses in this view look relatively clear.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is postured forward beneath the articular eminence.  The condyle appears to have moderately good mediolateral width.  There is a definitely decreased vertical joint space.  The condyle appears to be postured on the articular eminence, but towards the lateral aspect of the joint.   
Right TMJ coronal view shows a decreased vertical joint space.  Lateral rim barely clears the condyle.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is postured way anterior functioning on the articular eminence.  It probably has a strange rotation to it as it is perhaps anteriorly displaced at the medial aspect of the joint as compared to the lateral.  The more lateral we get the more the condyle appears to rotate back in towards the fossa area.  
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.    
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a slightly retruded maxilla and mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway appears constricted with an AP dimension at the base of the tongue of only about 5 mm and about 4 mm at the soft palate level. 

Basic diagnoses for Pam would be as follows:    

Post 2 previous surgeries that included vertical oblique osteotomies of the left mandibular ramus area.
Left mandibular condylar dislocation with adhesions. 
Left TMJ pain. 
Left-sided headaches.
Left-sided myofascial pain. 
Intraoral scar band residual from 2 previous surgeries limiting jaw opening.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.    
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol). 
Surgery. 
Left TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Left TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).
Possible placement of arch bars if orthodontic treatment is not initiated by the time of surgery. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

The MRI on the right TMJ shows that the disc is anteriorly and laterally displaced, although Pam is asymptomatic in that joint at this time.  Therefore, my recommendation is to continue to observe and monitor the right joint. It is possible that she could develop symptoms in the future which may require surgery later on in that joint.  The injury to the right joint is a result of the trauma she received on May 30, 2008.  
