ELISE LEGER									02/27/2009

Elise is 49 years old.  She was referred through Sleepnet.com, and in particularly Dr. Brian Rotskoff.  Elise has severe sleep apnea.  She has been tried on a CPAP machine, but cannot tolerate it.  The severity of the sleep apnea is significantly affecting her working abilities.  Primary concerns that Elise has include the following:

Severe sleep apnea. 
Extreme fatigue. 
Memory loss. 
Mental confusion.
Left TMJ popping.
Headaches.

Elise has recently had surgery on February 24, 2009, to include turbinectomies and a septoplasty.  She also had a sleep endoscopy procedure performed.  Elise currently takes the following medications:

Levoxyl 112 mg.
Prozac 40 mg.
Vytorin 10/40 mg.

Elise is unsure of when her left jaw joint began to click and pop, thus etiology is also unknown.  She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 2, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 2, diet and disability at 0.  She gets headaches predominantly in the left frontal and temporal area at about a level of 6.  Usually, Elise will wake up with headaches in the morning, but she will also get headaches in the afternoon as well and this is a daily occurrence.  She gets occasional earaches, occasional tinnitus, and has moderate vertigo.  She has no hearing loss.  She has herniated disks in her neck and back, but these do not particularly bother her and she does not really participate in too many activities.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night time and sometimes during the day under stress she will also clench.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Elise has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 26 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is -3 mm.  The maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm off to the left side.  The chin, however, is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is just posterior to subnasale.  She has probably only about 4 mm of AP deficiency in the maxilla.  Chin is AP deficient by about 20 mm.  There is no definition to the chin neckline or angle.  Intraorally, Elise has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars and upper teeth back through the second molars.  She has a crown on the mandibular left first molar.  Teeth are fairly well aligned, although the lower incisors are over angulated.  Transverse width of the lower arch is somewhat constricted.  In the upper arch, she has crowns on the first molars as well and also on the left second molar.  She has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side being 2 to 3 mm Class II.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  Intraorally, she has some moderate hyperplasia of the uvula and elongation of the soft palate.  Fascial pillars appear relatively normal.  Transverse width of the fascial pillars are quite restricted.  It is difficult to evaluate the tonsils, but they appear mildly enlarged perhaps.  Unable to evaluate turbinates and septum because of the recent surgery and discomfort.  She has severe snoring, severe daytime somnolence, and severe sleep apnea.  She has a moderate to severe sleep disorder.  She has frequent arousals at night.  She was predominantly a mouth breather prior to her recent surgery.  She has a moderate head postured forward neck position.  She was unable to tolerate the CPAP machine.  She had to use such a high setting that it creates significant problems for her.   Dental model analysis shows that she has some significant transverse deficiency in the widths of the maxillary and mandible arches.  She has an anterior deep bite of at least 3 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted to the left 2 mm.  She has about a 2 to 3 mm Class II relationship on the left side, but Class I on the right side.  She has a posterior cross bite on the left side.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the TMJs, left medial pterygoid area, and left retromandibular area.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly today.  

Basic diagnoses for Elise would be as follows:    

Left TMJ articular disc dislocation. 
AP and posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hyperplastic soft palate and uvula.
Severe sleep apnea. 
Headaches predominantly on the left side.
Over angulation of maxillary and mandibular anterior teeth.
Transverse deficiency and arch width of both the maxilla and mandible.
Class I occlusion on the right side, Class II end-on occlusion on the left side.  
Left posterior cross bite. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to help keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward.  Try to expand the lower arch, if possible 2 to 3 mm.  Be sure to place brackets on the second molars to better align those teeth, particularly on the left side. 
Surgery. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and expand it. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. 
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP procedure).
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the genial tubercles further forward. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.