DENISE LEININGER								03/12/2010

Denise is 47 years old and referred by Dr. Max Ebrahimian, 5 Erba Lane, Scotts Valley, CA 95066 and also Dr. Terry Forsberg, 3275 Aptos Rancho Road, Suite D, Aptos, CA 95003.

Denise states that she has had severe headaches for at least 28 years.  She thinks she was probably about 20 when they started.  She has had severe migraines since that time of unknown etiology.  About 6 or 7 years ago, she was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis that affects predominantly her knees and to a lesser extent her hips and possibly her TMJs.  Three years ago, she began the odyssey of trying to figure out what has been causing her headache problems.  She has had multiple brain MRIs and CT scans.  She also had a contrast MRI.  She has undergone sinus surgery approximately 8 to 10 years ago.  She has been through allergy testing and allergy shots.  She has been to two neurologists.  She was evaluated by a neurosurgeon at Stanford to rule out an aneurysm.  She has been to a cardiologist.  She has been through lots of physical therapy without resolution.  Acupuncture has been tried and she had been through hypnotherapy.  She does have a lot of red splotches on both her hands that is due to a medication she is using to decrease sun damage and is a precancerous medication.  

Primary concerns that Denise has include the following:

Chronic daily headaches--migraines (reasonably well controlled now with the orthotic device).
Ear congestion and pressure. 
Dizziness.
Limited jaw function. 
TMJ pain. 
Breathing difficulties.
Earaches (fairly well controlled with the orthotic).

Denise currently gets headaches relatively infrequently, but prior to her orthotic would have headaches daily at a level of 4 predominantly in the frontal and temporal area and occasionally in the back of the head.  The headaches could escalate to a 9.  With the orthotic, she gets a couple of headaches per month.  She rates her TMJ pain at 4, average pain at 4, jaw function at 6, diet at 4, disability at 8.  She does get earaches but they are infrequent now since wearing the orthotic and she had tinnitus before the orthotic.  She had frequent vertigo before the orthotic, but the orthotic now is controlling the vertigo reasonably well.  Other joints that bother her include her knees and to a lesser extent her hips.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day.

She takes the following medications:

Plaquenil 200 mg b.i.d. 
Ibuprofen p.r.n. 
Claritin p.r.n. 
Vitamins.

CLINICAL EVALUATION.  In frontal view, Denise has fairly good facial balance in the middle and upper third face.  Some asymmetry in the lower jaw.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 0.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left side.  The chin is probably 5 to 6 mm off to the left side.  The lower anterior teeth are tipped so that the crowns are 


displaced towards the right and apices toward the left.  In profile view, the maxilla is retruded about 5 to 6 mm and chin is retruded probably 10 to 12 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not defined.  As she postures her mandible forward, it improves her overall facial balance.  Intraorally, Denise has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some crowding of the lower anterior arch, but has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by probably 2 mm, but Class I cuspid on the left side.  She has a slight open bite tendency on the right side of maybe 1 mm.  In centric relation without the orthotic, her mandibular dental midline may be 2 mm off to the left side.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 1.5 mm.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being approximately 2 mm higher than the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  The left turbinate appears moderately enlarged and the right one mildly enlarged.  Anteriorly, the septum is deviated off towards the right side.  She may have some mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction.  There is tenderness over the masseter muscles, but all other areas are pain free.  She said before the orthotic she had significant pain through the head and jaws and neck area.  In excursion movements, she feels that there is some crepitus and popping noises within her joints.  Maximum opening is 35 mm, opening without significant pain 18 mm.  Excursion movements are about 5 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She appears to have arthritis in both joints particularly the left side more than the right side.  In the right side, however, the condylar head and neck is elongated significantly compared to the left side.  

Coronal view shows that she has a septal spur off towards the left side.  The turbinates are quite large and may be causing considerable blockage of the airway.  Sinuses are clear.  

Axial view shows that the turbinates are quite large and appear to block a majority of the nasal airway.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal views show some arthritic changes with a little sclerosis and beaking on the head of the condyle.  There appears to be decreased joint space.  The left condyle is smaller than the right.  There is a moderate inclination of the articular eminence. 

Right TMJ sagittal views show condylar head and neck are significantly longer than the left side.  There appears to be an erosion in the top of the condyle.  The joint space appears somewhat narrow.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has some unevenness in its superior contour.  There appears to be decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 10 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is much larger than the left side with a greater vertical volume.  There is an erosion in the top of the condyle.  There appears to be decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect and through the superior aspect of the joint.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Denise has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  


Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the soft palate level and down to about 4 mm at the base of the tongue.  She has a skeletal occlusal Class I basic morphology, although both maxilla and mandible are retruded.  She has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  

Basic diagnoses for Denise would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ rheumatoid arthritis.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Class I occlusion on the left side.
Slight Class III end-on occlusion on the right side. 
Right posterior open bite of about 1 mm.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Upper airway resistance syndrome.
Hypertrophied turbinates causing nasal airway obstruction. 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side.
Asymmetry of mandibular anterior teeth with the crowns tipped towards the right and apices towards the left.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level the maxillary arch.  Keep the lateral incisor roots tipped mesially 			and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to upright the incisors so that the long axis 			of the incisors in the coronal view are in a more vertical orientation.  Slenderize 
                        the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the 			tooth size discrepancy. 
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints. 
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction, mandibular advancement, and correction of the 			asymmetry using TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward in a counterclockwise 			direction and leveling the occlusal plan anteroposteriorly as well as transversely.
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Bilateral mandibular coronoidotomies.
	e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 