LACEY LEMKE									04-01-02

Lacey is 18 years old and referred by Dr. Greg Hubbard in Stephenville, TX.

Patient History

Lacy began developing TMJ problems back in the fourth to fifth grade of unknown etiology. She was going to a restaurant to eat one evening and it started to click and pop on one side, and things have just continued from there. She did have a mouth piece for one year about three years ago but noted no improvement.

Patient Concerns

Basic concerns that Lacey has include the following:

TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Jaw pain.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Lower law progressively becoming more retruded.

Lacey rates her headaches at a level of 6 in the frontal and temporal areas and can occur daily or every other day. She gets TMJ pain at a level of 5, overall pain at 4, jaw function at 4, diet at 3, and disability at 2.

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her knees and her ankles. She has no known allergies.

Lacey has had speech therapy for one year directed at trying to correct tongue thrust problems.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Lacey has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary dental midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin are all pretty much on the midline.

In profile view, Lacey has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Chin appears deficient AP-wise. Chin-neckline is short, although the chin-neck angle is reasonably well-defined. Chin appears to be probably 10 to 12 mm AP deficient.

Intraorally, Lacey has all of her lower teeth back through her second molars. There is some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch. She has a high attached labial frenulum but otherwise there appears to be adequate attached gingiva although is quite thin in some areas. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. There is significant buccal tipping of the second molars. She has almost a full Class II cuspid-molar relationship bilaterally. She has an overjet of probably about 5 to 6 mm. She has over a 0 overbite relationship. 

Lacey may breathe mainly through her mouth. 

Oropharynx appears clear, and soft palate and uvula look relatively normal. Intranasally, she has some septal spurring at the base of the septum bilaterally that may be blocking some of the airway particularly on the right side. Otherwise, the left airway looks good even with the spur present. 

She has no pain to palpation around the head and neck area except some mild tenderness over the styloid areas. 

On opening, she has a clicking glitch kind of sound in the right TMJ at about 25 mm of opening and 20 mm of closing. In excursive movements, she has clicking and popping in both joints. Maximal incisal opening is 47 mm and excursive movements were 7 mm in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars. All other teeth are present and accounted for. Sinuses look clear. The large spurs on the nasal septum can be seen extending out on both sides, although the turbinates do not look too large. Condyles show evidence of significant resorptive changes. Maxillary sinuses dip way down around the roots of the molar teeth. 

Right TMJ tomograms show extremely small condyles anteroposteriorly. There is increased joint space vertically. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There is definite evidence of condylar resorption present. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows likewise a condyle that is small anteroposteriorly with increased joint space in some areas. There is definite evidence of condylar resorption present. 

Open views show good translation of both condyles although decreased joint space between the condyles and the articular eminences.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph showed a retruded mandible and probably high occlusal plane angulation.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption present for probably four to five years.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II occlusion.
Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch.
Mild crowding, upper anterior arch.
Minimal crowding, lower anterior arch.
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton difference of 4 mm.
Slight over-angulation of lower incisors.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Four impacted third molars.
Bilateral septal spurs.
Partial nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip maxillary lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies (they may be necessary). Open about 0.5-mm space around each of the upper lateral incisors to help compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy.
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2.5 to 3 mm of tooth structure from the anterior six teeth to correct for the significant tooth-size discrepancy.

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand and downgraft the posterior aspect.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Surgical removal of four impacted third molars.
Nasoseptoplasty.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

Other Systems

Lacey has problems with her knees and ankles since about the sixth grade, and it started with sports-related trauma, and she does dance now, which aggravates the situation. Her periods are somewhat irregular. She has had pink eye x 2. There are no other significant factors except she has not been around any birds directly but cleans house for a lady who has a bird that she keeps in the garage. She has had cats all of her life and has three cats now, one I guess about ready to deliver some more. Some of the cats eat birds, mice, and rats. They are basically outdoor cats. She has had dogs in the past x 2. She has been around horses and cows and about five years ago actually raised some calves.