REBECCA (BECCA) LEMONS						04/11/2011

Becca is 27 years old, referred by Dr. Louis Anderson from Katy, TX.  Becca is in good health.  She has some mild asthma symptoms.  Primary concerns Becca has includes the following:

Daily tiredness and pain in her jaws.
Moderate back, neck and shoulder pain. 
Teeth do not fit together very well.
Upper jaw is small in size. 
Difficulties sleeping.

Becca was diagnosed with fibromyalgia in 1998, but she questions whether that was an accurate diagnosis or not.  Becca had orthodontics from 1995 to 1996 when she was about 15 to 16 years of age.  She has had physical therapy for her neck, back, and shoulders in 1998 and 1999.  Becca gets headaches about 3 times a week at a level of the 3 in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area bilaterally.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 2, diet at 1, disability at 5.  She has some numbness on the left side of her tongue from previous removal of a mandibular left third molar.  She gets occasional earaches on the left side, occasional tinnitus, occasional vertigo, but has no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her right knee, right elbow, left hip, and her knuckles occasionally.  She does have hay fever and has allergies to cedar.  She has no known jewelry allergies.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day.

In frontal view, Becca has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Becca has retrusion of the maxilla by 4 or 5 mm and the chin is retruded about 15 to 18 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well defined.  Becca generally postures her mandible forward during the day because it feels more comfortable and she can breathe a little bit easier.  Intraorally, Becca has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars and she has good attached gingiva.  Teeth appear to be nicely aligned and leveled.  In the upper arch, she is missing probably first bicuspids and has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  She has a 1.5 mm vertical over bite.  She has small upper lateral incisors with the right one being slightly smaller than the left one.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Uvula looks normal in length.  Soft palpate appears like it may be a little bit short in length.  Fascial pillars are relatively normal and she has had her tonsils removed.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderate in size.  The septum is a little bit off towards the right side.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the temporal muscles, masseters, SCMs, and milder tenderness over the right shoulder.  Joints today function fairly smoothly, but there are times she gets pops and clicks in her joints, just not today.  The maximal incisal opening was 36 mm, opening without pain about 20 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 7 mm and to the left 9 mm. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the maxillary first bicuspids.  Sinuses look reasonably clear and turbinates appear moderate in size.  Difficult to evaluate the TMJs.  

Coronal radiograph shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The septum is deviated just slightly off to the right side.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Axial view shows at this view the septum is reasonably straight.  The turbinates appear fairly large and appear to block off a good part of the airway.  Sinuses appear clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  The articular eminence has a fairly significant inclination and is perhaps slightly shortened in vertical height.  There is increased anterior joint space and decreased posterior superior joint space.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat small in size.  It is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  The anterior joint space is significantly increased.  The articular eminence is fairly steep, but short in vertical length.  There may be a little bit of anterior beaking developing towards the medial side of the joint. 

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width and both joints do exhibit a little bit of extension of the lateral pole of the condyle.  There is some decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is a high occlusal plane angle. The maxilla and mandible are both retruded.  Oropharyngeal airway is surprisingly fairly good.  

There is no MRI taken for this evaluation.  Therefore, the diagnoses based on clinical, radiographic, and dental model analyses would include the following:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Class I cuspid relationship, Class II molar relationship.
Missing maxillary first bicuspids.
Hypertrophied turbinates with partial nasal airway obstruction. 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	Surgery:  Treatment Option 1.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance in a counterclockwise 			direction.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance in a counterclockwise 				direction.
	d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
3.	Surgery:  Treatment Option 2 (depending on MRI and severity of TMJ 
                       pathology).
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses.
	b.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction. 
	c.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
	d.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts. 
	e.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

An additional option that Becca has would be just to fix the joints as determined from the MRI evaluation, perform the bilateral ramus osteotomies if the Mitek anchor technique is used, but eliminate the maxillary surgery.  This will keep the profile and airway at the same position that it is currently at.  The MRI will determine the indicated surgical procedures.

In addition, she does have a short soft palpate length.  Currently, she does not appear to have any hypernasal speech, but she says at time she will get that, although she does not really have any problems with regurgitation of food or fluids up into her nose.  I may want to use the option of doing a horseshoe technique leaving the palate attached to lateral nasal bones as well as tuberosity area so that we can move just the dental alveolus, hopefully leaving the palate in its current position.  Analysis of the cephalometric prediction tracing shows that with the plan to do the counterclockwise rotation, the maxilla and mandible will inferiorly position the posterior nasal spine and soft palate probably about 5 or 6 mm.  This places the soft palate at a wider transverse dimension at the posterior oropharyngeal area which would increase her risk of developing hypernasal speech and having post retropalatal regurgitation of food and fluids.  