GARY LESSER										04-25-03

Gary is 35 years old. Dr. Mark Piper, 111 Second Ave. NE, Ste. 1006, St. Petersburg, FL  33701, referred Gary to us.

Patient History

Gary originally had trauma at the age of 4 when he hit his chin on a coffee table. He had no problems at that time. It wasn’t until he was involved in an MVA in 1990. Gary is not aware of hitting his jaw at that time, but he did begin to develop jaw joint problems about three weeks afterwards. His jaws started to click and pop at that time. Gary has had previously bilateral arthroscopies in 1994. He then had orthognathic surgery performed in 1995. He had bilateral TMJ arthroscopies performed again in 1996. The dates may be a little bit different. One arthroscopy was done in approximately January of 1994. The orthognathic surgery involving maxillary osteotomies and a genioplasty was performed probably in December of 1994, and then the second arthroscopy to both TMJs was performed in late 1995. He does have some pain in his right shoulder joint but has never been scoped or treated. Dr. Andy Slavin did the arthroscopies and performed the orthognathic surgery in conjunction with Dr. Steve Reimer. 

The only other joint that bothers him is his right shoulder. He has some significant allergy problems, but they are not sure exactly what the allergies are to. He does get frequent sinus infections and just recently came off of some antibiotics. He says by the end of the day, the effect is so significant that his speech is affected, and he begins to slur. He has developed snoring problems. He has chronic fatigue as well. He is aware of having nocturnal clenching and bruxism. Gary gets his headaches predominantly in the temporal and posterior head area, and they occur daily. He registers them at about a level of 5, but they can escalate to 8. He has consistent and continuous pain in the TMJ areas at a level of 6 on the left side and 4 on the right side. On an average day, his pain levels are at about a 7. He rates his jaw function at 4, diet at 9, and disability at 5. 

Current Medications

The only medication that Gary really takes at this time is some Bufferin.

Patient Concerns

TMJ pain
Headaches 
Pain down through the neck and shoulders
Teeth don’t fit together very well
Snoring
Sleep disorder
Apneic episodes at night when sleeping
Earaches, being greater on the left side than the right side
Lower jaw is becoming more retruded
Difficulties breathing through the nose
Predominantly a mouth breather

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Gary has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Could be just some slight asymmetry in the mandible. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline may be about a millimeter to the right. Chin is probably a couple of millimeters to the right. Placing Gary in a centric relation causes pain in the jaw joints with it being greater on the left side. Upper lip supralabrale is probably 4 to 5 mm posterior to subnasale. Maxilla is AP retruded probably at least a good 6 mm. Chin is retruded approximately 18 to 20 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short, and chin-neck angle is essentially absent.
Intraorally, Gary has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Has good attached gingiva. Has some calculus around the necks of the teeth and a little bit of inflammation around the gums. Anteroposteriorly, the lower arch looks fairly symmetric. In the upper arch, he also has all of his teeth back through the second molars present. He occludes predominantly on his second molars on the right side and maybe first and second molars on the left side with the other teeth all being pretty much out of occlusion. Anteriorly, he has 0 open bite. He has a Class II end-on occlusion at about 3 mm. There is a slight cant in the transverse occlusal plane with the left side being about 1.5 to 2 mm lower than the right side. Oropharynx appears relatively clear. Uvula is hyperplastic and somewhat enlarged. Faucial pillars appear to be somewhat posteriorly positioned. 

Intranasally, septum appears pretty straight, but he has fairly large turbinates that appear to take up a good part of the potential functional nasal airway.

Maximal incisal opening is about 35 mm, and he can get to about 30 mm without significant pain. Excursive movements to the right were about 8 mm and to the left pretty close to 8 mm also, but it was painful to do that with a greater amount of pain on the left side as compared to the right side. To palpation, he has extremely loud audible crepitus in both TMJs, and interestingly, the crepitation was significantly louder on closing as compared to opening. To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the temporarlis muscles, masseters, TMJs, and styloid areas. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four bone plates in the maxilla from the previous surgery performed there. Third molars are absent. He has some significant foreshortening of the root on the mandibular right first bicuspid. Sinuses look relatively clear. Turbinates may be a little bit large, but they are partly out of the picture. Condyles show severe condylar resorption and arthritic changes. There are bone screws in the chin area where the previous genioplasty was performed. Gary has root canals on the right maxillary and mandibular second molars. Four bone plates in the maxilla are all H-shaped plates. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses look fairly clear. Perhaps could be a little something in the right maxillary sinus. Otherwise, things look fairly clear. Right turbinate looks larger than the left turbinate. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows that the articular eminence is quite shallow as though it has previously been removed. The condyle is severely arthritic and shows evidence of significant vertical loss of volume. Virtually no joint space between the condyle and what is left of the articular eminence. Increased posterior joint space with the mandible postured forward approximately 4 to 5 mm from a normal position. 

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle that is postured forward probably about 4 mm from a more normal position. The articular eminence is somewhat flattened. Virtually no joint space between the condyle and the articular eminence. The condyle also has lost significant volume, particularly in the vertical direction. 

Open views show that the condyles do translate some with a little bit greater translation on the left as compared to the right side. Forward posturing shows the significant loss of condylar volume.

Cephalometrically, evaluation shows that Gary has AP maxillary deficiency, AP mandibular deficiency, and high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway actually looks better than anticipated with an airway dimension between the soft palate and posterior pharyngeal wall of about 8 mm and at the tongue level is almost 10 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe reactive arthritis with almost complete loss of the condylar heads
AP mandibular deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary deficiency
High occlusal plane angle
Class II end-on occlusion
Occluding primarily on the second molars with the rest of the teeth out of occlusion
Anterior open bite
Hypertrophied turbinates
Partial nasal airway obstruction
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Earaches 

Recommended Treatment

CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth, removing about a millimeter of tooth structure to compensate for the slight tooth-size discrepancy of 1.5 mm

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomy, debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, decrease the occlusal plane angle, and expand
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)
Bilateral inferior turbinectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
