JANICE LESTER								07/29/2011
DOB:	08/17/1955

Janice is 55 years old.  Referred by Dr. Kurt Mackie, 802 Loop 499, Harlingen, TX 78550.  Her current orthodontist is Dr. David Adame, 210 W. Mahl, Edinburg, TX 78539

Janice can remember back when she was 8 years old she used to have difficulties turning her head and neck area and her mother would put hot compresses on her neck and that would tend to make things okay for a while.  It is really unknown when the TMJ problems began.  She has been aware of having clicking and popping in her right jaw joint since her early 20s.  She was told she needed orthodontics and finally had orthodontic treatment from the age of 36 to 38.  She was placed in a retainer that did help her symptoms in the right jaw joint area.  Dr. Mackie took over her treatment in 2000 and began splint therapy at that time which she continues to the present.  She has had physical therapy in the past as well.  No other treatments have been provided to address her TMJ issues.  Janice gets headaches about 3 to 4 times per week on the right side at about a level of 6 involving the frontal, temporal, posterior head and the top of the head areas.  She rates her right TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 7, diet at 5, disability at 7.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, but does get occasional vertigo.  She is not aware of any hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her index fingers and her back.  She had a fall in her teen years that injured her back and it occasionally flares up.  Janice feels that her symptoms have gotten significantly worse as a result of the auto accident.  

Additional medical factors affecting Janice include high blood pressure, rosacea, and high cholesterol.  She may experience some depression concerning the abilities to fix her jaw problem.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also during the day.  She has no history of any significant GI issues nor urinary tract infections.  She has not been around any birds.  

She takes the following medications:

Benicar 20/12.5 mg.
Crestor 20 mg.
Finacea gel 15%.

Janice is not aware of having any snoring problems, but has some moderate daytime somnolence but unaware of any sleep apnea issues.  She has moderate difficulties sleeping primarily related to the pain and discomfort when trying to sleep.  She breathes predominantly through her nose when sleeping.  In frontal view, Janice has good left-to-right symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 0.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midlines.  In profile, Janice has good facial balance anteroposterior and vertically.  Intraorally, Janice has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer.  She had good attached gingiva around the anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has an end-on Class II cuspid relationship and probably 2 mm on the left and 3 to 4 mm on the right Class II.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2.5 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  She did have her tonsils removed at about the age of 39.  Intranasally, turbinates appear mild to moderate in size, but there appears to be good airway.  The septum may be deviated just slightly off to the right side, but not too significant.  Airway looks reasonably good.  She did have her wisdom teeth removed when she was about 20 years old.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, there is some crepitation in the right joint and on the left side she has an opening click at probably 25 to 30 mm and a closing click at around 20 mm.  To palpation, Janice has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  The maximal incisal opening is 57 mm, but as she opens her jaw deviates a little bit to one side and then towards the other.  The excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPH EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has crowns on the maxillary left second bicuspid and molars, mandibular left second bicuspid, first molar, and on the right side maxillary and mandibular first molars.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  Turbinates are fairly large.  Sinuses appear clear.  

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight in this view and the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The sinuses are clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle with some anterior beaking present.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa and there is an increased anterior joint space.  The articular eminence is fairly steep.  

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows there is some anterior beaking and sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  The condyle is narrow anteroposteriorly particularly towards the medial side of the joint.  The condyle is posteriorly and superiorly positioned in the fossa.  There appears to be some small osteophytes off the head of the condyle towards the medial side.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has some arthritic changes to it.  There is some changes in the subcortical bone in some of the views.  There is decreased superior and lateral joint space.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears more arthritic.  There is almost a vertical step in the head of the condyle.  There is decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint where there could be possibly bone-on-bone contact accounting for the crepitation in her joints.  There appears to be a little medial osteophytic kind of development off the condyle as well. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Janice has a good skeletal Class I relationship and appears to have an adequate oropharyngeal airway.  

Basic diagnoses for Janice would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe degeneration on the right side.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Tooth size discrepancy.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up 1 mm of space between the 
                        upper laterals and cuspids tipping the upper incisors forward.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider slenderizing the lower anterior 		teeth to keep from flaring them too far forward.  
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses;
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
5.	Bonding, veneers or crowns to the maxillary lateral incisors to eliminate the 	spacing.  

I did discuss with Janice other treatment options that included:

Bilateral Mitek anchors to reposition the articular discs.
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to maintain occlusion and create space in the joint to accommodate the articular discs.

We discussed the pros and cons of this approach as well as the total joint prostheses.  The articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchors will have a poor prognosis because of the significant length of time that the articular discs have been out of place particularly on the right side which is estimated to be somewhere around 35 years.  The best results for Mitek anchor technique is we can put the discs back in place within the first 4 or 5 years and after that the prognosis significantly decreases.  Because of the amount of degeneration of the articular discs as noted on the MRI particularly on the right side, I do not feel the prognosis will be very good.  Janice feels she would prefer to have a total joint prostheses after discussion of the pros and cons.  Also discussed potential risks and complications with her in reference to performing the total joint prostheses.  She understands these risks.  