MITCHELL LEVIN 									02/03/2006

Mitchell is 48 years old, referred by Dr. Allen Moses, 233 S. Wacker Dr., Chicago, IL, 60606.  Mitchell has had previous nose surgery in April of 2005.  The nasal surgery was to straighten up the intranasal structures and Mitchell says he can now breathe very well through his nose.  Mitchell takes the following medications:
Lipitor 10 mg daily.
Aspirin 81 mg daily. 

Mitch's problems began when he was young, perhaps even in the late teens of unknown etiology.  He had an MRI taken in 1990.  He was referred to Dr. Richard Goldman and he did restorative dentistry on him.  He subsequently has had physical therapy, chiropractic treatment, yoga etc. to try and control the pain and headache problems.  He has been to see some oral surgeons and one doctor told him that there was nothing that could be done for him and he needed to live with the situation.  He has had splints for the past year x2.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Tightness and pain in the face, temples, and jaws with the left side worse than the right side.
Headaches. 
Sleep apnea. 
Snoring. 

Mitch has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He is not aware of any allergies.  He does clench and grind his teeth at night as well as during the day.  Mitch gets headaches in the frontal and temple areas that he rates at about a level of 6.  He rates his TMJ pain at 6 with the left worse than the right side and he rates his average daily pain at 6.  Mitch rates his jaw function at 3, diet at 0, disability at 8.  

To palpation, Mitch has severe pain around the TMJs, styloid areas, masseters, medial pterygoids, moderate pain around the temporalis, shoulders and milder pain over the SCMs and posterior neck area.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly but Mitch says occasionally he will get a crackling kind of noise particularly in the left joint.  Maximal opening is about 6 to 8 mm.  Excursive movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  In frontal view, Mitch has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Nose is deviated off to the left side probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -6.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Mitch may have some slight AP maxillary deficiency.  There is some infraorbital deficiency probably about 4 to 5 mm.  Chin projection in the closed position is actually fairly good.  As Mitch opens to where his lips separate the chin may be just slightly AP deficient but not too significant.  Chin-neckline is not well-defined.  He does have some significant fullness in the submental area.  Intraorally, Mitch does have some significant crenations on his tongue.  He has his lower teeth back through the second molars present.  He does have a lot of crowns.  He has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars but crowns on probably most of those teeth.  Oropharynx and uvula appears maybe mildly enlarged but not too significant.  
MITCHELL LEVIN				02/03/2006				Page 2


The soft palate appears somewhat elongated and mildly to moderate.  Faucial pillars are quite constricted which I would classify as probably moderate to severe causing significant decreased transverse width of the nasopharynx and oropharynx areas.  Intranasally, Mitch has some septal spurring off the base of the nose on both sides actually.  He has had bilateral turbinectomies and on the right side the turbinates have been reduced very nicely.  On the left side the anterior turbinate has been reduced although there may still be some fullness posteriorly.  Mitch has both anterior and posterior bilateral crossbites present.  He has a Class III occlusion.  He has a reverse deep bite of about 2 mm.  Lateral occlusal plane is fairly flat as is the upper arch.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows that Mitch has crowns on almost all the maxillary teeth except perhaps the cuspids.  He has a root canal on the maxillary right lateral incisor.  In the lower arch he has crowns on the right cuspid, first bicuspid, first molar and left cuspid first bicuspid.  The condyles are hard to evaluate the superior surface.  The right condylar head and neck appear a little bit longer than the left side. 

Waters view shows that there is cloudiness in the left sinus.  The septum looks reasonably straight.  The turbinate on the left side appears quite large posteriorly and may be obstructing the airway on that side.  It appears there is a good and open airway on the right side.  

Left TMJ sagittal view is somewhat difficult to evaluate.  The condyle appears to have reasonable morphology.  The posterior joint space may be just slightly enlarged compared to the superior and anterior spaces.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  He does have fairly prominent styloid processes.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that looks fairly reasonable.  The posterior aspect is a little bit flattened.  The joint space appears relatively balanced.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening there appears to be good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Mitch has a Class III occlusion, however, the mandible appears to be a fairly good size.  There appears to be disproportion vertical height of the occlusal plane from one side compared to the other side.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 7 mm and at the base of the tongue measures probably about 9 mm.  He has a skeletal and occlusal Class III relationship.  He has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.  However, the maxillary incisor crowns are unusual in shape and have rather severe attrition of the maxillary cuspids.  All the teeth are fairly flattened off probably due to the clenching and bruxism.  Some of it may be due to the multiple crown placements as well.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency. 
MITCHELL LEVIN				02/03/2006				Page 3


Class III occlusion. 
Crowns on all the maxillary teeth except for the cuspids and in the lower arch there are crowns on the cuspids, first bicuspids and the right first molar.
Hyperplastic soft palate. 
Decreased transverse dimension of the oral and nasopharynx.
Sleep apnea. 
Severe snoring. 
History of severe clenching and bruxism.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications.
Klonopin 1 mg tablets 1 tablet q.h.s. dispensing 30 tablets refill x5.  Adjust the dosage until desired result achieved.
Sleep study.
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and expand it as well as down graft it vertically. 
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP procedure.)
Application of arch bars.
Restorative dentistry to redo the maxillary crowns to try to maximize the bite relationship. 

I did give Mitch a prescription for the Klonopin as described above.  He is to call me in a week to let me know how effective it is. 

