ANN LEWIS										03/10/2010

Ann is 73 years old.  About 3 or 4 months ago, she began developing some pain around the head and neck area and then about 6 weeks ago she went to bed one evening and the next morning woke up with her jaws sore and with clicking her jaw joints.  It is possible that Ann may have had long term displacement of her articular discs that may contribute to her longstanding neck and shoulder pain.  


CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Ann has good facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -1.  In profile, Ann may have just some slight AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm in the maxilla and maybe about 6 in the mandible.  The chin neckline is somewhat short.  Intraorally, Ann has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding in the anterior arch.  She has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has lots of crowns in both the maxilla and mandible posterior teeth.  She is Class I cuspid on the left side and Class II end-on on the right side by probably 2 to 3 mm.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear mild to moderate in size.  The septum appears deviated a little bit towards the left side with a spur about midway back.  On opening, Ann has some glitches in the left TMJ at probably about 10 mm of opening and 5 mm of closing.  The right side seems reasonably smooth on opening, however, on excursion movements there is almost an audible click on both sides.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except for the third molars.  There appears to be some arthritic changes in the joints.  She has crowns on almost all of her posterior teeth.  

Coronal view shows that she sinuses are clear.  The nasal septum is deviated off towards the left side with a septal spur.  Turbinates appear quite large and appear to block a lot of the airway.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear, but the turbinates are quite large.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  There may be just some slight anterior beaking in some of the views.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is flattened on the anterior aspect with a little bit of anterior beaking present.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The joint space appears somewhat decreased.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  The joint space may be slightly decreased.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a skeletal and occlusal Class I relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway may be slightly decreased particularly at the tongue base.  

Basic diagnoses for Ann would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction.
Myofascial pain affecting predominantly the temporalis muscles and right masseter muscle.
Mild snoring.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Medications:  Klonopin 1 mg tablets, dispensing 30 tablets, 1/2 to 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x3.
Consider splint therapy to help unload the joints. 
Continue to monitor to consider for surgical invention if medications and splint therapy are ineffective. 







