JODIE LEWIS									06/19/2006

Jodie is 33 years old.  She had a previous tonsillectomy and adenoids removed.  She has had tubes in her ears.  She had a breast core biopsy performed.  She is in good health with no major medical problems.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Estrostep (BCP.)
Advil occasionally for pain.
Claritin occasional.

ALLERGIES:  She has had an adverse reaction to sulfa drugs.  

She has allergies to things like cats and grasses.  When she was younger she did take allergy shots but she does not take those anymore.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Clenching the teeth particularly at night when she sleeps.
Pain and discomfort in the jaw joints particularly in the mornings.
Clicking and popping in the joints.
Headaches that she usually wakes up with in the morning.

Jodie’s problems began when she was about 15 years of age of unknown etiology.  The joint problems began when she was under orthodontic treatment.  She had the ortho complete when she was about 15 years old and wore braces from 1987 through 1989.  When she was 15 she did have some problems with her jaw locking shut.  After that she had some clicking and popping in her jaw joints.  She had some TMJ therapy in 1989 that did not help her.  She had chiropractic treatment from 2003 to 2005 and acupuncture in 2004.  She has worn a night splint from 2003 until the present time.  She was using a harder from of splint but now uses a soft one as it was felt that the hard one was causing some additional problems. 

Jodie has no problems with earaches.  She gets occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo but no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her right wrist and her knees.  She is very much aware of clenching at nighttime as well as during the day and in fact is aware that she frequently wakes up with headaches that she feels is probably due to the clenching at night.  She gets headaches about two times per week at about a level of 6 in the frontal and temple areas bilaterally.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, overall average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 5, diet at 1 disability at 2.  With the splint that Jodie currently has she feels that this is actually inducing her clenching particularly at night when she is sleeping.  

Jodie does state that she has some daytime tiredness of a moderate degree.  She is not aware of any snoring problems but does have some daytime somnolence of a moderate degree.  She has no sleep apnea symptoms.  She does get moderate pain in the neck and back.  She does get huge muscle knots in her shoulders and in her neck.  


JODIE LEWIS				06/19/2006				Page 2


In frontal view, Jodie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 
22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 4 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midlines are all fairly much aligned with each other.  In profile view, she has a little AP deficiency in the maxilla of maybe about 2 to 3 mm.  Chin is retruded by about 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is short although the chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Intraorally she is missing the lower first bicuspids and upper first bicuspids.  Transversely the arches are quite narrow particularly in the lower arch.  There is adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally being about 3 to 4 mm Class II.  Oropharyngeal tissues look good.  Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all look well and within normal limits.  Intranasally she has moderately enlarged turbinates.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm.  To palpation, she has mild tenderness over the temporalis, masseters, TMJs and shoulder areas.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 40 mm and opening without significant pain 44 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 5 mm, to the left 6 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids.  The condyles and condylar necks appear short in vertical although the condyles themselves look very large.  The right condyle is quite flattened.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The turbinates appear enlarged and almost touching against the turbinates.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is postured forward coming down towards the articular eminence.  The patient is not in centric relation.  Condyle has fairly good space around it.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  There are definitely arthritic changes and some anterior beaking present.  There appears to be some erosion in the anterior head of the condyle just opposite the articular eminence.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows that the mouth is open and the condyle is postured way forward in the fossa almost by the articular eminence.  On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle being a little greater on the left side than the right side.  Good vertical joint space but the condyle appears posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Anterior part of the condylar head appears flat and the condyle appears larger towards the lateral aspect as compared to the medial aspect.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II relationship.  She has significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.  It appears she has an occlusal Class II and skeletal Class II.  There is a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway is only about 2 to 3 mm at the base of the tongue.  The tongue fills most of the oral cavity. 



JODIE LEWIS				06/19/2006				Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
High occlusal plane angle.
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars. 
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Headaches.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to expand the arch transversely and retract the lower incisors some if possible.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior maxilla superiorly and posterior maxillary inferiorly.
Partial turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
