MARIA ABREU-LEWIS								04/09/2007

This is a 56-year-old female.  She has had a previous hysterectomy and tonsillectomy.  Otherwise she is in good health.  She reports some mild snoring but does not have any sleep apnea or daytime somnolence.  Primary concerns involve jaw problems on the left side which causes headaches, earaches, neck and shoulder pain.  She would like to have the pain relieved and to correct her problem.  She has had previous TMJ treatment that included splints by Dr. Baker in July of 2006, splints by Dr. Benson in September of 2006, physical therapy from 2006 to December 2006 and physical therapy began in March of 2007.  The pain is predominately on the left side and the pain is fairly significant for her.  The pain began when she was about 50 years old of unknown etiology.  She gets headaches that can be fairly severe and she gets these about 2 times a week.  They occur predominately in the left forehead beyond the left eye, left temple area and in the back of the head.  She also has some neck and shoulder pain.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing at night or during the day.  She does get earaches in the left side that can be mild to severe but she has no problems with tinnitus or vertigo.  She has no other joints problems.  She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 6, headaches, at a level of 7, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 2, diet at 0 and disability at 2.  Maria takes Excedrin and ibuprofen for pain.  She has to take Prevacid when she takes the medicines because she has diverticulitis.  She does not have any problems with her joints except she has ben told she has scoliosis and possible a neck problem.  It appears it may be more muscle related.  

In frontal view, Maria has fairly good facial symmetry.  In profile, she has good facial balance.  Intraorally, she is missing mandibular right first bicuspid but has it on the left side.  Lower arch is actually fairly symmetric at the cuspid area.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Slight tip to the incisors with roots being tipped towards the left side and crowns a little bit towards the right side.  She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship and a Class I molar relationship on the left side and Class III molar relationship on the right side because the missing lower first bicuspid.  Midlines are off a little bit with the mandibular dental midline being a little bit close to the facial midline and maxillary midline being off just a 1 mm or 2 to the right.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the left styloid area but no other pain in the area.  She has frequent earaches on the left side.  In jaw function, she has a consistent click in the right joint about 50 mm of opening and 10 mm of closure.  There may be a little bit of crepitus sounds in there as well.  In the left joint, she has some clicking on excursion and she does on the right side as well.  The left joint seems to function reasonably smoothly just on opening.  There could be a little bit of crepitus on that side as well.  Maximal incisal opening is about 43 mm but she could open about 25 mm without much discomfort.  Excursive movement to the right was only about 6 to 7 mm and to the left about 10 mm.   Oropharyngeal examination shows that the uvula appears normal as does the soft palate.  Faucial pillars may be mildly constricted.  Intranasally, turbinates appear normal in size and there appears to be adequate airway with the septum being reasonably straight.  In July of 2006, Dr. Roger Baker in Wichita, Kansas, made a bite splint for her that actually postured her mandible forward.  This did not help her situation.  The splint did help her initially and she did feel somewhat better but it did not fix the problem.  She then went to see Dr. Melvin Benson, who made a splint for her in September of 2006.  This did help her and made her feel better particularly in conjunction with the physical therapy that she received from September through December of 2006.  However, the pain then came back.  
MARIA ABREU-LEWIS			04/09/2007				Page 2

She had additional physical therapy in March of 2007.  She has had a fair amount of dental work since the beginning of this year that included some restorations which were redone as well as root canal therapy.  She has problems with tooth #14 and #19 that are hypersensitive.  This associated pain and discomfort comes and goes with those 2 teeth.  Radiographically, there is a dark area beneath the distal root of #19.  This is in the same general vicinity where the exostosis at the inferior border of the mandible is located.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows that she is missing actually the maxillary third molars, mandibular left third molar, mandibular right, probably first or second bicuspid.  The other bicuspid is present.  She had root canals on the maxillary right central lateral, left second bicuspid first and second molars as well as mandibular left and right first molars.  The condyle appears a little bit more abnormal as compared to the left one but difficult to tell in this particular view.  Styloid processes are seen to be a little elongated and calcified.  At the inferior border of the mandible, she has a bone bump that extends downward and perhaps a little bit lateral and/or medial that appears well calcified.  This can be felt clinically to be located almost between the first and second molars but at the inferior border.  It may be related to previous localized ostitis.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear and bony septum appears relatively straight.  Nasal airway appears reasonably open.  

Right TMJ tomogram is a little bit hard to read but it appears the condyle may be posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is relatively normal in steepness.  Joint space is hard to evaluate.

Left TMJ tomogram is a little bit easier to read.  There is some anterior beaking of the condyle.  Relatively normal inclination of the articular eminence.  There appears to be decreased posterior joint space.  On opening, there is moderate translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a pretty good skeletal Class I occlusal relationship.  Moderately steep occlusal plane angle.  She has some increased soft tissue thickness in the pogonion. 

Dental model analysis shows that she is missing the mandibular right, probably second bicuspid and has the third molar present on the mandibular right side.  Maxillary incisors are angled where the incisors tips are towards the right and roots are toward the left.   She has a posterior crossbite on the right side involving the mandibular second and third molars and maxillary first and second molars.  She has about a 3 mm anterior deep bite relationship.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally probably due to some small upper lateral incisors.  However, the occlusion is fairly well in position. 




MARIA ABREU-LEWIS			04/09/2007				Page 3

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
Relative mandibular hyperplasia.
Severe earaches.
Headaches.
TMJ pain. 
Masticatory dysfunction.
Osteoma, left mandibular body inferior border. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Apply appliances to the maxilla.
Apply appliances to the mandible.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion and create space in the joint to accommodate the articular disc.
Removal of osteoma, left mandibular body inferior border.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
