STACY LEWIS									02/14/2008

Stacy is 53 years old, referred by Dr. George Adams, 2845 Parkwood Blvd., Suite 100, Plano, Texas 75093, and Dr. Samuel Marynick, 3600 Gaston Avenue, Suite 506, Dallas, Texas 75246.  Primary concerns that Stacy has includes the following:

1.  	The quality of her life has been reduced.
2.	Moderate to severe snoring.
3. 	Severe daytime tiredness.
4.	Sleep apnea.
5.	Popping in the left joint
6.	Pain in the left TMJ area.
7.	Headaches.

Stacy’s problem with significant daytime somnolence began in about 2005.  She had Invisalign orthodontic treatment beginning in 2005.  She finally had to have some lower orthodontic appliances placed and she finished her ortho treatment in June 2007.  She gets B12 shots bimonthly.  She gets headaches at about a level of 4 in the temporal areas and left frontal areas.  She gets headaches about two to three times per week.  She gets migraines once in a while as well.  She rates her TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 1, diet at 0, disability at 4.  Her disability is predominantly related to her extreme daytime somnolence.  She has no problems with earaches, gets some mild tinnitus, but no vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her shoulders and she gets an occasional costochondritis.  She has had a weight gain of 35 pounds in the past two years and she attributes this in part to going through menopause.  She is aware of bruxing her teeth at night.  She has been diagnosed as having pernicious anemia.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Stacy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 24 mm.  Lip length is 0 to 1.  Lower dental midline and chin midline are a little bit off to the right side about 1 mm.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lips and cheeks and nose.  Chin may be a little bit retruded and chin neckline is somewhat short.  Chin may be about 8 mm AP deficient.  Chin neck angle is not well-defined.  As Stacy postures her mandible forward, it improves her profile and her chin neckline.  She may be just slightly AP deficient in the maxilla by about 2-3 mm.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars.  She has some mild crenations in her tongue.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side, but Class I on the left side.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  Intraorally, the uvula looks relatively normal as does the soft palate, although they are both slightly elongated.  Faucial pillars are mild to moderately constricted.  Septum is deviated a little bit off to the right side.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  There may be some mild airway obstruction, but not too significant.  TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the styloid areas and minimal tenderness over the SCMs.  Maximum size opening is 44 mm.  Excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has root canals on the maxilla right second bicuspid and first molar and left second bicuspid.  She appears to have crowns on almost all of her posterior teeth in the maxilla.  Sinuses are difficult to evaluate.  Condyles do not look too abnormal.  Waters view shows deviation of the bony nasal septum with it going off to the right side slightly.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Right TMJ tomogram shows some sclerosis on top of the condyle and anterior beaking present.  Decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The articular disc is somewhat increased.  Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit arthritic and appears to have a little bit of anterior beaking present.  Decreased superior and perhaps posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints.  

The basic diagnoses for Stacy would be as follows:

1.	Left TMJ arthritis and medial displacement of the articular disc. 
2.	Right TMJ arthritis and lateral displacement of the articular disc.
3.	AP maxillary deficiency.  
4.	Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
5.	AP mandibular deficiency.
6.	Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
7.	TMJ pain.
8.	Headaches.
9.	Sleep apnea syndrome.
10.	Severe daytime somnolence.
11.	Class I occlusion on the left, Class II nonocclusion on the left.  
12.	Mandible deviated off towards the right side about 2 mm.
13. 	Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of probably 2-3 mm.
14.	High occlusal pain angle. 
	15.	Hyperplastic soft palate. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

	1.  	Presurgical orthodontics.
a.  Align and level maxillary arch.  
b.  Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.
	2.  	Surgery.
a.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft it posteriorly and advance the incisal edges about 3-4 mm.  
b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction approximately 9 mm.
c.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
d.  UPPP procedure with lateral inversion flaps.
3.  	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.