TERESA LEWIS									10/19/2007

Teresa is 46 years old and referred by Dr. Duane Keller.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Jaw pain.
Headaches.
Neck and shoulder pain.
Earaches.
Difficulty hearing from left ear.
Not able to open mouth wide.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Prempro.
Protonix.
Triamterene 35.5 mg.
Multivitamins.
Aleve for pain and headaches.

Her TMJ problems are unknown when they actually begun.  In 1999, she was involved in a motor vehicle accident being struck in the face with airbags and being knocked unconscious.  In 2004, during that year she had two falls from a horse 8 weeks apart in which she broke one arm and in the second fall she broke the other arm.  She received her first splint in March 2007 from her dentist, Dr. Wehrmister.  She went to see Dr. Keller in June of 2007 and he made her a splint as well.  Teresa has had previous orthodontics from the 5th grade to the 8th grade where four bicuspids were extracted. 

She rates her headaches at a level of 9 and they occur predominately in frontal, temporal and on the top of the head.  She rates her TMJ at 8, average daily pain at 9, jaw function at 8, diet at 7 and disability at 7.  She has no problems with earaches or tinnitus but has moderate vertigo and decreased hearing in the left ear.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching her teeth at night.  She used to wake up with major headaches prior to getting Dr. Keller's splint.  Now she wakes up with lesser headache but then it gets progressively worse during the day with increased jaw function.  

She has difficulty breathing through her nose which is something new in the last few years.  She tends to breathe through her mouth.  She snores and sometimes it is really bad and other times it is not so significant.  She has moderate daytime somnolence.  She is not aware of sleep apnea problems.  She does have some mild elevated blood pressure.

In frontal view, Teresa has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm.  Maxillary midline is just slightly off to the left side by about 1 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off towards the right side.  Chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, she has AP deficiency of the maxilla and the mandible.  Chin-neckline is extremely short.  Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by a couple of mm.  Probably about 4 to 5 mm 
TERESA LEWIS				10/19/2007				Page 2

AP maxillary deficiency and probably close to 10 mm AP mandibular deficiency.  Intraorally, she is missing mandibular first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars present.  Some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Transverse width of the lower arch is constricted.  In the upper arch she also is missing first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth.  She has a Class III cuspid relationship on the left side by about 3 to 4 mm.  On the right side she is a little bit closer to a Class I.  She has posterior open bites.  She occludes only on her central incisors.  The rest of the teeth are out of occlusion.  She has about a 1 mm anterior overbite but about a 2 mm posterior open bite bilaterally.  When she bites her teeth together she gets pain in her neck.  To palpation, she has mild to moderate discomfort over the masseters, TMJs, styloid areas, right temporalis, left medial pterygoid, left SCM and left shoulder.  Maximal incisal opening is 27 mm.  She can open to about 20 mm without significant pain.  Excursive movement to the right is 5 mm, left 4 mm.  She has crepitus in her left TMJ.  The right side seems to function reasonably smoothly but in a closed lock situation.   

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids.  Mandibular right second molar has a crown and a root canal on it.  Difficult to evaluate the joints on this view.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates appear quite large.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear.  Turbinates are fairly large.  Left nasal airway appearing fairly well blocked and the right side to a lesser degree.  Bony septum is deviated just slightly off towards the right side.

Left TMJ tomogram may have been taken with her splint in place but shows the condyle postured downward and forward in the fossa as a result of wearing the splint.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit more morphology than the opposite side.  Joint space appears reasonably well balanced.  She has a posterior open bite when this x-ray was taken.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles on top of the respective articular eminences. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that her maxilla and mandible are retruded.  Oropharyngeal airway space is about 5 mm at the soft palate level and about 6 mm at the base of the tongue.  She does demonstrate posterior open bite.  Tooth size analysis shows that there is a Bolton's difference of almost 2 mm.  It is likely related to small upper lateral incisors particularly on the left side.  There is also a significant tooth size discrepancy in the bicuspid area with the lower bicuspid being at least 1 mm larger than the upper bicuspids.  There is some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ reactive arthritis worse on the left side with erosions and non-salvageable discs.
AP maxillary deficiency.

TERESA LEWIS				10/19/2007				Page 3

Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Class II occlusion being worse on the right side.
Crowding in the lower anterior arch.
Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of at least 2.5 mm related to small upper lateral incisors particularly on the left side.
Snoring.
 Sleep apnea symptoms.
 Severe TMJ pain.
 Headaches.
 Myofascial pain.
 Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars.
 Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Nasal airway obstruction. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up 1 mm of space mesial and 1mm distal to the maxillary left lateral incisor.  Open up 1 mm of space between the right upper lateral and cuspid.   Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. 
Bilateral inferior turbinectomies. 
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Fat grafts to the bilateral TMJs (harvest from the abdomen.)
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
