ADRIANNE LICHLITER								08/20/2008

Adrianne Lichliter is now 22 years old.  I saw her originally when she was 13 years 9 months of age on March 29, 2000.  At that time, she did have clicking in her jaw joints and had been in orthodontics treatment for about 4 years.  At that time, I suspected bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations.  She had TMJ pain and headaches at that time. She also had anterior vertical maxillary excess and mandibular hypoplasia.  She had a Class II occlusion.  She had significant nasal airway obstruction and snoring.  She had TMJ pain and headaches. In the summer of 2000, Adrianne had a tonsillectomy and some nasal polyps removed as well as she had  UPPP procedure performed.  Adrianne had 4 years of orthodontic treatment and 2 years with a tongue basket in place.  Current medications she takes includes:

Ibuprofen.
Advil.
Levora 28.

She gets headaches about 3 times a week at a level of 4 in the temporal and posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 4, diet at 3, and disability at 2.  She gets frequent and severe headaches on the right side, occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Adrianne has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 6 mm.  The maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are on the facial midline.  In profile view, Adrianne has some slight deficiency and maxillary projection of probably about 2 to 3 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded about 15 mm.  Chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  She does have increased lower third facial height.  Adrianne has about 10 mm of lip incompetence.  Intraorally, Adrianne has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has adequate attached gingiva.  Teeth are reasonably well aligned.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She appears to have an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.  Adrianne has a Class II cuspid relationship bilaterally, being probably 5 to 6 mm Class II.  She has an overjet of about 4 to 5 mm.  She may have about 1 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy, but definite evidence of a previous UPPP procedure that was done probably some time around June or July 2000.  The soft palate is asymmetric with the right side being shorter anteroposteriorly than the left side.  Intranasally, the right turbinate is moderate in size.  There is some synechiae present between the turbinate and septum creating a small band.  The left turbinate appears much larger and could cause some mild to moderate obstruction.  She does breath predominantly through her mouth when she sleeps.  Columella is moderately wide and the nostrils are mildly narrow.  Luminal valves may be slightly constricted.  To palpation, she has mild to moderate discomfort over the right masseter, right TMJ, right styloid area and slightly milder tenderness over the temporalis muscles.  On opening, joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  On excursion, however, she would get a click in the right side when she would go into left excursion movement.  She does hear a little bit of grinding noise on the right side when she opens and closes her jaws.  Maximal incisal opening is 45 mm, opening without significant pain 35 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 6 mm, to the left 7 mm.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the four third molars, but all the rest of her teeth are present.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Condyles both look arthritic.  
Waters view shows that sinuses appear clear.  Bony septum is reasonably straight.  Airway on the right side appears fairly passable, but on the left side the turbinate appears large and it does not appear to be a passable airway.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows significantly decreased joint space vertically and posteriorly.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There may be some anterior beaking on the condyle.   
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is positioned posteriorly and superiorly in the fossa with decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.   
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a Class II skeletal relationship with a Class II malocclusion and moderately high occlusal plane angle.  The oropharyngeal airway measures about 2 mm at the base of the tongue and probably about 6 mm at the soft palate level.  Adrianne does have a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton difference of 1 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Adrianne would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated with severe deformation. 
Anterior vertical maxillary excess. 
Slight AP maxillary hypoplasia. 
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.  
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Class II occlusion.  
5-mm overjet.
High occlusal plane angle. 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Earaches.  
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1 to 2 mm.
Slight over angulation of lower incisors.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral root incisors mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla slightly forward, moving it superiorly, expand, and decrease the occlusal plane angle.  
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). 
Bilateral mandibular coronoidotomies.
4.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine and retain occlusion.

