KIM LE 										10/13/2008

Kim is 14 years old; birth date is 12/01/1993.  Kim was actually referred by Son N. Giep, MD, Presbyterian Hospital of Plano, 6300 West Parker Road, Suite 220, Plano, Texas 75093, telephone #972-981-8215.  Kim is also being seen by Frank Stich III, DDS, 495 S. Denton Tap Road, Coppell, TX 75109.  Kim first became aware of having a jaw problem in about 2005 when her lower jaw began protruding forward beyond the upper jaw.  In 2007, she developed some TMJ noises.  She has had no treatment to date.  She has been followed by Dr. Stich who has been following Kim for about 3 years now and apparently was waiting until Kim’s growth is complete before initiating any orthodontic treatment.  Kim gets headaches sporadically, but maybe once a month with a level of about 1.  She has no TMJ pain.  She rates her jaw function at 1, diet at 2, and disability at 1.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She does have eczema which she has had since a baby.  She is now aware of clenching or bruxing.  She takes multivitamins and Claritin.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Kim has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry, but maybe slightly more full on the right side of her face than the left side.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -2 to 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is 1 mm to the right, and chin is probably 2 mm towards the left.  In profile view, Kim has some slight deficiency in the subnasale area, but supralabrale appears a little bit prominent.  Mandible is quite prominent and probably about 10 to 12 mm anterior to its normal position.  Chin neckline is extremely long and chin neck angle is moderately well defined.   Intraorally, Kim has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  The lower teeth are in significant lingual inclination.  She does not have any crowding and just a slight lingual inclination of the lower anteriors.  She has thin attached gingiva, but adequate.  In the upper arch, she has all her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a decreased curve of Wilson in the upper arch.  She has a full Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally.  She has no cross bite created by the excessively wide upper arch and the extremely narrow lower arch.  She has probably about a 6 to 7 mm reverse overjet relationship.  She has a reverse deep bite of about 2 mm.  Upper incisors appears slightly over angulated and lowers appear deangulated.  Transversely, the jaws appear fairly level.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On joint function, the condyles do come out beyond the articular eminences, but go back.  This feels though they are probably quite thin, but difficult to tell if they are out of position.  Oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal.  Intranasally, turbinates appear mild to moderate in size.  She has actually a little tissue area below the left inferior turbinate.  The septum may be deviated slightly off to the right side.  There is a significant nasal airway obstruction.  Transverse width of the nose looks relatively wide.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four developing third molars that are unerupted.  All other teeth are in position. Right sinus looks a little bit cloudy.  Turbinates appears moderately large.  Condylar head and necks appear elongated.  Vertical height of the mandibular body appears relatively short.  
Waters view shows that the bony nasal septum is deviated off towards the left side, but clinically the cartilage portion is slightly off to the right side.  Right nasal airway appears reasonably good, but the left one appears partially blocked.  Sinuses appear relatively clear, although there possibly could be a mucocele on the left medial side of the sinus.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have reasonably good morphology as best as can be seen.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  It is difficult to evaluate joint spaces.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  There appears to be good superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Kim has a significant Class III skeletal occlusal morphology.  Upper incisors are over angulated and lowers actually have a fairly good angulation relative to the mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway is excessively large measuring about almost 17 mm at the tongue level and almost 20 mm at the soft palate level.  Occlusal plane is moderately increased in angulation.  Kim has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm. 

Basic diagnoses for Kim would be as follows:    

Bilateral mandible condylar hyperplasia in the active growth phase.
Mandible prognathism. 
Vertical maxillary hypoplasia.  
Transverse maxillary hyperplasia. 
Class III occlusion. 
Reverse curve of Wilson in the lower arch. 
Accentuated curve of Wilson in the upper arch. 
Anterior cross bite.
Impacted third molars x4. 
Excessive angulation of maxillary incisors.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
OPTION #1
Align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally for interdental osteotomies.  
Align and level mandibular arch. 
OPTION#2 
a.   Extract maxillary 1st or 2nd bicuspids
Align and level maxillary arch.  Retract maxillary anterior teeth  and close the extraction spaces.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally for interdental osteotomies.  
Align and level mandibular arch. Try to expand the bicuspids and 1st molars buccally.
Continue to monitor facial growth and development to confirm active condylar hyperplasia. 
Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies to arrest disproportionate growth.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly approximately 10 to 12 mm.
Maxillary osteotomies to down graft the maxilla approximately 5 mm and upright the four incisors.  
4.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
