AARON LICHTER									02/12/2007

Aaron is 50 years old.   Aaron is basically a self-referral indirectly through Dr. Warner Young's office.  Aaron is not sure when his problem actually began but it was at least 20 years ago.  He had orthodontics when he was a teenager by Dr. Pruzansky in the Chicago area.  Apparently, as best as I can remember, he had a good bite at that time.  Over the years, however, he has noticed that his bite has continued to change and to open anteriorly as well as the lower jaw has become more retruded.  He reinitiated orthodontic treatment in July 2005.  He has had nightguards since about 1970 through to the current time. 

He currently takes Flonase and this is the only medication.

He has no problems with earaches.  He gets occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  The other joints that bother him include his fingers, hips and knees predominately.  He is allergic to erythromycin.  He does have low pressure.  He clenches and bruxes his teeth at night.  However, he has no TMJ pain, essentially no headaches except for an occasional one.  No pain around the head and neck area on the average day.  He rates his jaw function at 4, diet at 2, disability at 3.  In frontal view, Aaron has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably about 4 mm.  The maxilla appears to be retruded by at least 6 mm.  Chin is retruded by 20 to 25 mm.  Chin-neckline is very short and chin-neck angle is not well defined.  A lot of fullness in the submental area.  Aaron has a little bit of a Class II cuspid relationship by a couple of mm.  He is slightly Class II on the left side by 1 to 2 mm and on the right side probably fairly close to a Class I.  He has an anterior open bite of about 3 mm.  Oropharyngeal areas look healthy.  Uvula looks normal.  Soft palate appears somewhat elongated.  It appears that there is a decreased oropharyngeal airway.  Faucial pillars look relatively normal in width.  He has a somewhat deviated nasal septum.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Airway looks reasonably.  His luminal valves are somewhat constricted.  He has mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction.  He apparently does have snoring problems but it is not as severe with a CPAP as it was before.  He has some mild daytime somnolence.  He has severe sleep apnea problems though reasonably well controlled currently with the CPAP machine.  To palpation he has just some very mild tenderness over the left posterior neck.  Otherwise, no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly today.  Sometimes he does get some noises in his joints.  Maximal incisal opening is 42 mm.  Excursive movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  He has a slight tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1 mm.  Dental model analysis shows that there is a reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch with the lower incisors being at least 2 mm lower than their ideal position.  Maxillary arch also has increased curve of Spee by about 1 mm.  Second molars are elevated in the upper arch.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  He has large crowns on the mandibular first molars and maxillary first molars.  A lot of bone loss around the teeth particularly in the molar area bilaterally and also in the bicuspid area and to a lesser degree it appears around the incisors.  

AARON LICHTER				02/12/2007				Page 2

Difficult to evaluate the sinuses.  He has severe arthritis in both TMJs.  He has antegonial notching in the mandible.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  Bony septum appears straight.  The right turbinate appears a little bit enlarged and the right nasal airway just does not appear as open as the left side. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic and has lost volume.  Articular eminence is quite shallow indicative of some resorptive process that previously had occurred.  The condyle is postured forward in the fossa functioning down towards the inferior aspect of the articular eminence with increased posterior joint space.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite arthritic.  Articular eminence again is very shallow.  There appears to be decreased joint space between the condyle and the articular eminence and roof of the fossa.  There is an increased posterior joint space on this side as well.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles but both condyles appear quite arthritic.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that both the maxilla and mandible are retruded.  There is a skeletal Class II position although the occlusion is closer to Class I.  There is an anterior open bite of about 3 mm.  There is a significantly decreased posterior airway space of probably only 2 to 3 mm in some areas.  He has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  Upper lip supralabrale is significantly posterior to subnasale by probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Vertical height of the mandible appears elongated.  He does have a history of psoriasis.  It has affected his elbows and his knees.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ psoriatic arthritis.
Severe mandibular hypoplasia.
Maxillary hypoplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Apertognathia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Significant periodontal disease affecting most all the teeth.
Slight reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch.
Slight accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.
 Occluding primarily on just the second molars with the rest of the teeth essentially out of
             occlusion. 
 Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 
       11 mm.)
 Sleep apnea syndrome.



AARON LICHTER 				02/12/2007				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Detach the second molars from the archwire.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies with particular attention towards the left side where the roots are fairly close together.
Continue to align and level the mandibular arch.  Detach the second molars from the archwire.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 1 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing and try to elevate the incisal edges approximately 1 mm to help decrease the reverse curve of Spee.
CAT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and rotate it in a counterclockwise direction.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
