AMY LIEFER										12-01-04

Amy is 38 years old and referred by Dr. Duane Keller, 3929 Bayless Avenue, St. Louis, MO  63125-1437.

Patient History

Amy is in good health with no major medical problems. The only medications she takes are birth control pills. She has NO ALLERGIES to anything that she is aware.

Amy remembers back in college that if she would lie on her side she would have some pain and discomfort in and around the jaw and jaw joint areas, but it wasn’t until the past six to eight years that she began developing clicking and popping in her jaw joints. Actually through the years, if Amy would lie on her side and support her lower jaws and lateral aspect of the jaw area with her hand it would help relieve some of the pressure and discomfort in the jaw area. Only during the past year has she developed significant problems with inability to open wide. 

She had orthodontics in high school for one year. Two years ago her dentist, Dr. Holub made a splint for her. Dr. Holub has adjusted the splint, and her orthodontist also has adjusted the splint, but the splint made things worse. She was referred to Dr. Duane Keller, and in 09/2004 Dr. Keller made a new splint for Amy. This has improved her situation some, but she still continues to have significant headache, pain, and functional problems. She has had physical therapy x 4, but this has created no improvement for her.

The medications she takes include birth control pills and ibuprofen. She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is aware of nocturnal clenching. She probably clenches a little bit during the day but can control that much better than she can at night. There are fairly frequent times that she wakes up because of the clenching and discomfort it creates. She often or usually wakes up with pain in the morning. Exercise seems to aggravate her symptoms as well. She gets headaches almost on a daily basis in the frontal and temporal areas primarily that she rates on an average of about 7. She rates her average TMJ pain at about 6 and average daily pain at 4. She rates her jaw function and diet at 4 and disability at 5.

Patient Concerns

Headaches 
Pain in the jaw joints
Difficulties opening
Difficulties eating and chewing

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Amy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 22mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 3mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline. Chin might be just slightly to the left maybe 1 to 2 mm. 

In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is about 2 to 3 mm posterior to subnasale. Maxilla is probably about 4 to 5mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is extremely short and not well-defined. Chin may be about 15mm AP deficient. 

Intraorally Amy has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. A little mild crowding lower anterior arch. Attached gingiva appears to be adequate though quite thin around the left central incisor. In the upper arch, Amy has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Amy has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally of about 3 to 4 mm. She has an overjet of about 2mm. She has about a 0 anterior open bite relationship. Uvula appears moderately hyperplastic. Soft palate appears relatively normal although may be a little bit long. Faucial pillars appear relatively normal. 

Intranasally, septum is deviated off to the right side way posteriorly in the bony portion of the septum. Turbinates are relatively normal in size, and it appears that she has adequate airway on both sides although the left side appears a little bit larger than the right side. Probably no significant airway obstruction in the nose. She gives no significant history of snoring. She is tired during the day but records no other sleep apnea type of problems. 

To palpation, she has some mild tenderness of the TMJs but no other tenderness around the muscles of the head and neck area. 

On opening, she has a click in the left joint that is probably at about 5mmn of opening and closing click at about the same. Right joint seems to function relatively smoothly. As she opens, she deviates to the right about 5mm. Maximal incisal opening is 27mm, but she could open 24mm without significant discomfort. In excursive movements, she could move 6.5mm to the right and about 0.5mm at the most to the left. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Maxillary sinus appears clear. She has some flattening of the condyle on the right side. On the left side, she has fairly advanced arthritis in the left condyle. Left turbinate appears larger than the right one. 

Waters view shows the sinuses all appear to be relatively clear. Some deviation of the nasal septum. Turbinates appear moderate in size. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that actually has reasonable morphology. A little bit of flattening on the posterior head area. Articular eminence is moderately steep, but the length of the articular eminence is a little bit short in length. Could be a little bit of flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. Decreased posterior and superior joint space.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone some significant arthritic changes. There is some anterior beaking. Appears to be some loss of vertical height and anteroposterior volume. There is a pseudocyst in the head of the condyle. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep but not quite as steep as the opposite side.

On opening, there is some restricted translation of the left condyle, but there is major restriction in translation of the right TMJ where it moves forward no more than about 1 to 2 mm. Has an obvious closed lock situation on that right joint. 

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class II relationship. High occlusal plane angle. Decreased oropharyngeal airway of only about 4mm between the base of the tongue and the posterior pharyngeal wall and about the same at the soft palate level or even perhaps a little bit less. Has a Class II occlusal relationship as well.
Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations without reduction and a closed lock on the right side
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Class II end-on occlusion
High occlusal plane angle
Crowding, lower anterior arch
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1 to 2 mm
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4mm (normal 11mm)
Headaches
TMJ pain
Nocturnal clenching

Recommended Treatment

Medications
Klonopin 0.5mg tablets, disp. 30, 1 tablet q.h.s. to control nocturnal clenching

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies 
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth strength to eliminate the crowding and to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward

Periodontal evaluation of lower anterior arch and consider gingival grafting if indicated

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it posteriorly to decrease the occlusal plane angle
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Consider possible small augmentation genioplasty

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
 