DANIELLE LIMA									8/15/05

Danielle is 35 years old.  Previous surgery she has had includes gallbladder removal.  She has hypothyroidism and she takes Synthroid 0.75 mg per day.  Danielle's TMJ problems began she believes when she was around 20 years of age of unknown etiology.  She has had no treatment for her jaw problems.  Orthodontics began just 12 days ago.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Headaches.
Popping in the jaws.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Difficulty breathing through the nose.
Sleep apnea symptoms.
Jaw joint pain.

She has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus but no vertigo.  No other joints appear to bother.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing at night.  She gets headaches predominately in the frontal and temple area at a level of 7 and they occur probably 2 to 3 times per week.  She gets pain in the jaw joints about a level of 7 and average daily pain is around level 7.  She rates her jaw function at 8, diet at 7 and disability at 5.

In frontal view, Danielle has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 5.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is about 1 mm off towards the left side.  Mandibular dental midline is also about 2 mm off to the left side.  Chin is about 2 to 3 mm off to the left side.  Danielle has lip incompetence of about 15 mm.  Distance from lower lip to lower incisor is about 6 mm.  In profile view, the maxilla and subnasale is about 3 mm AP deficient but the upper lip supralabrale is in pretty good AP position.  The chin is retruded by probably 25 mm.  Chin neck-neckline is extremely short and chin-neck angle is not well defined.  She has elongated vertical height of the mandible that is significantly elongated.  The mentalis muscle is positioned probably a good 2 mm above the inferior border of the mandible.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has severe angle inclination of the bicuspids and molars.  They are all in significant lingual inclination with a severely increased curve of Wilson.  There is mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  There is adequate attached gingiva of the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch she has severe transverse deficiency in the upper arch extending from the lateral incisors posteriorly.  She has a simian arch form in the upper arch.  There are bilateral posterior crossbites and she has an anterior overjet of 10 mm.  She has an anterior open bite of probably 2 mm.  She is slightly greater than a full Class II malocclusion.  Intraorally, the tissues look healthy in the oropharynx area.  Uvula is normal in length as is the soft palate and the faucial pillars look relatively normal in width.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is relatively level.  Intranasally, the septum appears relatively straight at least in the front.  The turbinates are enlarged particularly in comparison to the transverse width of the nose which is somewhat constricted.  When she sleeps she is predominately a mouth breather.  To palpation, she has some moderate discomfort over the right 
DANIELLE LIMA				8/15/05				Page 2


TMJ and milder pain and discomfort over the styloid areas and left temporalis area.  On opening, she was able to elicit an audible pop on the right side about 35 mm of opening and about 30 mm of closing.  The left joint seems to function relatively smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 43 mm and excursive movements about 7 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the absence of maxillary right first molar and second and third molars are in position but with forward movement of the second and third decreasing the space between the second bicuspid and the second molar less than a width of a bicuspid.  On the left side of the arch it appears that the third molar is absent and the first and second molars are in position although there is some posterior tipping of the roots of the first molar.  In the lower arch the patient is missing the left third molar and on the lower right she has an impacted third molar and the first and second molars are maligned and actually the first molar appears hyper-erupted compared to the second bicuspid.  Significant space between the roots of the second bicuspid and first molar.  Cannot adequately evaluate sinuses or nasal airway.  Condyles appear to be relatively normal although joint space appears somewhat decreased.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that actually has fairly good morphology with just some slight anterior beaking perhaps.  Decreased superior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  Decreased joint space is indicative of displaced articular disc.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit more arthritic kind of changes perhaps with some sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  Decreased joint space superiorly.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  There may be some more beaking on this side compared to the other side but difficult to tell.  

On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles with the right one having a little bit more translatory ability than the left side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is relatively straight.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged with the right side being larger than the left side.  Transverse width of the nose is extremely narrow.  Maxillary arch is extremely narrow.  There is a significant anteroposterior overjet relationship.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a high occlusal plane angle and accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch and also to a lesser degree in the lower arch.  The overjet measures about 10 mm and there is probably a 2 mm anterior open bite.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate measures about 3 to 4 mm at the base of the tongue about 5 to 6 mm.  She has a reverse curve of the cervical vertebra.  Probably a head postured forward neck position.  Danielle does have a significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm and approximately actually 2-3/4 mm. 
DANIELLE LIMA				8/15/05				Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation in anteromedial direction with reduction on the right side and no reduction on the left side.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Anterior vertical mandibular excess.
AP microgenia. 
Severe transverse maxillary deficiency. 
Severe AP mandibular deficiency. 
Super Class II malocclusion.
A 10 mm overjet relationship.
Transverse deficiency of the lower arch.
Anterior open bite of about 3 mm.
Missing maxillary right first molar.
Mild crowding of upper arch.
Moderate crowding of lower arch.
High occlusal plane.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Sleep apnea symptoms.  
Predominately mouth breather. 
Bony impacted mandibular right third molar. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Surgery stage I.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.

Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Remove the residual spacing of the first molar on the right side by pulling the second and third molars forwards perhaps one at a time.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
Continue to align and level lower arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm but no more than 3 mm of tooth structure to help align the teeth and to help prevent from moving them any further forward.  Upright the molar teeth and bicuspids by tipping the occlusal surfaces buccally.  This will increase the crossbite most likely. 
DANIELLE LIMA   				8/15/05				Page 4


Surgery stage II.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla, move it superiorly, correct the occlusal plane angulation and correct transverse discrepancies.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.  
Vertical reduction genioplasty with an inferior border ostectomy.
Augmentation genioplasty with HTR implant.  
Surgical removal of impacted mandibular right third molar.
Partial turbinectomies.

 Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 