DANIEL LIN										07/01/2010

Daniel is 23 years old and just graduated from Texas A&M.  Primary concerns he has are:

Difficulties breathing through the nose. 
Postnasal drip.
Teeth do not fit together.

In frontal view, Daniel has fairly good balance in the middle and upper third face.  He has some asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is 26 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm to the right.  Chin is probably about 4 to 5 mm to the right.  Daniel has a lip incompetence of almost 10 mm.  Daniel has perhaps some slight AP deficiency in the maxilla but 10 mm at subnasale area.  Chin appears to retruded about 12 to 15 mm.  Chin neckline is short, however, the chin neck angle looks reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, Daniel has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  He has good attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship by about -5 mm on the left side and almost a Class I on the right side.  He has an anterior cross bite and a right posterior cross bite.  He has a 1 mm anterior open bite.  He has asymmetry in the lower arch with the right cuspid being 3 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch, the right cuspid is about 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  He has a posterior yaw in the occlusion with the posterior maxilla and mandible being 2 mm to the left.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.  As Daniel shifts his mandible to the left about 3 mm, it improves his facial symmetry, although he is still full in the left side of the face.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  He does have a bifed uvula.  His tonsils are moderately enlarged.  This affects the fascial pillars to a certain extent making them a little bit narrow.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear enlarged and appear to cause some nasal airway obstruction.

He is now aware of snoring, but has some daytime tiredness, but is not aware of sleep apnea where he wakes up at night unable to catch his breath, although this has happened to him in the past.  He is predominantly a mouth breather, daytime and nighttime.  To palpation, he has some minimal tenderness over the TMJs but not elsewhere.  On opening, his joints function for the most part fairly smoothly.  He does subluxate his condyles in wide opening.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  He has got what appear to be 3 x 3 retainers in both arches.  The sinuses look fairly clear.  
Coronal view shows that there is a small mucous retention cyst in the maxilla right sinus.  The turbinates appear enlarged, both the inferior and middle turbinates.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  There is some slight thickening of the mucosal lining in the left maxillary sinus.

Axial view shows that the septum may be deviated just a little bit off towards the right side.  The right nasal airway appears to be obliterated with the turbinate touching against the septum.  The left turbinate is moderately enlarged.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears elongated vertically.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 3 to 3 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a similar morphology to the other side.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head.  Joint space may be slightly decreased vertically and perhaps posteriorly a little bit but not too bad. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is decreased joint space particularly anteriorly.  More medially, the condyle is a little bit more flattened on the anterior aspect.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Daniel has some slight decreased AP maxillary projection and anterior vertical maxillary excess.  The mandible appears somewhat prognathic.  The lip incompetence is seen to equal about 8 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Daniel would be as follows:

Anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia and transverse hypoplasia.
Mandibular deviated prognathism off towards the right side. 
Posterior yaw of the maxilla and mandible with it being rotated to the left about 4 or 5 mm.
Facial asymmetry with the left side of the face more prominent transversely than the right side. 
Class III end-on occlusion on the left side and close to Class I occlusion on the right side.  
Anterior and right posterior cross bite.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
External nasal deformity.
AP microgenia but anterior mandibular vertical hyperplasia.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level the maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid 			roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
	b.	Align and level the mandibular arch.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible anteriorly towards 			the left about 3 mm, but posteriorly shift it to the right 2 or 3 mm.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly, advance slightly, and 			expand.
	c.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to vertically reduce but AP augment 			the chin.
	d.	Bilateral partial turbinectomies. 
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
