AUTUMN LINDNER									06/23/2010

Autumn is 14 years old, birth date is 09/01/1985.  She is referred by Gilbert T. Selkin, MD DMD, 5044 Tennyson Parkway, Suite A, Plano, TX 75024, telephone #927-378-3569 and fax is #972-378-3703.  Autumn’s TMJ problems began about 3 months ago when she yawned.  Since then, she has had pain problems.  She had previously had orthodontics from 2006 to 2008.  Other treatment that Autumn has had so far has just been muscle relaxants to try to help her sleep at night and help her jaws relax at night.  Her pain is usually worse when she talks for a while or eats.  She takes Doryx and a muscle relaxer.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 5, diet at 5, disability at 2.  She gets headaches predominantly on the right side in the temporal area at about a level of 3.  Her problems are predominantly on the right side.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching and bruxism.  

In frontal view, Autumn has good facial symmetry and balance.  She has normal upper lip length of about 20 mm and upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all fairly well aligned with each other.  In profile view, she has good facial balance.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth and upper teeth back through the second molars.  She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship and just a slight Class II tendency.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  To palpation, she has no pain around the head and neck area.  Joints function smoothly.  Maximal opening is 29 mm.  On opening, she deviates to the right side about 3 to 4 mm.  Excursion movements to the right 9 mm, to the left 4.5 mm.  Transversely, she does have a cant in occlusal plan with the right side being about 2 mm higher than the left side.  Chin is shifted to the right side about 3 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars that are developing but unerupted.  The sinuses are clear.  The right condyle appears smaller in size than the left one.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has good morphology and good joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is narrow anteroposteriorly and appears to have lost some vertical height.  The posterior joint space is decreased and the anterior joint space is increased.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width and good joint space surrounding the condylar head.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width.  Vertical joint space appears somewhat decreased.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she good facial balance and harmony.  

Coronal view shows that the left turbinate is quite large and appears to obliterate the airway.  The septum is reasonably straight.  The sinuses are clear.  The turbinate is also quite large on the left side.   Right turbinate has a mild enlargement.

Axial view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side.  The left turbinate is quite large and appears to block most of the airway.   On the right side, the turbinate is more reasonable size and appears to be a passable airway.  The sinuses are clear.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated just slightly off to the left side.  The turbinate, particularly on the left side, is fairly good size.  The right side appears more normal.  

Basic diagnoses for Autumn would be as follows:

Right TMJ articular disc dislocation without reduction.
Right mandibular hyperplasia.
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.
Impacted third molars x4.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1. 	Presurgical orthodontics:  Apply orthodontic appliances to the maxillary and mandibular 	teeth.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
	b.	Right mandibular ramus osteotomy to maintain occlusion and create space in the 			joint to accommodate the articular disc. 
	c.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4. 
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 