STEVE LINDLEY									05/23/2010

Steve is 61 years old and a self-referral.  On April 27, 2010, Steve went to Baylor College of Dentistry for a tooth extraction of the mandibular right second molar.  The tooth was removed.  During the process, he felt a pop in his left TMJ that radiated into his ear canal and through his face.  The next day his face swelled up and he came back in and had to have the area lanced as there was apparently an infection that occurred.  He was placed on antibiotics for 11 days.  The area appears well healed now without any residual evidence of infection; however, he continues to have problems with the left jaw joint.  He has popping the left jaw joint, limited opening, and the mandible deviates towards the left side on opening approximately 4 mm.  He has developed “migraine” headaches since the incident.  These headaches are daily and occur in the left frontal and temporal area at a level of 6.  He rates his normal TMJ pain at 3, but with jaw function it escalates to 7.  Average daily pain is at 5.  Jaw function, diet, and disability are all at 6.  Maximal incisal opening is 37 mm, but opening without pain 30 mm.  The excursion movement to the right 4.5 mm, to the left 9 mm.  On opening, the right joint functions smoothly, but the left joint has a soft click at about 15 mm of opening and a more prominent click at 10 mm of closing.  On excursion, however, there is a consistent click in the left TMJ area.  To palpation, he just has some mild tenderness over the left medial pterygoid area.  He takes no medications.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  No other joints bother him.  He does get pain that goes down into his left neck and shoulder area.  He wakes up stiff and sore in the mornings, but the pain is worse when eating.  He is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime.  In profile, Steve has a retruded maxilla and mandible and AP microgenia.  He is absent the chin neckline and angle.  He has basically a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being about 3 or 4 mm Class I on the right side and just slight Class II by maybe 2 mm on the left side.  He has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm.  He is missing his mandibular left second molar, mandibular right first molar with the second and third molars drifted forward and the missing the rest of the third molars.  He has crowns on a few of the maxillary posterior teeth.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that he is missing the mandibular left second and third molar, maxillary left third molar, mandibular right first molar with the second and third molars drifted forward, and the maxillary right third molar.  Sinuses look relatively healthy.  He does have arthritis in both of his TMJ joint space.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates are relatively normal in size.  He does have a septal spur off to the left side of the nose. 

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is deviated off towards the right side anteriorly and then towards the left side at the spur area.  The sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are moderate in size. 
Left TMJ sagittal view shows that he has anterior beaking present, but appears to have good vertical joint space.  There is some sclerosis on the head of the condyle and also on the articular eminence and posterior wall of the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Right TMJ shows some anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is good superior and posterior joint space.  The joint space adjacent to the articular eminence appears somewhat narrowed.

Left TMJ coronal view shows that there is good joint space throughout the joint medially, superiorly, and at the lateral rim.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of peaking of the condylar head, but appears to be good joint space through the joint.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Steve has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  oropharyngeal airway surprisingly is better than anticipated with about a 7 mm space at the soft palate level and almost 9 at the base of the gone. 

Basic diagnoses for Steve would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis.
Left TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Surgery:
1.	Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
2.	Possible left mandibular ramus osteotomy with bone plate and screw stabilization. 
3.	Application of arch bars. 

I feel this treatment plan will get Steve the best treatment outcome.  At this time, he wants to wait and see how things progress for him.  He is to keep me informed of his progress.