DAVID LINDSAY									02/09/2010

David is 40 years old and referred by Dr. Michael Arvystas, 24 Washington Square North, New York City, New York 10011.  Primary concern that David has is that his posterior teeth do not touch.  It has been this way as long as he can remember.  He did see an orthodontist when he was a lot younger and they suggested he might need some jaw surgery in order to get everything to fit together properly.  David apparently does not have any TMJ issues.  He has no difficulties with headaches, no TMJ pain.  He rates his average pain around the head and neck area around 1, jaw function, diet and disability at 1.  The only medicines he takes are vitamins.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo, but does have some slight hearing loss.  Other joints that bother him includes her shoulders, right wrist, and right hip.  He believes he probably occasionally clenches at night time.  

CLINICAL EVALUATION.  In frontal view, David has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  He has some slight increased vertical height on the right side maybe 2-3 mm.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is -5 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The maxillary midline is about a 1 mm off to the left side.  The chin also appears to be pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 4-5 mm.  The mandible is retruded about 10-12 mm when he opens his jaws up to where his lips just start to separate.  The chin may be back about 6 mm in that position.  When Dave bites together, his upper lip fills out a little bit and his chin comes further forward.  Intraorally, Dave has all his lower teeth back through the second molars present.  He has some spacing but he has small lower teeth particularly in the bicuspid and central incisor area.  The cuspids also appear somewhat small.  He has an extreme accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.  He has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  He has space between the lower cuspids and first bicuspids, being a little bit greater on the left side than the right side.  In the upper arch, he has all of his upper teeth back through the second molars.  The teeth are short in vertical length.  He is in full appliances.  He has a maxillary expander device in the palate.  Dave hits predominantly on his incisors, but the rest of teeth appear to be out of occlusion.  Dave has bilateral 8 mm open bites in the molar area.  The second molars elevate somewhat, although possibly due to bracket placement.  The lower first molars may be anklyosed.  He has about a 2 to 3 mm Class II cuspid relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  The septum may be deviated anteriorly off to the right side a little bit.  There may be some mild nasal airway obstruction.  The incisal opening is 67 mm.  The excursion movement to the right 15 mm and the left 17 mm.  He has no tenderness around the head and neck area and joints function smoothly.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of impacted maxillary third molars, but the rest of the teeth are all erupted and present.  There is some spacing around some of the upper teeth.  In the lower arch, he is missing the third molars, but has the rest of the teeth present.  There is spacing between a number of the lower teeth, both in the bicuspid area and in the incisor area.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  

Left TMJ and right TMJ tomograms show the condyles have fairly good morphology with a little bit of a hockey stick shape to them.  There appears to be good joint space superiorly and posteriorly.  

Coronal views show likewise that the condyles have fairly good morphology and there is good joint space present.   Coronal view shows that the turbinates are fairly large.   The bony septum is actually reasonably straight.  The sinuses appear fairly clear.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear, but the turbinates appear fairly large and appear to fill a good portion of the nasal airway.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla is vertically and anteriorly hypoplastic.  The mandible also is somewhat AP hypoplastic, but is over closed and it is in the current position that the dental alveolus appears to be AP hypoplastic.  He has bilateral posterior open bites.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 8 mm at the soft palate level and 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  Maxillary occlusal plane appears that it may be slightly increased and the mandible occlusal plane might have a slight reverse inclination to it.  Chin is strong compared to the AP position of the dental alveolus.  

Basic diagnoses for Dave would be as follows:

Maxillary AP and posterior vertical as well as some slight transverse hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP macrogenia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Bony anklyosis of the following teeth:  maxillary right cuspid, bicuspids, and molars as well as the left second bicuspid and molars and the mandibular right second bicuspid and molars as well as the left second bicuspid and molars.
Bilateral posterior open bites of about 7-8 mm.
Impacted maxillary third molars x2.
Submerged mandibular first molars bilaterally.
Spacing between the lower anterior teeth and back through to the first molars.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Tip maxillary central and lateral 			incisors forward to increase the angulation and open up 1 to 2 mm of space in 			between the upper cuspids and lateral incisors. 
	b.	Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Take the first molars out of the arch 			wires and try to elevate the second bicuspids (if they are not found to be 				ankylosed).  Try to close a little bit more of the anterior spacing if possible. 
c.	Consider decreasing the size of the crown on the mandibular right second molar as 		it is hyper-erupted compared to the first molar unless it orthodontically can be 			depressed.  Otherwise, reduce the size of the crown and place a temporary crown 			on it to level it a little bit better with the first molar.  This should help get a better 			fit at the time of surgery.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies to counterclockwise rotate the maxilla downward and 		to down graft the anterior maxilla approximately 5-6 mm, but also 
                        advance it about 5-6 mm in multiple segments. 
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a clockwise 			direction. 
	c.	Consider possible AP reduction genioplasty.
	d.	Surgical removal of impacted maxillary third molars x2.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
4.	Periodontal surgery to expose more of the anterior maxillary crowns.
5.	Restorative dentistry to place crowns on the posterior teeth, particularly the mandibular 	first molars and perhaps the second bicuspids to get them into occlusion as well as to 	reconstruct the rest of his arches including veneers or crowns on the four incisors to 	elongate them slightly more.  