CECILIA LING								01/03/2012

Cecilia is 40 years old, birth date 07/08/1971.  Date of evaluation is 01/03/2012.  I evaluated Cecilia at the Shanghai Hundred Centuries Hotel in Shanghai, China.  By history, Cecilia began orthodontics in 2008 and finished in 2010.  On 07/19/2009, she underwent orthognathic surgery for maxillary osteotomies, bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies, and a bony chin augmentation.  Primary concerns that Cecilia has are as follows:

Upper jaw is loose and when she bites down it moves upwards.
Does not like her facial appearance because when she smiles the corners of her mouth go downward, her nose has become flatter, and she feels her nose has been destroyed by the surgery.
Muscles around the mouth are tense and the face looks unnatural.
She appears much older than before the surgery.
Does not show any of her upper teeth when her lips are relaxed and it appears that she is toothless.  
Difficulties eating and chewing requiring an extremely soft to puree type of diet.
Pain in the upper jaw.

Clinical evaluation shows that the upper lip length is 22 mm and the tooth lip relationship is -0.35 mm.  The right side of the face is 3 to 4 mm more prominent at the right mandibular angle than the left side.  She appears to have a posterior yaw with the maxillary and mandibular posterior teeth being 2 to 3 mm to the right.  At point A, she appears deficient by about 2 mm, but at supralabrale she appears very prominent by 3 to 4 mm.  the chin is deficient by 4 to 5 mm.  She has lower lip ptosis and shows 8 mm of her lower incisor tip to her lip.  When she bites down, there is mobility of the maxilla where it meets superiorly probably about at least 2 to 3 mm.  She is basically a Class I occlusal relationship with a 3 mm anterior deep bite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal with a normal uvula, soft palate, fascial pillars and tonsils.  She is not aware of snoring, but does have some mild daytime somnolence and perhaps some mild sleep apnea.  She is a mouth breather at nighttime.  She rates her TMJ pain at 0, average daily pain at 4 related primarily to the upper jaw.  She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 8, disability at 6.  The incisal opening is 37 mm and excursion movements are 5 mm in each direction.  TMJ joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  To palpation, she has some very minimal tenderness over the masseter muscles.  She currently takes no medications.  She gets earaches one to two times per month with occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  She has no hearing loss and no other joint problems.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and this may have been contributory to her mobility.  Radiographs include pre and postsurgical lateral cephalograms and coronal views.  There is no Panorex.  It appears that there were four bone plates in the maxilla and it is difficult to tell how many screws in each bone plate.  There appear to be three screws in the mandibular ramus in each side as well as a screw through the inferior border of the mandible to stabilize the genioplasty.  After surgery, the inferior borders are at different vertical levels.  However, this could lead to some mild rotation or tipping of the head.  She may have a hypertrophied turbinate in the right side of the nose.  In profile, she has prominence of the upper lip where it appears quite protrusive.  Point A appears somewhat deficient.  Chin is slightly AP deficient as well by about 4 to 5 mm.  She has lower lip ptosis where the lower lip is about 8 mm lower than the lower incisors.  She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with a 3 mm anterior deep bite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  She does not really have any significant problems breathing through the nose except in the winter when it is cold it gives an unusual sensation in the nose from the cold air, but also in the summer she gets a feeling of sort of a sour feeling when she breathes through her nose as well.  She is not sure if she snores at night or not.  She has some mild daytime tiredness.  She says sometimes she wakes up unable to catch her breath, but this was more of a problem prior to the surgery.  She sleeps pretty well at  night.  She thinks at night she may breathe some through her mouth.  To palpation, she does have some mild tenderness over the masseter muscles, but no other tenderness around the head and neck area.  As she bites down, the maxilla moves upwards close to 2 mm.  There is fairly good mobility of the maxilla.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  The incisal opening is 37 mm and excursion movements are about 5 mm in each direction.

Dental model analysis shows on the right side in the maxilla she is missing the third molar and on the left side she is missing the cuspid, but has a first bicuspid in the cuspid position and has the rest of her teeth back through the third molar.  In the lower arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has very mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.  She appears to have good attached gingiva.  She seems to fit into a fairly good occlusal relationship.  She is basically a Class I cuspid with a just a slight Class II tendency on the right side by about 2 mm, but on the left side she is Class I cuspid and Class II molar.  

Basic diagnoses for Cecilia would be as follows:

Previous orthognathic surgery to include maxillary Le Fort I osteotomy, bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies, and genioplasty.
Maxillary nonunion.
Mandibular retrognathia.
Lower lip ptosis.  
History of clenching and bruxism.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics:  Apply maxillary and mandibular orthodontic 	appliances.  
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Maxillary osteotomies to down graft it approximately 5 mm and 				posteriorly position in the incisors about 4 mm.  
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a 	counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Resuspend mentalis muscles.  
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 