JAY LISENBY									01/28/2008

Jay is 23 years old, referred by Dr. Farhad Moshiri.  Only previous surgery was for wisdom teeth extraction x4 in June 2006.  Jay developed Type 1 diabetes about 5 years ago.  Currently takes the following medications:  

NovoLog insulin--breakfast 7 units, lunch 12 units, supper 12 units +/- sliding scale.  
Lantus insulin at bedtime 12 units. 
Avapro.
Baby aspirin 1 per day.

Primary concerns that Jay has include the following:

Improper jaw alignment.
Clicking sounds in the left jaw joint.

Jay’s problems began when he was about 18 years of age in about 2003 of unknown etiology.  He was aware that his left jaw joint began clicking and popping.  He began orthodontic treatment in 2006.  

Jay denies headaches, TMJ pain, pain around the head and neck area, earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, and other joint problems.  He rates his jaw function at 1, diet at 0, disability at 0.  In frontal view, Jay has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper teeth lip relationship is about 3.5 to 4 mm.  The maxillary midline is about 2 mm off towards the left side.  The mandibular midline is somewhat toward the facial midline, but the chin is off to the left side about 2 mm.  In the profile view, Jay has some infraorbital deficiency by 5 to 6 mm and probably about 4 mm in the maxilla.  His chin appears a little bit strong, but actual chin neck length and angle actually look fairly good.  Intraorally, Jay has all of his lower teeth back to the second molars present.  The teeth are nicely aligned and level.  A little thin on the attached gingiva around the mandibular left central incisor, but the other teeth appear to be adequate.  In the upper arch, he has all his teeth back to the second molars present.  Jay has a full Class III cuspid relationship with an anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.  Jay is missing the mandibular right lateral incisor.  The right eye is about 2 mm higher than the left eye.  Some slight asymmetry in the upper arch with the left cuspid about 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look healthy, but he does have extremely large tonsils.  Intranasally, septum appears relatively straight.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  Jay does state he tends to breathe through his mouth at night when he sleeps.  Jay has no pain to palpation on the head and neck area.  On opening, he does have a definite click in the left joint at about 20 mm of opening and closing click at 15 mm.  He has about 0.5 mm of reverse overbite.  With the absence of mandibular right lateral incisor, there is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 5 mm with the lower arch being smaller than the upper arch.

On radiographic evaluation, Panorex shows the absence of all 4th and 3rd molars and the mandibular right incisor. Difficult to evaluate condyles and sinuses in this radiograph.  Left TMJ tomogram shows the condyle appears a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly and there is a decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep and somewhat 
elongated.  Increased anterior joint space is present.  Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is narrow anteroposteriorly and there is a decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is not quite as steep.  I feel there is fairly good translation of both condyles with them coming down towards the inferior aspect of the articular eminence.  Waters view shows that right sinus looks a little bit more cloudy than the left side.  Turbinates appear quite large.  There is some deviation of the nasal septum in the bony area.  A maxillary midline shift off towards the left side is noted.  Lateral cephalogram radiograph shows a skeletal and occlusal Class III skeletal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal.  Infraorbital areas appear somewhat hypoplastic.

DIAGNOSES:
Mandibular prognathism.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Slight vertical maxillary excess.
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Hypertrophied turbinates causing partial nasal airway obstruction.
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.
Class III occlusion.
Bilateral infraorbital hypoplasia (the patient is not interested in treating this aspect).
Extrusion of maxillary left second molar.
Periodontal concerns especially with the mandibular right central incisor with lack of attached gingiva. 

Treatment plan for Jay would be as follows:
Periodontal evaluation and possible gingival grafting around mandibular right central incisor.
Surgery Stage 1.
a.  	Placement of mandibular distraction device on the lower arch.
b. 	Midline vertical osteotomy of the mandible.
c.  	Initiation of distraction 7 days post surgery with expansion to open the space 
approximately 5 mm.
      3.   Presurgical Orthodontics.
a.  	Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Tip the cuspid roots distally and 
lateral roots mesially to make room for interdental osteotomies. Left side is a little 
tight currently.  Try to intrude the maxillary left second molar to help level the 
occlusion.
b.  	Align level of the lower arch.  Place a pontic tooth in the distraction space so as to    
maintain that spacing. 
     4.   Surgery Stage 2.
	a.  	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning using Mitek anchors.
	b. 	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand, advance, and correct any 
asymmetries.
	c.  	Bilateral mandibular osteotomies to set the mandible backwards.
	d.  	Partial turbinectomies.


     5.  	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
	a.   	Placement of osteointegrated implant in mandibular central incisor 
space.
	b.  	Restorative dentistry to place a crown on the dental implant.