REBECCA LITVIN								04/06/2011

Rebecca is 31 years old and referred by Dr. Jim Tyree, 901 S. Mopac Expressway, Building 2, Suite 395, Austin, TX 78746, telephone #512-328-4411.

Rebecca has had TMJ problems since about the age of 19 or so years old.  It began in about 2000.  She was involved in a motor vehicle accident in 1996 and she also has a long history of clenching and bruxism.  She had orthodontics from the age of 10 to 14.  She has had splints almost continuously since 2000 until present and this included 3 splints, although she has not worn them continuously.  She also has had acupuncture in 2001.

Rebecca has constant headaches at a level of 6 in the frontal and temporal area and these can escalate to 8.  She has TMJ pain at a level of 8 that can escalate to 10.  Average daily pain is at 8, jaw function, diet and disability at 7.  She gets occasional earaches, tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her right shoulder.  She had scoliosis and wore a back brace when she was younger.  She is aware of clenching her teeth at nighttime, but not so much during the day.  She takes the following medications:

Yaz.
Prozac 20 mg q.d.
Dolobid 1 to 2 tablets per day.
Advil p.r.n. 

In frontal view, Rebecca has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is probably about -2.  The maxillary midline and mandibular dental midline are fairly aligned with the facial midline.  The chin may be just slightly to the right but not too significant, maybe 2 mm.  In profile view, she has fairly good maxillary projection and chin may be just slightly deficient maybe by about 4 to 5 mm.  Intraorally, Rebecca has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch, but has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with about a 3.5 mm deep bite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  To palpation, Rebecca has got high moderate pain over the temporalis muscles and moderate pain over the masseters, right TMJ, shoulder area, and milder tenderness over the posterior neck and left TMJ.  On opening, she has some crepitus in the right joint.  In the left joint, she has a pop at 35 mm of opening and closing at 5 mm.  The incisal opening is about 44 mm, opening without significant discomfort about 18 mm.  The excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction, but that was painful for her.  


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but all the rest of the teeth are present with virtually no restorations.  The sinuses look reasonably good.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  It is difficult to evaluate the TMJs.  

Coronal view shows that she has a little bit of a deviated septum off to the right side in the bony septal area.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  Sinuses are relatively clear.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates appear to be just slightly enlarged, but not too significant.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little bit arthritic with some sclerosis on the head of the condyle and some slight anterior beaking.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination, but is relatively short in vertical height.  There is decreased posterior joint space. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat arthritic and out laterally there is some peaking of the condyle.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow.  There is decreased posterior joint space, but significantly increased anterior joint space.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is some lateral extension of the lateral pole of the condyle and there is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic and appears to have lost some vertical volume.  There is decreased superior and particularly lateral joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  

Rebecca has some slight transverse deficiency in the right side being probably about 2 to 3 mm transversely deficient on the right side.  Rebecca has a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 to 2 mm higher than the left side.  The left mandibular cuspid is about 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  In the upper arch, the left cuspid is 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  Rebecca may have just a slight yaw in the maxillary and mandibular posterior area being maybe about 2 mm off towards the left side.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a moderately high occlusal plane angle with some slight AP chin hypoplasia.  Oropharyngeal airway however is reasonably good. 

Basic diagnoses for Rebecca would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction on the left side, but without reduction on the right side and greater deformation of the disc on the right side.
Mandibular hyperplasia.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics:  Place appliances on maxillary and mandibular arches.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor. 
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone plate and screw 				stabilization.
	c.	Placement of arch bars if the patient elects not to have orthodontic 				treatment.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

 