CHARLENE LIVERETT								03/26/2007

Charlene is 42 years old and referred by Dr. Frank Higginbottom.  She has had 4 jaw surgeries and 2 C-sections as well as had her tonsils removed.  The only medication she takes is Aleve 600 mg b.i.d.  Charlene first developed TMJ problems when she was about 17 years of unknown etiology.  She initially tried to be managed orthodontically and so she wore braces from 1983 to 1985.  She had some teeth extracted.  In 1985 she began her surgical odyssey.  She does not remember the dates but the procedures performed include:
Ligament shortening in the left TMJ.
Proplast Teflon IPI into the left TMJ.
Right TMJ Christensen total joint prostheses.
Left TMJ Christensen total joint prostheses.
Redo of the left TMJ Christensen total joint prostheses with placement of a metal-on-metal articulation. (The initial Christensen devices were acrylic on metal articulations.)  
Physical therapy for her jaws. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS: 
Pain on left side of face and jaw.
Swelling on the left side of face and jaw area.
Decreased jaw function.

Charlene reports no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  She has problems with all of her joints in reference to ligamentous structures and it is possible that she may have Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.  However, she has never been tested to verify that.  She has protein-S deficiency.  The protein-S deficiency causes clotting hypercoagulability.  Charlene states that when she takes her first bite of food she gets intense pain in the left side of the face likely related to the parotid gland.  It immediately goes away.

She rates her average daily TMJ pain at 7 but with jaw use or chewing, it escalates to 10.  Average daily pain is about a level of 3.  She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 8.  She gets headaches about twice a month that are related to her menstrual cycles, therefore are likely hormonal related.  If she takes her Maxalt she can control them fairly well and they just get to a level of 4.  However, at the worst, they get to a level of 10.  She does have some left frontal nerve deficiency related to her previous surgeries.  She has a little bit of numbness or decreased sensation to the lower left lip and chin area.  

In frontal view, Charlene has a little bit of increased fullness in the right side of the face.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm.  Maxillary midline and chin midline are pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about a 1.5 mm to the left.  Charlene has fairly significant head postured forward neck position and facial profile is fairly good balance with maybe just some slight AP deficiency in the mandible.  Intraorally, she is missing mandibular right first molar.  She has some crowding in the lower anterior arch.  There is adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she is missing first bicuspids.  Basically she has a Class I cuspid relationship with about a 4 mm anterior deep bite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy but she has asymmetry in the soft palate with the uvula and faucial pillar being shifted off towards the left side.  
CHARLENE LIVERETT			03/26/2007				Page 2

Intranasally, airway looks fairly good.  Right turbinate is slightly enlarged compared to the left one but it still appears to be adequate functional airway.  She reports occasional snoring.  She has some mild to moderate daytime somnolence but says it is because she does not get enough sleep because she has too much to do.  She does not have any sleep apnea considerations.   Maxilla may be about 3 to 4 mm AP deficient and chin may be 8 to 10 mm AP deficient.  Chin-neckline is not well defined.  To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the left TMJ, moderate pain over the left styloid area and mild pain over the right TMJ and left masseter area.  On opening, she has a clicking glitch kind of noise in the left TMJ.  Maximal opening is about 39 mm.  Opening without significant discomfort is 27 mm.  Excursive movements are less than ½ mm in each direction.  She has sharp pain in and around the right jaw joint area that then comes forward on the left side into her upper jaw and lip area and down in to her lower jaw and under her tongue.  It is like a shock initially but then sometimes the pain will linger for quite some time.  She has had to go to the emergency room at times because the pain was so intense.  

The swelling that Charlene is aware of is occurring in the left submandibular area, not quite so much in the lateral aspect.  She says this just occurred in the last 4 to 5 months.  It is likely related to the metal-on-metal articulations of the Christensen prostheses and the metalosis thus produced.  The left side may be exacerbated somewhat because of having Proplast Teflon on that left side and not on the right side.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of a mandibular left first molar, maxillary first bicuspids and all 4 third molars.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  She has bilateral Christensen prostheses with metal-on-metal articulations.  

Waters view shows that her sinuses are relatively clear.  Bony nasal septum may be a little bit deviated.  The bilateral metal-on-metal Christensen prostheses are seen.  It appears there may be about 6 screws holding each one in place relative to the mandibular component.  The maxillary component may have as many as 4 screws holding each side in.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that she has a Christensen metal-on-metal articulating prosthesis.  There are 5 empty holes with 6 screws in place.  

Left TMJ prosthesis only has 5 screws in place.  Does show metal-on-metal Christensen prosthesis.  On opening there appears to be some rotational movement.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the left maxilla and mandible do appear somewhat retruded.  Oropharyngeal airway appears decreased though cannot see the soft palate level but the base of the tongue appears to be fairly constricted.  She has a significant curvature in the cervical spine. 




CHARLENE LIVERETT			03/26/2007				Page 3

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ failed Christensen total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ metalosis from Christensen prostheses.
Severe TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Sleep apnea symptoms (snoring, unable to sleep on back, daytime somnolence.)
Previously extracted maxillary first bicuspids, missing mandibular right first molar and all 4 third molars.
Anterior deep bite.
Moderately high occlusal plane angulation.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider slenderizing lower anterior teeth to keep from flaring them too far forward.  
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and downgraft the posterior aspect.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to replace the missing mandibular right first molar by either implant and crown or 3-unit bridge. 