ALEJANDRO LLAMAS							12/07/2011

Alex is 16 years old.  Birth date 02/16/1995.  He was referred here by Dr. Christine Porter-Ellis, 8100 Lomo Alto Drive #204, Dallas, TX 75225, phone #214-363-8893, an orthodontist over at the medical school.  Alex’s TMJ problems began when he was about 15 of unknown etiology.  He has had orthodontics for the first phase from the age of 12 to 14 and they were put back on when he was 15 and he currently has the devices on.

Alex has no problems with headaches.  He rates his TMJ pain at 2, facial pain and headaches at 0, jaw function at 3, diet at 1, disability at 3.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss and no other joints bother him.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxing at night.  He breathes well through his nose and does not snore but does have some mild daytime tiredness.  

Primary concerns that Alex has at this time include the following:

Jaws get tight after chewing.
Left side gets locks and has to be maneuvered to open.
Right side gets locked as well. 
Pain in the left TMJ area.

In frontal view, Alex has good facial symmetry and balance.  He has a slight masseteric hyperplasia on the left side.  Upper lip length is about 26 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 5 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline.  In profile view, he has just some slight hypoplasia in the infraorbital area.  The maxilla is AP deficient by probably about 3 to 4 mm.  The chin is retruded about 18 mm and chin neckline is extremely short, although the chin neck angle is well defined.  Intraorally, Alex has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  The teeth appear to be nicely aligned and leveled.  He has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, Alex has all of his teeth back through the second molars present.  He has about a 2 mm vertical over bite.  He has a Class I cuspid relationship with just a slight open bite in the left cuspid-bicuspid area.  Arches are fairly level transversely.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the septum appears to be deviated significantly off to the left side and appears to obstruct against the left turbinate which is moderately enlarged.  The right side airway appears fairly open.  To palpation, Alex has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  His maximal incisal opening is 34 mm with excursion movement to the right 5 mm and to the left 7 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars that may be still soft tissue impacted or could possibly be just slightly erupted through in the mandible.  The sinuses appear clear.  The septum is deviated significantly off towards the left side.  Difficult to evaluate the joints.  

Coronal view shows that the bony septum posteriorly is fairly straight.  Left inferior and middle turbinates are quite enlarged and the right side appears relatively normal in size.  Sinuses appear relatively clear with just some very slight thickening of the sinus membrane in the left sinus floor.  

Axial view shows that the nasal septum anteriorly is deviated significantly off to the left side almost against the lateral nasal wall area.  The turbinate is moderately enlarged on that side and, with the septal deviation and spur sticking off the left side as well as the enlarged turbinate, the left side of the nose appears to be significantly obstructed.  The right side appears wide open.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the top of the condyle and there is a little bit of anterior beaking present.  The joint space may be slightly narrowed posteriorly.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination but relatively short in vertical height.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit better quality of bone across the top of the condyle.  There is anterior beaking present.  The joint space may be slightly decreased.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  It is a little bit longer in length than the left side.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that does not appear to have real strong cortical bone across the top of the condyle.  There is decreased vertical and lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 to 5 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla is AP and posterior vertical deficient, but the maxilla is vertically elongated.  The mandible is retruded.  Occlusal plane angulation is moderately steep.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5.5 mm at the soft palate level and about 7.5 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnoses for Alex would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ anteriorly displaced discs non-reducing,
Maxillary anterior vertical hyperplasia but posterior vertical and AP hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5.5 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Hypertrophied left nasal inferior turbinate.
Nasal septal deviation off to the left side.
Impacted third molars x4.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics:  Continue to align and level the maxillary and 	mandibular arches.

2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.  
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction.  
	d.	Left nasal reduction turbinectomy.
	e.	Nasal septoplasty.
	f.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
	g.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.  
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.