CLAIRE LOGAN									08/23/2010

Claire is 21 years and 10 months old.  She is referred by Dr. Jim Compton, Midland, Texas.  Claire is in good health with no major medical problems.  Primary concerns are:

Her jaw and chin are deficient.
Teeth do not meet in the front.

Claire had orthodontics by Dr. Henry from the age of 10 through 14.  She had chin augmentation surgery performed at the age of 14 by Dr. David Brown.  Claire has no problems with TMJ pain nor myofascial pain around the head and neck area.  She rates her headaches at a 3 occurring at least 2 times per week.  She rates her jaw function at 0, diet at 0, disability at 0.  She has a little bit of numbness in her chin area from her previous surgery.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her left ankle and right knee.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime.  She has no problems with snoring, daytime somnolence, nor sleep apnea.  

In frontal view, Claire has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  She has some slight decreased fullness in her left cheek as compared to the right side but not too significantly different.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  The nasal tip is about 2 mm off to the right side.  The maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline and the mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the left.  The chin is about 1 mm to the left as well.  In profile, the maxilla is 6 to 7 mm AP deficient.  The chin is deficient by about 15 to 18 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not defined.  Intraorally, Claire has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has some very mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  In centric relation, she has about a 1 to 2 mm anterior open bite.  She is fairly close to being Class I cuspid relationship.  In centric relation, she occludes on the right molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderately enlarged with the right side a little greater than the left side.  To palpation, she has some very mild tenderness over the masseter and retromandibular areas.  She has some fine crepitus perhaps in the TMJ areas.  There is a slight cant in the occlusal plane angle with the right side being perhaps a half to 1 mm higher than the left side.  The maximal incisal opening is 48 mm, excursion movement to the right 7 mm, to the left 8 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has a bone plate in the chin area.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  The septum seems to show a spur off the left side.  Both condyles appear arthritic.  It appears that there may have been some resorption in the condylar heads.  

Coronal view shows that the right turbinate is enlarged, but the left one has a more normal size to it.  There is probably a little mucous retention cyst in the floor of the right maxillary sinus.  The septum looks reasonably straight.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses appear clear.  Right turbinate appears somewhat enlarged and the left one appears a little bit more normal.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has lost significant condylar volume.  The head is quite flattened with some anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence has resorbed probably at least 50 percent of its original volume.  There is decreased vertical joint space particularly at the articular eminence and anterior aspect of the condyle. 

Right TMJ shows a condyle that is flattened, but not nearly as significant as the opposite side.  However, the articular eminence is exceptionally flat on this side.  There is decreased joint space involving the anterior half of the condylar head.  There appears to be significant loss of condylar volume.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost vertical height and is fairly broad mediolaterally.  There is decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  There is a little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that a little bit more narrow than the opposite side.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm and seems to overlap the lateral pole of the condyle.  There is decreased vertical joint space. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Claire has her lower jaw postured forward somewhat in this x-ray.  She has almost an end-on incisor relationship and an anterior open bite of about 2 mm.  She has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6.5 mm at the base of the tongue and at the tip of the uvula.  There is not a significant tooth size discrepancy, but with the over angulation of the lower incisors and vertical orientation of the upper incisors this will create a tooth size discrepancy.  She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and a slight reverse curve in the lower arch.  


Basic diagnoses for Claire would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis compatible with JRA.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Anterior open bite.
Mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.
High occlusal plane angle.
Increased angulation of lower incisors.
Hypertrophied right turbinate.
Headaches.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Aligning the occlusion at 2 different occlusal 			plane levels.  Place a small step between the cuspids and lateral incisors so as to 			extrude the cuspids slightly and align the 4 incisors at an elevated plane.  Tip 			lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for 				interdental osteotomies.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 			about 1 mm to 1.5 mm of tooth structure.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints. 
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts 			total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	c.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
	d.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction.
	e.	Right partial inferior turbinectomy. 
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 