ANDREW (AJ) LONG							10/27/2011

AJ was referred to me by Dr. Jeffrey T. Buske, DDS, 1309 Paluxy Road, Granbury, TX 76048, telephone #817-573-3761, e-mail drjbuske@gmail.com.  

AJ is 17 years old, birth date 04/05/1994.  AJ is in good health with no major medical problems.  AJ gets headaches only about once a month at about a level of 4 and he feels they may be sinus type as they occur in the frontal area and over the maxillary sinuses.  He rates his TMJ pain at 3, jaw function at 3, diet and disability at 0.  He gets some earaches, the left side greater than the right side, and has some left-sided tinnitus.  He has no vertigo and no hearing loss and no other joints bother him, although he has been diagnosed with scoliosis but no associated pain.  He does not believe that he clenches or grinds his teeth at night.  

AJ believes that his jaw problems began about 3 to 4 years ago.  He did have some orthodontics done beginning in the first grade from about 2001 to 2003.  He did have a maxillary expander used at that time.  He then went back into orthodontics from 2005 to 2007.  He is not too sure if his bite situation is worsening.  He does report moderate snoring, mild daytime somnolence, but no sleep apnea.  He is predominantly a mouth breather at nighttime and also breathes through his mouth quite a bit during the day.  

In frontal view, AJ has good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 0.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline may be about 1 mm to the left.  The chin appears to be probably about 3 mm to the left.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 5 to 6 mm.  The chin is also retruded probably 6 to 8 mm.  The chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not defined.  Intraorally, AJ has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has a retained ankylosed primary second molar on the left side.  Teeth appear to be in a little bit of a lingual inclination.  In the upper arch, AJ is missing his upper lateral incisors but has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars.  The upper incisors may be in a little bit of lingual inclination.  AJ has anterior and posterior cross bites.  He actually has a Class II cuspid relationship on the left side being probably 3 mm Class II and on the right side is a little bit closer to being Class I or just slightly Class III.  He has a significant increased curve of Spee on the left side of the mandible.  He has an open bite in the left first molar and bicuspid areas.  He has an anterior reverse deep bite of about 2.5 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Intranasally, the septum appears to be deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  The turbinates are fairly large.  To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the left retromandibular area.  On opening, he has a click in the left TMJ at about 15 mm of opening and about 10 mm of closing.  Maximum opening is 46 mm, excursion movement to the right about 6 mm and to the left about 5 mm.

RADIOGRAPIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of maxillary lateral incisors and the maxillary third molars, but he has impacted mandibular third molars.  On the left side, he has an ankylosed primary second molar with no successor.  The vertical height of the mandibular body appears somewhat short.  The condylar head and neck lengths appear a little bit elongated.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear.  The septum at this particular cut is fairly straight.  The right turbinate is quite enlarged and is essentially blocking the airway on the right side.  The left turbinate appears a little bit more normal in size, although moderately enlarged.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side.  The right turbinate is impacted against the septum and is obviously blocking off the right airway.  The left turbinate is moderately enlarged and does create some more moderate obstruction the left side. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is very narrow anteroposteriorly particularly towards the medial side of the joint.  The condyle is positioned back against the posterior wall of the fossa with a significant increased anterior joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is also very narrow in mediolateral width particularly towards the medial side of the joint.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. 
			
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly probably 3 to 4 mm. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  The lateral joint space is decreased somewhat.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a significant component of maxillary AP hypoplasia.  The occlusal plane angle is fairly low.  He has a large adenoid mass in the nasopharynx that touches almost against the inferior turbinates likely contributing significantly to the nasal airway obstruction.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm at the soft palate level and about 9 mm at the base of the tongue.  The maxillary occlusal plane appears fairly flat, but the mandibular occlusal plane has a significant increased curve of Spee and lower incisors are in vertical inclination.  The maxillary incisors are in fairly good inclination.

Diagnoses for AJ would be as follows:

Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia type 1 with greater growth on the right side compared to the left side.  
Left TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction.  
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia.
Bilateral mid dental open bites being worse on the left side compared to the right side.  
Left mandibular ankylosed and submerged primary second molar without a successor.
Impacted mandibular third molars.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Hyperplasia of nasopharyngeal adenoid tissues.
Nasal airway obstruction.  
Anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites.
Missing maxillary lateral incisors.
Class III occlusal relationship utilizing the maxillary first bicuspids as cuspids. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
2.	Extract mandibular left second primary molar. 
3.	Presurgical orthodontics.  
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch closing the slight spacing between the 			cuspids and centrals.  Reshape the cuspids to look more like lateral 			incisors.  Tip cuspid roots mesially and first bicuspid roots distally to 			make room for interdental osteotomies that will be necessary to achieve 			the best occlusal result.  
	b.	Align and level the mandibular arch.  Try to tip lower incisors forward 2    
                        to 3 mm if possible.  Maintain approximately 7 mm of spacing in the 			mandibular left second bicuspid area.  Be careful of mandibular left first 			molar as it could be ankylosed.
4.	Monitor facial growth and development to see if active condylar hyperplasia is 	still present.  
5.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies if condylar hyperplasia is 			verified.
	b.	Articular disc repositioning on the left side and also the right side if 			displacement is identified on the MRI.  
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and down graft posteriorly.
	d.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance it forward and 
                        improve facial symmetry.
	e.	Removal of impacted mandibular third molars x2.
	f.	Partial nasal turbinectomies.
	g.	Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy.
6.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
7.	Restorative dentistry.
	a.	Implant in mandibular left second bicuspid area.  
	b.	Place crown on implant in mandibular left second bicuspid area. 