COURTNEY LONG									02/01/2010

Courtney is now 32 years old.  Courtney was first treated by me with surgery on July 16, 1994.  She had AICR and maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia.  Procedures performed included:

Bilateral TMJ disc repositioning with ligament repair with Mitek anchor. 
Mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible. 
Maxillary osteotomies to reposition the maxilla. 
Anterior mandibular augmentation with HTR grafting.
Removal of impacted third molars x4.

Courtney was 16 years old at the time of the surgery.  Courtney was last seen for a followup on March 15, 1999.  Courtney currently works for the FDA and lives in San Diego.

Primary concerns that Courtney has at this time are as follows:

Pain in the jaw joints. 
Popping and other noises in the joints. 
Locking. 

Courtney does not have a real problem with headaches.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 6, diet at 2, disability at 0.  She has no earaches, but gets tinnitus and vertigo at times.  No hearing loss and no other joints bother her.  She is hypothyroid.  She gets neck, shoulder, and back pain.  

She takes the following medications:

Yasmin.
Synthroid.
Claritin.
Motrin.

She has tenderness over the TMJs and masseters.  On opening, she has an audible crepitus popping kind of noise AT about 30 mm on the left joint and at about 5 mm of closing.  The right side seems to function reasonably smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 40 mm, but it was painful on the right side.   The excursion movement to the right is 6 mm and to left 5 mm.  

Clinical examination shows she has an upper lip length of 20 mm, upper tooth lip relationship of about 3 mm.  There is slight transverse asymmetry with the left side being about 2 mm higher than the right side.  Profile looks good.  She has a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship, but is missing 4 bicuspids.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy, although the uvula is moderately elongated.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderate in size.  The septum is fairly straight. 
Basic diagnoses for Courtney would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis, being worse on the left side, and with partial displacement of the articular disc on the left side as well as degenerative changes with both discs.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Medications:  Klonopin 1-mg tablet 1/2 to 1 tablet at bedtime to control clenching and 	bruxism.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints. 
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts. 
	c.	Application and removal of arch bars.



