REBECCA LONG 									07/16/2007

Rebecca is 14 years old.  She is referred by Dr. William Hang, 101 North Westlake Blvd., #202, Westlake Village, CA 91362.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Clicking in the right jaw joint.
Pain in the right side of the jaw.
Jaw asymmetry.

She has no difficulty in eating and chewing.  She has no significant problems with headaches nor pain directly in the TMJ.  She does get myofascial pain but only in the masseter muscle on the right side which is also the side that she has her clicking and popping.  She rates her jaw function and diet at 0, disability at 1.  She takes no medications.

Her problems began about 3 years when she was about 11 years old and that was the first time she became aware that her jaw was becoming asymmetric.  Etiology is unknown.  She has had no treatment to date.  She has no problems with earaches or tinnitus but gets occasional vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.

In frontal view, Rebecca has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is probably about 2 mm off to the right side.  Nasal tip is also about 3 mm off to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted 5 mm off to the right side and the chin is shifted 10 to 12 mm off to the right.  There maybe just some slight orbital dystopia with the left eye being 1 to 2 mm higher than the right side.  In profile view she has some nasal problems.  She has good balance with the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  Chin has fairly good AP balance.  Chin-neckline is fairly long and chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  She has good vertical facial balance.  She has some slight ptosis of the nasal tip.  Intraorally, Becky has all of her lower teeth back through the first molar on the right side and the second molar on the left side.  She has a little bit of spacing between some of her teeth on the right side particularly the second bicuspid and first molar.  Some very minimal crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Some lower arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being about 5 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch she has teeth erupted back through the right first and back through the left second molar.  On the right side she has a Class II cuspid relationship by about 5 mm and on the left side she has just a slight Class III cuspid relationship by maybe 1 to 2 mm.  She has anterior deep bite of about 5 mm.  She has an increased curve of Wilson in the mandibular arch on the right side and almost a reverse curve of Wilson on the left side in the molar area.  She actually has a retained primary E in the left lower second bicuspid area.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusion with the right cuspids being about 4 mm higher than the left side.  Transversely in the angle of mandible area she probably has about 8 mm more fullness on the left side as compared to the right side.  It appears she has a posterior yaw with the left side being laterally displaced about 3 to 4 mm compared to the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  Uvula and soft palate appear relatively normal.  She has some odd constricture of the faucial pillars.  Tonsils appear moderate in size.  Intranasally, turbinates appear moderate in size.  The septum is probably more in the midline although the tip of the nose is off to the right side.  
REBECCA LONG			07/16/2007				Page 2

As Becky shifts her mandible towards the left side it improves the midline symmetry although the left side remains even more prominent in transverse fullness.  To palpation she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening she has a definite pop in the right joint about 30 mm and a closing click of about 5 mm.  The left joint seems to function relatively smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 11 mm, left 12 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
She is missing a mandibular second molar or perhaps it is just unerupted in a posteriorly position compared to the rest of the teeth.  It is impacted and dislodged behind the first molar by probably almost 8 mm.  She is missing second bicuspid permanent tooth in the left mandible but has retained primary E with fairly good root structure still remaining.  In the upper arch she has unerupted maxillary right second molar and has a developing maxillary left third molar.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.

Waters view shows that the bony septum is fairly straight.  The left turbinate appears enlarged.  The right turbinate does not appear as bad.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit posteriorly displaced in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condylar head appears to have reasonably good shape.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit more radiolucent on the top of it.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Difficult to evaluate the joint space.  On opening there is good translation of both joints.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a skeletal Class I.  Oropharyngeal airway looks good.  Occlusal plane may be relatively low.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Left TMJ osteochondroma versus osteoma.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. 
Deviated mandibular prognathism off to the right side.
Vertical asymmetry of the maxilla with the left side being longer vertically than the right side.
Maxillary midline shifted off to the right side 2 to 3 mm.  Mandibular dental midline shifted off to the right side 5 mm and chin shifted off to the right side 10 to 12 mm.  
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane angle with the left side being 4 mm lower than the right side.
Increased curve of Wilson on the right side and decreased curve of Wilson on the left side.
Absent mandibular left second bicuspid but with retained primary second molar.
Impacted, unerupted and distally displaced mandibular right second molar.
 Lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being 4 to 5 mm posterior to the right cuspid.
REBECCA LONG 				07/16/2007				Page 3

 Right-sided myofascial pain.
 Tooth size discrepancy of approximately 4 mm secondary to small upper lateral 
 incisors.
 Nasal asymmetry of the nose rotated approximately 3 mm off towards the right side   
        secondary to the severe facial asymmetry.
 Abnormal growth of the maxilla and mandible. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up at least 1 mm of space around each upper lateral incisor.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider slenderizing the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy.
Consider using cross arch elastics on the right side to tip the mandibular teeth buccally and the maxillary teeth slightly lingually.  This may create a crossbite but this will be corrected at surgery.
Surgery.
Left TMJ condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomy to shift the mandible back onto the facial midline and level it transversely. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to correct transverse discrepancies and level the occlusal plane. 
External rhinoplasty to straighten the nose and to remove the dorsal hump.
Removal of impacted maxillary left third molar and remove the left impacted mandibular right second molar. 
Post surgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry.
Bonding or veneers to maxillary lateral incisors. 
Placement of osseointegrated implant mandibular right second molar area. 
Crown placement on dental implant. 