RAE LYNN LOVELACE							07/12/2011

Rae Lynn is 28 years old, birth date 08/17/1982.  She was referred here by Dr. Mike Steffen from Edmond, OK.  Rae Lynn’s problems began when she was 16 years old when she was involved in an MVA.  Apparently, she did have a fracture to the left mandibular body angle area, but it was not treated.  She had a traumatic brain injury that kept her in the hospital for a week and the fracture apparently was just overlooked.  She did consult an oral surgeon a few months after, but no treatment was provided.  She had headaches and jaw pain that began almost immediately after the accident.  She had myoclonic seizures.  She was put on seizure medication for a while.  The accident was in January 1999.  She subsequently was in physical therapy from 1999 to 2001.  She has been through the myofascial pain clinic and began seeing Dr. Bob Talley in 2000.  She has had more than 10 splints, most of those made by Dr. Talley and by her dentist, Dr. Robert Molan.  She has also had some chiropractic treatment that began in 2010, but the chiropractor did not want to treat her for very long because of her condition.

Rae Lynn states that she has constant headaches that on the average are at a level of 7 in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 9, jaw function at 5, diet at 4, disability ay 6.  She gets moderate occurrence of earaches, but no tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  She may have some cervical involvement.  

She takes the following medications:

Aleve 6 to 9 tablets per day.
Soma p.r.n. 
Parafon Forte 2 to 4 tablets per day.
Yaz.
Benadryl at bedtime.

She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and clenching during the day. 

In frontal view, Rae Lynn has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is actually 1 mm to the left and chin may be just slightly retruded on the left side about 2 mm.  In profile view, she has some mild maxillary retrusion of probably 3 to 4 mm and the mandible may be retruded about 8 to 10 mm.  Intraorally, Rae Lynn has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  The teeth are actually fairly well aligned and level.  She has adequate attached gingiva in the lower arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She is fairly close to being Class I on the right side with end-on Class II by about 2 to 3 mm on the left side.  She has an anterior deep bite of 3 to 4 mm.  Oropharyngeal airway tissues all look healthy and normal.  She seems to have fairly good space between the soft palate and posterior pharyngeal wall area.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear just mild to moderate in size.  The septum appears fairly straight.  She seems to have a passable airway on each side.  To palpation, she has high moderate pain in the left medial pterygoid, left TMJ, and bilateral retromandibular area.  She has moderate pain in the masseters, right medial pterygoid, right TMJ, right posterior neck, and right shoulder.  On opening, it is very uncomfortable for her and she has some inconsistent popping.  When she eats, her joints pop a lot.  The maximum opening was 41 mm, opening without significant pain 31 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 2 mm and to the left 3 mm.  When she yawns, sometimes people can hear her make loud popping noises.  

RADIOGRAPIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  There has been some movement in radiograph.  She has got a root canal on the maxillary left first molar.  Condylar head and neck length on the right side is significantly longer than on the left side.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The right turbinate appears enlarged and there is some mild thickening of the sinus membrane in the right maxillary sinus.  The septum looks reasonably straight. 

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight, but the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The sinuses are clear on this view.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  The articular eminence is fairly steep at the lateral aspect of the joint.  There is increased anterior joint space and decreased posterior joint space.  There is some anterior beaking in the condyle and some degenerative changes in the condyle. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some anterior beaking and flattening on the anterior head.  The articular eminence is fairly steep.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The condyle appears shorter in vertical height compared to the opposite side.  The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with a downward curvature of only 1 to 2 mm.  there appears to be decreased joint space present. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology and fairly good width.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  In one area, there appears to be decreased space between the lateral rim and the head of the condyle.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she appears to have some retrusion of the maxilla and mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway appears restricted with an AP dimension of only about 3 mm at the soft palate level and only about perhaps 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  The occlusal plane appears to be increased.  

Basic diagnoses for Rae Lynn would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs anteriorly dislocated with early reduction.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3.5 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
TMJ pain.
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain.
Clenching and bruxism at night.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible 				approximately 8 mm.
	c.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance it approximately 6 mm.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  