MORGAN LOWREY								08/08/2011

Birth date  09/06/1994. Age 16 years.   Morgan is in good health with no major medical problems.  TMJ problems began she was 15 of unknown etiology.  She had orthodontics from 2008 and got her braces off in November 2009.  She was treated by Dr. Compton and Dr. Boren.  Primary concern she has is popping in her jaw joints.  She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain nor myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 1, disability at 0.   She takes no medications.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, but has some hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her are predominantly her hips which may be due to injury or stress from playing basketball.  She used to clench and brux her teeth at night when she was younger, but now she feels as though she breathes primarily through her mouth when she sleeps.  

In frontal view, Morgan has good facial balance and symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  In profile, she may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency by maybe 3 to 4 mm and the mandible may be slight AP deficient by about 8 mm.  Intraorally, Morgan has all of her lower teeth and upper teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being about 2 mm Class II on the left side and 3 mm on the right side.  She has about a 2 mm over jet.  She has about a 2.5 mm vertical overbite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the septum may be just a little bit off towards the right side, but the turbinates look relatively normal.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, she has audible clicks and pops in her joints bilaterally at about 10 mm of opening and 5 mm of closing.  The maximal incisal opening is 57 mm and excursion movement to the right 9 mm and to the left 8 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Bony septum appears reasonably straight and sinuses appear clear.  She has 3 x 3 lower retainer.  

Coronal view shows that she has a deviated septum off towards the right side.  Turbinates are moderately large particularly the left side is quite large particularly more posteriorly.  The sinuses appear relatively clear, although she has a very small mucocele in the left maxillary sinus.  

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight in this cut.  The turbinates are enlarged and may block a good part of the airway.  Sinuses appear relatively clear in this view.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good shape, but is posteriorly positioned within the fossa with an increased anterior joint space more so at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The articular eminence has a fairly steep inclination.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening anteriorly and is posteriorly positioned in the fossa, more so at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The articular eminence is fairly steep.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly by probably about 3 to 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly by about 3 to 4 mm.  There may be some decreased vertical joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are mildly retruded.  She has a moderate high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the most at the soft palate level and 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis but articular disc anteriorly displaced with reduction.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia, but anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia.
Mandibular AP hyperplasia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Impacted third molars x4.
Hyperplastic turbinates creating nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance it in a counterclockwise direction.
	d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	e.	Removal of impacted third molars x4.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  