ANA LOZANO										10-14-03

Patient History

Ana was last seen in 08/1997. It is now about six years since her last visit here, and her situation has gotten worse. She had had previous orthognathic surgery before she came to see me. Currently she has earaches, tinnitus, sometimes vertigo, some hearing loss, and sometimes hypersensitive hearing. She clenches and bruxes her teeth at night. She does have a night guard, though, for this. She rates her headaches at a level of 6 that occur in the frontal and temporal area. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, overall pain on an average day at 5, jaw function at 7, diet at 6, and disability at 5. She has a little bit of decreased sensation in her chin area from her previous surgery. She takes Advil, Motrin, and Tylenol for pain medication. Ana is very uncomfortable at night when she tries to sleep if she doesn’t have her mouth guard in. She doesn’t know where to place her lower jaw. Other joints that trouble her include her hips and her wrists. She has a bite plate that she has to wear at night in order to sleep, or she has severe pain problems. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Ana has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 4 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is a little bit off to the left as is the chin, probably 1 mm at the incisor and 2 mm at the chin. 

In profile, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably a couple millimeters; therefore, the maxilla is probably about 4 mm AP deficient. The mandible at the chin area is retruded about 25 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short, although the chin-neck angle is reasonably well-defined. She has some lip incompetence of probably about 7 mm.

Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids and has a 3x3 retainer in place. Teeth are fairly well-aligned. She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. Second molars are showing some evidence of wear. In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids and has a 2x2 retainer in place there. In centric relation, she has about a 5 to 6-mm Class II occlusion, being a little bit worse on the left side than the right side. She has an anterior open bite of probably a couple of millimeters. Occludes on basically the first and second molars on the right side and maybe only the second molar on the left side. Ana states that when she is in her most centric relation position that only her second molars on each side touch, and all other teeth are out of occlusion. Ana’s open bite is a little bit worse on the left side as compared to the right side. Mandibular occlusal plane is fairly level. Maxillary left cuspid is about 2 mm higher than the right cuspid. Mandibular occlusal plane is fairly level. Ana is aware of snoring when she sleeps. There are times when she is awake she feels as though she doesn’t get enough air when she is breathing. Oropharynx appears clear. 

Nasal airway looks good. Turbinates are of moderate size, but there appears to be adequate airway around them.

To palpation, she has moderate to severe pain throughout the head and neck area. She has crepitation in the joints bilaterally indicative of probably perforations through the bilaminar tissues. Maximal incisal opening is about 38 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 7 and to the left about 6 mm. She can open about 30 mm without too much discomfort. However, it is painful for her to try to chew anything of any substance.
Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe resorptive arthritis (probable ICR) and articular disc dislocation without reduction and nonsalvageable
AP maxillary deficiency
Anterior vertical maxillary excess
Transverse maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Apertognathia
Class II occlusion
Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars
High occlusal plane angulation
Occluding only on the second molars bilaterally
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Previously placed bone plates in the maxilla x 4 with 15 bone screws
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Severe snoring
Daytime somnolence
Sleep apnea

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch

CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it and downgraft it posteriorly with bone plate stabilization and hydroxyapatite grafting
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Removal of bone plates (x 4) and bone screws (x 15) from maxilla

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
