MARIA LOZANO									10-14-03

This is Ana’s twin sister.

Patient History

She gets earaches, tinnitus, and has significant problems with vertigo. She has hypersensitive hearing. Other joints that bother her include her back, wrists, hands, fingers, hips, and knees. She has had previous back surgery. She is aware of nocturnal clenching and bruxism. She has significant problems with snoring, daytime somnolence, and episodes of difficulty breathing. She takes Motrin, Aleve, and Advil for her pain problems. Her gums and teeth are still numb since her initial surgery. She rates her headaches at a level of 6 in the frontal and temporal area. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, overall pain on an average day at 7, jaw function at 8, diet at 7, and disability at 6.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 5 mm. Maxillary dental midline is about 2 mm off to the right as is the mandibular dental midline, and the chin is slightly off to the right side. 

In profile, upper lip supralabrale is slightly AP deficient compared to subnasale with the maxilla being about 4 mm AP retruded. Chin is probably around 25 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined. 

Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids and has a 3x3 retainer with some very mild crowding, lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has a 2x2 retainer, and she is missing the upper first bicuspids. She has an anterior open bite of probably about 3 mm. She has an end-on Class II occlusion being worse on the left side than the right side. There is a transverse cant in the occlusion with the left cuspid being about 1.5 to 2 mm higher than the right cuspid. Likewise, the mandibular left cuspid is 1.5 to 2 mm higher than the right side. She occludes only on her second molars. All other teeth are out of occlusion. If she postures her mandible about 2 mm to the left, it improves her mandibular facial symmetry, and the asymmetry in the upper arch is more evident. Oropharynx appears clear. 

Intranasally, the right side has a good airway. On the left side, it appears that the septum is deviated off toward the left, and there is a spur at the base of the septum. Turbinates are moderately large on that side, and there appears to be decreased functional airway on the left side. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four bone plates in the maxilla with 16 screws and 3 large screws in the mandible ramus area. There are also two bone plates in the chin area. A 3x3 retainer is seen in the lower jaw and 2x2 in the upper jaw. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Condyles appear small in size and somewhat resorbed.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have undergone significant resorption, and there is significantly decreased vertical joint space between the condyle and the fossa.

Left TMJ has a similar appearance with a severely decreased joint space, deformed condyle, although it appears in reasonable size anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep in both joints. 

Translation is somewhat restricted in both joints. Articular eminence on the left side is a little bit steeper than the right side.

Waters view shows obstruction of the nasal airway on the left side, although the right side appears to have some opacity. Sinuses look relatively clear. Has huge bone screws in the mandible and the four plates and 16 screws in the maxilla.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has an extremely high occlusal plane angle and AP deficient maxilla and mandible. She has anterior vertical maxillary excess in the maxilla and posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. She has a head postured forward neck position.

To palpation, she has some moderate pain around the temporalis, masseters, SCMs, posterior neck, and shoulder areas but high moderate to severe pain to palpation of the medial ptergyoids, TMJs, and styloid areas. Has some crepitation in the joints with the right side being worse than the left side. Maximal incisal opening is about 36 mm but without significant pain about 26 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 6 mm and to the left 7 mm. She has to wear a bite splint a good bit of time to sleep in, and if she participates in each sports, she has to wear her bite plate. She says she can’t go to sleep without her splint because her jaws feel too stressed, and she has no comfortable place to put her jaws, and this interferes with her ability to go to sleep.

She has lip incompetence of about 13 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis (probable idiopathic condylar resorption) with articular disc dislocation, severe deformation, and nonreducing
Anterior vertical maxillary excess
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Class II occlusion
Anterior open bite
Missing four first bicuspids and all four third molars
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Snoring
Sleep apnea symptoms 
Daytime somnolence
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch

CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it and downgraft it posteriorly with bone plate stabilization and hydroxyapatite grafting
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Removal of bone plates (x 4) and bone screws (x 16) from maxilla

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
