LOGAN LOZIER								05/27/2011

Logan is 16 years old, birth date 03/06/1995.  Referred by Dr. William Hang, 101 N. Westlake Blvd., Suite 202, Westlake Village, CA 91362-7049.

Logan has had previous orthodontic treatment.  He began orthodontics at the age of 7 years 11 months and had a double high pole head gear treatment for phase 1.  At age 10 years 6 months, he began phase 2.  In February 2007, he had four first bicuspids extracted and spaces closed.  In November 2008, treatment was completed.  Interestingly, he has his third molars developed and erupted in place.  Primary concerns that Logan has include the following:

Inadequate intraoral space for his tongue.
Tension and discomfort in the TMJ region with crepitus.  
Facial discomfort over the bridge of his nose that radiates up into the forehead and laterally in towards the temporal areas. 
Neck tension and pain with crepitus. 
Concerns of facial profile and dental aesthetics.
TMJ pain and headaches.

Logan does not take any medications.  Logan is a musician and a singer and his jaw alignment and position appear to be interfering with his abilities to perform at his maximum.  By history, Logan was a competitive gymnast and did have some falls, but is not sure if any of these created any significant problems for him.  He did have a fall in 2003 hitting his chin receiving a laceration.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Logan has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 5 mm.  Lower dental midline and chin are shifted to the right probably 1 mm or so at the incisors and probably at least 2 to 3 mm at the chin area.  In profile view, Logan has deficiency in the maxilla a good 5 to 6 mm.  The chin is retruded almost 20 mm.  The chin neckline is extremely short, although the chin neck angle is well defined.  He does have a dorsal hump in his nose.  Intraorally, Logan is missing all four first bicuspids, but he does have the third molars in place.  He has a slight Class II cuspid relationship of probably a couple of millimeters.  He has space in between the maxillary incisors.  Logan has a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plan with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side in the cuspid area.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy, but he does have an elongated uvula and the tonsils are at least moderately enlarged.  There does not appear to be any evidence of infection associated with them.  The maximal incisal opening is 40 mm, opening without discomfort 34 mm.  The excursion movements were 9 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four first bicuspids and all four third molars are erupted into position.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  Some of the roots particularly on the bicuspids and molars look a little bit short. 

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is reasonably straight, although the mucosa seems thickened.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged.  

 Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged and may cause a little bit of airway constricture.  There is some thickening of the sinus lining along the posterior medial wall of the right maxillary sinus.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows that the condyle has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly 3 or 4 mm.  There appears to be decreased lateral joint space.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with some flattening on the anterior head and some peaking of the condyle.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  The height of the articular eminence particularly towards the medial side is fairly short.  For the most part, there appears to be reasonable joint space present.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little better morphology and position within the fossa.  Out laterally, there is some flattening on the head of the condyle and some peaking of the condyle.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla is deficient in an AP dimension and also exhibits posterior vertical hyperplasia.  The mandible is AP hypoplastic.  There is a high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway with measuring at the base of the tongue is probably 7 to 8 mm and at the soft palate level is probably about 9 mm.  The occlusal plane angle itself is significantly increased.  

Basic diagnoses for Logan would be as follows: 

Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations. 
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia, anterior vertical hyperplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Hypertrophic turbinates. 
Slight Class II end-on occlusion.
Headaches. 
TMJ pain. 
Myofascial pain.
Missing all four first bicuspids extracted for previous orthodontic treatment.
High occlusal plane angle. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.	
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.  
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction approximately 15 mm.
	c.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance in a counterclockwise rotation 				approximately 7 mm.  
	d.	Partial nasal inferior turbinectomies. 
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.   