TAMARA LUCE									08-07-02

Tamara is 42 years old and referred by Dr. Sidney Craft.

Patient History

Tamara is in good health with no major medical problems. She gets one or two sinus infections per year.

Current Medications

She takes the following medications:

Progesterone SR 12.5 mg
Bi-EST 80/20 SR 0.625 mg
Armour Thyroid 1 g 2 tablets daily
DHEA SR 10 mg

Patient Concerns

Primary concerns that Tamara has include the following:

Headaches.
Jaw joint pain.
Earaches.
Muscle pain through the head and neck area.

Tamara has problems with earaches with the right side being greater than the left side. No tinnitus, but she does get occasional vertigo.

Tamara is only aware of having joint problems perhaps in the last six years and of unknown etiology. She says she was in an MVA in college, but it was not too severe and placed no correlation on that accident to her current situation. She began orthodontics in the past month. She has had a night guard for about six years now. Other joints that bother her include her neck and her hips. No specific allergies although she has had difficulty wearing cheap jewelry, particularly pierced earrings. Anything that is plated, her body tends to eat the plating off. 

She gets headaches almost daily. Since beginning orthodontics and working with a night guard more, they are not quite as frequent, but still she gets them fairly often. She rates the average headache at about a level of 6 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. Tamara rates her headaches that occur in the frontal, temporal, and sometimes the posterior head area about a level of 6, and they occur almost daily but have decreased some. Rates her TMJ pain at 3 with the right side worse than the left side, overall pain at 6, jaw function at 5, diet and disability at 3. 



Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, she has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about a millimeter or two to the right. The chin also may be just slightly to the right side as well. Actually, mandibular dental midline is shifted off to the left side probably a good 4 mm of the maxillary midline. Mandibular dental midline is to the left of the chin midline probably by 2 or 3 mm.

In profile view, Tamara has fairly good facial balance. Chin-neckline is a little bit shortened, although chin-neck angle is fairly well defined. Mandible may be slightly AP deficient by maybe 4 or 5 mm. Has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Some moderate crowding, lower anterior arch. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Has a slight reversed curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Is fairly close to a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side but is almost a full Class II cuspid relationship on the left side. Transversely, cuspids in the lower arch appear fairly level. In the upper arch, the right cuspid is probably 3 to 4 mm posterior to the left cuspid. In reassessment of the facial structures, with getting the pupillary plane and ears fairly level, nose is deviated off to the right side probably about 3 mm, and maxillary midline is off to the right side probably almost 3 mm. Mandibular dental midline is close to the facial midline, and chin is rotated off to the right side a couple of millimeters. Transversely, the left cuspid is probably a couple of millimeters lower than the right cuspid.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of four third molars. Sinuses look relatively clear. Left turbinate looks a little bit enlarged. Significant osseous changes in the right mandibular condyle. Left side looks more normal. 

Waters view shows the sinuses appear relatively clear. Left side of the mandible is lower than the right side. Cant in the transverse occlusion. Maxillary midline is seen to be significantly off to the right side. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears small in size and appears to have lost vertical dimension. Articular eminence is quite long in length and moderately steep. Decreased posterior joint space. 

Left TMJ shows some flattening of the anterior head of the condyle. Articular eminence is fairly steep but not quite as elongated as the opposite side. Flattening on the anterior head is present. Decreased posterior joint space. Articular disc is probably in a vertical orientation and anteriorly displaced.
On opening, there is excellent translation of the left condyle and some restriction in translation of the right condyle. Significant decreased joint space in the open jaw position on the right side. 

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class II occlusal relationship. Has about a 3 to 4-mm anterior open bite relationship. Oropharyngeal airway looks very good.

Intraorally, oropharynx appears clear with relatively normal architecture of the soft palate, faucial pillars, and uvula. 

She does have a significant septal spur going off the left side, but turbinates are just moderate in size, and it appears that she has a reasonably good airway. 

Tamara does have a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of about 2 mm. A little bit of a size difference at the bicuspid area with the lowers being a little bit larger than the uppers. Mandibular left cuspid is slightly extruded. She has an anterior deep bite of about 5 to 6 mm.

To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the TMJ, styloid areas, and SCMs. Maximum incisal opening is about 50 mm but opening without significant discomfort about 40 mm. Excursive movements are about 11 mm in each direction. She does have crepitus on opening in both jaw joints, being a little bit worse on the right side as compared to the left side. On excursive movements, she did have popping in the left TMJ.

Basic Diagnoses

Right TMJ reactive arthritis with condylar resorption and articular disc dislocation without reduction and significant disc deformation.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Maxillary hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Mandibular hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm lower than the right side.
Class II cuspid-molar relationship on the left side, Class I on the right.
Anterior deep bite of 6 mm.
Reverse curve of occlusion, upper arch.
Slight hypereruption, mandibular left cuspid.
Moderate crowding, lower anterior arch.
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.
Maxillary midline shifted 3 mm to the left of the facial midline.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.



Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth, removing 2 mm of tooth structure to help keep the lower teeth from flaring forward and to adjust for the tooth-size discrepancy.
Maxillary arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being 3 to 4 mm anterior to the right cuspid.

CT scan of jaws and jaw joint (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Right TMJ condylectomy, debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to rotate it to the right and downgraft the left side to create good facial symmetry.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Left mandibular ramus osteotomy with bone screw stabilization.
Fat graft to right TMJ (harvested from abdomen).

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion