PAMELA LUDLOW									03/05/2007

Pamela is 58 years old and is referred by Dr. Dale Gallagher, 12210 Pecan St., Austin, TX 78727.  She has had previous problems with occipital neuralgia and she has had previous foot surgery.  She has had several operations on her feet for a neuroma development.  She has also had double bunionectomies.  

Pamela wore orthodontic appliances for about a year and a half before her first surgery.  Her first surgery was done on October 2, 1985, by Dr. Tom Weil in Houston, Texas.  She developed problems after that but in the meantime had moved to the San Francisco area.  There she saw Dr. John Dann.  In May of 1987 Dr. Dan performed a bilateral TMJ arthroscopy and an arthroplasty in the left joint with temporal fascial graft.  Following the first surgery and for about 5 to 7 years, Pam had physical therapy and biofeedback treatments to try and control her pain.  After some time she then began to be very tolerant of her situation.  About 5 weeks ago she started to have significant difficulties once again such as excruciating pain predominately on the left side.  Even moving her tongue from side-to-side would create excruciating pain for her on the left side. By limiting her jaw function to primarily a liquid diet, she has been able to calm her situation down.

In addition, Pam has fibromyalgia and hypoglycemia.  She also has a seizure disorder that is triggered by nausea followed by fainting and then the seizures.  Apparently, any type of narcotic can create this problem for her.  Treatments she has had to date for her jaw problem includes splints, bite plates, previous orthodontics, the mandibular ramus osteotomies, TMJ arthroscopies and left arthroplasty and then the years of physical therapy and biofeedback.  Additional surgery she has had includes complete gingivectomy.  She has worn over the years about 20 different splints. The splints always made her situation worse and finally she got rid of them and said she does feel better.  The other joints that bother include her hands, feet, neck and fingers.  She is not aware of clenching and bruxism.  She gets periodic earaches, occasional tinnitus but no vertigo or hearing loss.  She does have some mild snoring tendencies and she does have some daytime tiredness.  She and her husband are unaware of any sleep apnea problems.  

In frontal view, Pam has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned with each other.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks and nose.  The chin appears retruded.  Chin-neckline is extremely short and chin-neck angle is not well defined.  Upper lip may be just slightly retruded by 2 to 3 mm.  Chin is retruded by approximately 15 mm.  Intraorally, Pam has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has crowns on her left first second molar and right first molar.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has crowns on the first and second molars.  She is essentially a Class I cuspid molar relationship bilaterally.  She has about a 4 mm anterior deep bite.  The uvula and soft palate appear normal.  The faucial pillars may be just slightly constricted but not too significant.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off to the left side.  The turbinates are of moderate size.  Airway appears reasonably good on the right side.  There is some slight constriction on the left side.  There is perhaps some mild constriction of the nasal airway on the left side.  The right side appears as though it should be relatively normal function.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the masseter muscles and TMJs on the left, a little bit worse on the right and in the right styloid area.  
PAMELA LUDLOW				03/05/2007				Page 2

Maximal opening is about 33 mm and opening without significant pain is about 15 mm.  
Excursive movement to the right is 6 mm, to the left 5 mm.  In excursive movement she had quite a bit of discomfort particularly in the left TMJ.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  She has root canals on the mandibular left first and second molars and maxillary left first and second molars and maxillary right second molar.  She has crowns on all the first and second molars in all 4 quadrants except for the mandibular right second molar.  She has 3 bone screws in the left ramus and 2 bone screws in the right ramus from previous surgery.   Both condyles appear quite arthritic with the left side being worse than the right side.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. The bony septum appears reasonably straight.  There appears to be a little bit more obstruction in the nose on the left side as compared to the right side.  Bone screws can be seen, 3 in the left ramus and 2 in the right ramus.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows that she has severe arthritis in the left TMJ.  Condyle is severely deformed and resorbed.  A little sclerosis on the top.  Posterior extending osteophyte is present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  It appears there may be some decreased distance between some of the bony structures in the condyle and the fossa.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a joint that is arthritic.  There is some flattening on the posterior head of the condyle and the head appears smaller in size than normal.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship and a high occlusal plane angle.  She has decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of about 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 5.5 mm at the base of the tongue.  There is a vertical difference in the height at the inferior border of the mandible with one side being about 5 mm vertically than the opposite side.  Clinically, it appears that the left side of the mandible is shorter vertically than the right side.

MRI:  Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears fairly arthritic and sclerotic.  There may be some bone-on-bone contact.  On opening, there is translation.  The extent of the degeneration on the condylar head is quite extensive.   On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle on this side.  There is a large fluid cystic space in the bilaminar tissues.  The top of the condyle appears quite sclerotic.  Translation is actually moderately good with it coming out towards the inferior aspect of the articular eminence.  No evidence of discal tissue present but in the open view there appears to be some compressed soft tissue.  This could be residual factors of the temporal fascia graft.  




PAMELA LUDLOW				03/05/2007				Page 3

Right TMJ shows a condyle that is arthritic but not as severe as the left side.  Disc appears to be anteriorly displaced sitting beneath the articular eminence.  Condylar head lights up significantly and it appears that there is a large mass of fluid in the joint space.  It appears that the disc is identifiable but positioned anteriorly and somewhat deformed.   Right TMJ shows that there appears to still be some anterior displaced disc and some restricted function.   There is moderately good translation of the condyle but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Left coronal view shows that there is severe resorptive arthritis that has occurred in this joint with loss of volume.  There are osteophytic extensions going medial off the remaining condylar head and lateral off the lateral pole of the condyle that actually extends out even to the lateral rim of the fossa.  There is osteophytic bone also that has developed up in the fossa area.  No evidence of discal tissue on this side.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows likewise the condyle has lost significant volume.  There is out lateral as well as medial osteophytic developments.  There is significant decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm.  It actually appears that there may be a little bit of heterotopic bone growing vertically off the lateral rim of the fossa that overlaps the had of the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows significant degenerative changes and obliteration of the joint space with possible bone-on-bone contact.  In the right on opening there is non-reducing disc and the disc appears fairly degenerated. 

Left TMJ sagittal view there is no evidence of any discal tissue.

DIAGNOSES OF MRI:
Left TMJ severe arthritis and no evidence of articular disc structures.
Right TMJ arthritis (not as severe as the left side) but with anterior articular disc dislocation without reduction.  Clinically the transverse occlusal plane is fairly level.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ arthritis.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Severe TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Headaches. 



PAMELA LUDLOW				03/05/2007				Page 4

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch. 
CT scans of jaw joints and jaw.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Maxillary osteotomies to advance it down and down graft the maxilla posteriorly.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

The second surgical treatment option would be to reconstruct the TMJs with total joint prostheses and place the fat grafts and not perform the maxillary osteotomies.  This will result in a compromised result but would eliminate her primary concerns.  