GRETCHEN LULOW								07/14/2008

Gretchen is 19 years old and referred by Michael Parsons, DDS, 17300 N. Outer 40, Suite 103, Chesterfield, MO 63005.  Gretchen is in good health with no major medical problems.  Primary concerns she has are:

Limited range of motion in the jaw.
Severe pain when eating and chewing.
Frequent headaches and earaches. 
Left joint pops.
Right side used to pop, but no longer does. 
Pain worse in the right jaw as compared to the left side.  

Medications include:

Yasmin 
Lexapro. 

Gretchen's goals will be to be to reduce her jaw pain, eliminate the headaches and earaches as well as increase mobility of the jaws.  She also has some cartilage problems in her joints, particularly in the knees and shoulders.  The only treatment she has basically had for her jaws so far has been a splint made in November 2007 by Dr. Richard Pyle, 800 W. University, Muncie, Indiana 47303.  Gretchen gets headaches in the frontotemporal area bilaterally at about a level of 5.  She rates her TMJ at 7, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 7, diet at 6, and disability at 4.  Gretchen gets some earaches and vertigo.  The other joints that bother her include her knees, elbows, and shoulders.  She has had a previous hip injury, but that is doing okay now.  She does clench her teeth at night. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Gretchen has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20  mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  The maxillary and mandibular dental midline are pretty much on the facial midline.  The chin is also fairly close to being on the facial midline and may be just about 1 mm off to the right.  In profile view, upper lip supralabale is about 2 mm posterior to subnasale.  Maxilla appears to be deficient by probably 4 to 5 mm.  Chin is retruded by 12 to 15 mm.  Chin neckline is shorter, although the chin neckline angle is moderately well defined.  She has moderate head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, Gretchen has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has retained primary E on the left side without a successor.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She is basically a slight Class II end-on occlusion being 2 mm Class II bilaterally.  Anterior deep bite is about 2 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal, although the posterior fascial pillar is a little posteriorly positioned.  Septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side.  Turbinate on the left side may be just slightly enlarged.  The right side is pretty much normal.  Airway appears more constricted on the left side as compared to the right side.  The columella is moderately wide and the nostrils are somewhat narrow.  Gretchen became aware of having jaw joint problems particularly with tenderness and clicking around the jaw joints about the age of 14 of unknown etiology.  She had orthodontics on and off from about the age of 10 through age 15.  There is a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 1 mm higher than the left side.  To palpation, she has moderate pain in the masseters, TMJs, and right retromandibular area.  She has moderate tenderness over the temporalis muscles and shoulders.  On opening, she has a soft pop in the left joint at about 10 to 15 mm of opening and closing about 5 to 10 mm.  She has some fine crepitus in the right joint on opening.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all third molars.  She has a retained primary E in the left side absent a successor tooth.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The condyles do not appear to abnormal.  
Waters view shows that she has a significant deviation in the septum and spurring off towards the left side in the bony aspect of the nasal cavity with significant decreased airway on the left side.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears somewhat arthritic.  There is some anterior beaking present and there appears to be some loss of vertical height.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  Joint space may be slightly decreased.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some anterior beaking and the condyle appears to be a little bit more posteriorly displaced in the fossa.  Moderate inclination of the articular eminence.  On opening, there is moderately good translation of both joints. 
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are both retruded.  She has a high occlusal plane angle, however, oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal.  
Basic diagnoses for Gretchen would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ AICR.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction. 
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. 
AP mandibular deficiency. 
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
High occlusal plane angle. 
Deviated nasal septum. 
AP microgenia.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Place appliances on the maxillary and mandibular arch.
Try to work up to a reasonable size archwire for surgery. 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it and down graft it posteriorly.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
Nasal septoplasty. 
  3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

