TERRI LUPTOWSKI									10-01-03

Terri is 40 years old and referred by Dr. Lee Fitzgerald, 670 W. Campbell Road, #120, Richardson, TX  75080.

Patient History

Terri has had a lot of previous TMJ surgeries including 9 surgeries. Terri’s problems with her joints began in high school, where she had clicking and popping and headache problems. In 1984, she was under the care of Dr. Charles Holt and was wearing splints. She was to have some TMJ surgery done at HEB Hospital by Dr. Dean White, but somehow the nurse anesthetist gave her some Pavulon, and she became paralyzed and had a respiratory arrest in the holding room. She then switched to Dr. Ray Reed in Houston. In May of 1985, Dr. Reed did bilateral TMJ articular disc tie-back procedures. Her problems got worse, and he took her back to surgery in August of 1985 and placed bilateral silastic implants. She developed a fairly significant anterior open bite. He then took her back to surgery in January of 1986 and performed maxillary osteotomies to close the open bite, but it didn’t turn out well, and the bite was even worse, and so he took her back to surgery in March of 1986 and performed bilateral sagittal split osteotomies to advance the mandible forward. Later in 1986, he did bilateral TMJ surgery again to remove the silastic implants. All those times she continued to have some significant pain problems and headaches. In February of 1987, Dr. Reed placed bilateral Vitek total joint prostheses. By 1983, she was in severe pain again and had a significant decrease in her incisal opening. Dr. Reed kept telling her that the joints looked good radiographically. 

Finally in 1998, she saw Dr. Steve Watson here in Dallas, who opened one side for an exploration and apparently told her that it was beyond what he was capable of doing, and he just closed up, and she was awake again within 15 minutes. Dr. Watson then apparently had conferences with Dr. Doug Sinn and Dr. Kevin McBride, and Dr. Sinn agreed to try to help Terri. In May of 1998, Dr. Sinn placed bilateral Biomet prostheses. There apparently was some problem with the alignment of the prostheses and/or the jaws, and they put her asleep and did some manipulations and then wired her together for three months. Apparently the bite was still off, so in November of 1998 Dr. Sinn performed a right sagittal split osteotomy to try to improve the alignment of the jaws and then wired the jaws together again for another six weeks. She did fairly well after that surgery until August 28, 2003, when she yawned and developed severe pain predominantly in the left side. She went back to see Dr. Sinn on an emergency basis, and he opened the left joint in the office and according to Terri sanded the fossa. Terri has had no improvement; in fact, her pain levels are continuing to worsen. She is here for another opinion. Dr. Sinn did obtain a CT scan, which we will review.

Terri has significant immune disorder and receives Ig IV. She has common variable immunodeficiency (CVID). She also has low IgA levels. During the past five years, she has had lot of problems with pneumonia. She has had it at least five times. She has chronic sinus problems as well. She was hospitalized for one bout for 23 days. She has a kidney problem that they have diagnosed as FSGS, which is focal segmental glomerular sclerosis, which is an autoimmune condition. After that she was treated with prednisone and cyclosporin as an immune system suppressor. This condition causes the passage of protein in large amounts through the urinary system. She has had problems in the past with stomach ulcers and has problems with diarrhea. The stomach ulcers have cleared now. She has had anemia off and on. Terri also apparently has some kind of platelet disorder where the platelets have an abnormal shape to them. She has a sister who is 10 years old who also has TMJ problems and also has had previous Proplast Teflon in one jaw joint and has similar kind of symptoms that Terri has. Her sister has also had multiple surgeries in the affected jaw joint.
Current Medications

Lexapro 15 mg
OxyContin 10 mg b.i.d. 
Benadryl 25 mg which she has to take with any pain medication. She essentially breaks out with any pain medicine
Zonegran 100 mg q.d. 
Seroquel 100 mg q.d. 
Phenergan 25 mg p.r.n. nausea
Soma 350 mg 4 per day
 
Allergies

 Terri has had a lot of allergic reactions to medications, and they include the following:  MORPHINE, CODEINE, TALWIN, HYDROCODONE, COMPAZINE, BACLOFEN, VICODIN, PERCODAN, AND MOST ALL PAIN MEDICATIONS.  Last week she had a rather severe reaction to baclofen. At that time, Dr. Sinn suggested that she go into a psychiatric ward. On the baclofen, she had problems with hallucinations and a lot of problems with cycling through depression and crying and so forth.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Terri has increased fullness on the right side of the face compared to the left side. The left side appears to be probably 8 to 10 mm deficient compared to the right angle of the mandible. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is a couple of millimeters off toward the right side as is the chin which is 2 to 3 mm off to the right side. 

In profile view, she may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency and may be probably 5 to 8 mm of AP mandibular deficiency. Chin-neckline is short and not well-defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Some mild crowding, lower anterior teeth. Has fairly good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth but has a high labial frenulum that attaches right in between the two lower central incisors. In the upper jaw, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by about 2 mm, and on the left side she is fairly close to being Class I. Some malrotations of the upper left cuspid. Has a slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being a millimeter or 2 lower than the left side. 

Terri rates her TMJ pain at 10, overall facial pain currently on an average day at about 10, jaw function, diet, and disability all at 8. She gets headaches about two times a week in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area at about a level of 8. Her incisal opening is 22 maximum, and she stops because of severe pain. Amount of opening without any significant pain is only about 5 mm or so. Excursive movements are very minimal with probably less than 0.5 mm in each direction. About two years ago, her incisal opening was about 41 mm. To palpation, she has severe pain over the TMJs, medial pterygoids, SCMs, left styloid area, high moderate pain over the masseters, right styloid area, and moderate pain over the posterior neck and temporalis muscle areas.

She is missing all four third molars. She has root canals on the maxillary right lateral incisor, cuspid, and left second bicuspid. She said these occurred after the upper jaw surgery, and apparently she had a lot of problems with those teeth almost immediately after surgery and had to have the root canals done. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Sinuses as best I can see appear reasonably clear. Probably some carry over from the prostheses mask the clarity. She has bilateral Biomet total joint protheses in place with both the fossas and mandibular components. On the left side, the mandibular component is positioned somewhat anterior. Fossas appear to be stabilized with three bone screws on the left side and four bone screws on the right side. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses do appear relatively clear. Prostheses are positioned perhaps a little bit toward the right side, and the angle of the mandible is rotated in toward the right side. The whole maxilla appears to be rotated the posterior aspect off toward the right side, and this may account for some of the asymmetry noted in the frontal view. Screws all appear to be position on the prostheses.

Right TMJ tomogram shows the prosthesis in place. Not too much thickness between the fossa. There may be some bone cement up in there as there appears to be thick white mantling along the articular eminence and in the base of the fossa. Difficult to tell if there is reactive bone, but there is a little bit of shadow in front of the condyle that might hint that. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows the presence of again what appears to be some bone cement in the fossa and along the flattened articular eminence. Both articular eminences apparently have been ground down. The condyle appears more anteriorly positioned in this fossa as compared to the opposite side and is compared to the position of the internal meatus. 

Cephalometrically, she has a little bit of a high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway is probably moderate size. At least in the profile view she appears to have fairly close to a skeletal Class I and occlusal Class I relationship. Left condyle and probably the fossa are more anteriorly positioned than the right side. 

Basic Diagnoses

Probable fractured fossa component, left TMJ prosthesis
Bilateral TMJ localized foreign body giant cell reaction
Bilateral TMJ severe pain
Severe headaches 
Moderate to severe myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment

Blood test to evaluate for Chlamydia group antibody titers and Mycoplasma pneumoniae antibody titer

Pain control
OxyContin 20 mg, 1 tablet b.i.d., disp. 30
Referral to Dr. Howard Cohen for pain management

Tomograms of TMJ both sagittal and coronal views
Evaluation at the Environmental Center for hypersensitivities to materials in the prostheses

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ removal of current prostheses
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Fat grafts to bilateral TMJs
Application of arch bars to control occlusion

Continued pain management as necessary posttreatment

Dr. Sinn apparently told Terri that the fossa component is broken, and he is suggesting it be changed out and the same type of fossa replaced. I feel in the long term that she would do much better with replacement of both devices. She says other patients that she knows of that have that device have also had problems. One patient in fact committed suicide because of her severe pain problems and depression. Another patient that had the devices placed had them removed. She is now the longest followup for Dr. Sinn with the devices still remaining. She was very receptive to our treatment recommendations. I did tell her that Dr. Sinn could put in the devices also. She may prefer to come here, and if so, we will be happy to work with her and help her. 