PAUL LUTZ										06-21-04

Paul is 47-year-old and referred by Dr. Duane Keller, 3929 Bayless Ave., St. Louis, MO  32125.

Patient History

Paul has had previous surgery for a deviated nasal septum. Otherwise he is in good health. Takes Lipitor 40 mg once per day. Has an adverse reaction to PENICILLIN LIQUID. Paul has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joints bother him. Is not aware of nocturnal clenching or bruxism. He feels best in the mornings, and the pain is worse in the evening. He feels that he breathes a lot through his mouth when sleeping. 

Patient Concerns

TMJ pain
Headaches
Grating noises particularly in the left TMJ
Bite doesn’t fit
Open bite
Crossbite
Snoring
Predominant mouth breather
Difficulties eating

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Paul has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Some asymmetry in the nose. Upper lip length is about 26 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship may be about -2 mm. Maxillary dental midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin are all pretty much on the facial midline.

In profile view, Paul appears to have some AP maxillary deficiency. Chin is significantly AP deficient being probably 20 mm retruded. Chin-neckline is not well-defined at all. Has a head postured forward neck position. Has pretty much about a 90-degree nasolabial angle. A little bit of ptosis of the nasal tip. 

Intraorally, Paul is missing the mandibular right second and third molar and left second and third molar. The rest of the teeth are present. Some very minimal crowding, lower anterior arch. Has fairly good attached gingiva except for around the cuspids it is thin and the central incisors are quite thin as well. In the upper arch, she is missing the second and third molars on the right side. On the left side is missing the second bicuspid and all three molars. Could be just a slight Class II cuspid relationship by maybe 1 to 2 mm. Paul does have an anterior open bite of probably 2 to 3 mm. Has a crossbite on the right side including the bicuspids and molars. Left cuspid is probably 2 mm lower than the right cuspid in the upper arch.

In frontal view, the mandible appears to be shifted off toward the right side, the anterior part. 

Oropharynx appears relatively normal. Transverse dimension between the faucial pillars may be just slightly constricted.

Intranasally, he has some deviation of the nasal septum off to the right side and then there is a spur off to the left side. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. Luminal valves seem a little bit constricted. He does have nasal airway obstruction. 

He has some mild tenderness over the TMJs, temporalis areas, styloid areas, shoulders, and left masseter area. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly. On opening, he does deviate 2 to 3 mm to the left side. Maximal incisal opening is 43 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 10 mm and to the left 11 mm.

Intranasally, the luminal valves look somewhat constricted.

Radiographic Evaluation

The left condyle looks extremely long in the head and neck area as compared to the right side. Missing maxillary right second and third molar, left second bicuspid, first, second, and third molar, and bilateral mandibular second and third molars. The rest of the teeth are present. Sinuses appears clear. The left nasal airway appears somewhat obstructed compared to the right side. Left condylar head and neck area appear larger in dimension than the right side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. Left nasal airway appears fairly well blocked off. Right side appears to have some space particularly around the middle turbinates. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears small anteroposteriorly and is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Some increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa but increased posterior joint space compared to the opposite side. Condyle possibly could have been postured forward on this as on the second tomogram cut it was postured forward about 4 mm in the fossa area.

On opening, there is decreased translations of both TMJs.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class II jaw relationship. There is a significant anterior open bite with increased angulation of the upper arch. All of the missing posterior teeth are readily observed. Upper incisors appear slightly overangulated as do the mandibular incisors. Paul has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of only about 1 mm. Has an extremely accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch with the four incisors being significantly elevated compared to the rest of the posterior teeth. There is a reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch with the lower anterior teeth being significantly lower than the posterior teeth probably by 2 mm difference in the lower arch and probably 4 to 5 mm of accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with reduction
Slight AP maxillary deficiency 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency 
High occlusal plane angle
Slight Class II cuspid relationship
Anterior open bite of about 2 to 3 mm
Right posterior crossbites
Accentuated curve of Spee, upper arch
Slight reverse curve of Spee, lower arch
Slight tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1+ mm
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Maxillary lateral incisor roots in distal angulation
Missing maxillary left second bicuspid, first, second, and third molar, maxillary right second and third molar and bilateral mandibular second and third molars
Right maxillary alveolar ridge atrophy
Masticatory dysfunction

Recommended Treatment

Surgery, Stage I
Bone graft to left maxillary sinus
Placement of osseointegrated implants when convenient

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch in three segments:
Segment 1:  Left cuspid/first bicuspid
Segment 2:  Left lateral incisor through right lateral incisor
Segment 3:  Right cuspid through first molar
Place a compensating step in the arch wire to align the four incisors in an elevated plane level as compared to the cuspids and bicuspids. Importantly, tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing a millimeter to 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the tooth-size discrepancy 

Surgery, Stage II
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it, downgraft it posteriorly, and eliminate the accentuated curve of Spee
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Augmentation genioplasty with HTR implant

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
 
Restorative dentistry to finalize the occlusion
