KELLY LYDE (SMITH)								02/03/2006

Kelly is 41 years old, referred by Dr. James Baker, 10900 Hefner Point Dr., Ste. 204, Oklahoma City, OK, 73120.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Chronic pain.
Chronic functional problems with the jaws.
Sleep apnea.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Muscle pain and spasms.
Pain down through the neck and shoulders.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Difficulties swallowing. 
Speech affected.
GI problems. 

She has had surgeries which include the following:
August of 1990, hysterectomy.
December 1994, multiple facial fractures shattered lower right quadrant (jaw.)
October 1995, bone graft and steel plate to the jaws.
December 2000, surgery to unload jaw joints.

She smokes one pack of cigarettes per day and has done this for 20 years.  She had hepatitis at the age of 20.

MEDICATIONS:
Aciphex.
OxyContin 40 mg b.i.d.
Effexor 75 mg per day.
Zelnorm 6 mg b.i.d.
Lortab p.r.n. breakthrough pain.
Soma at night and may take one during the day. 
Lunesta p.r.n. 

Codeine causes vomiting but she apparently has no other drug reactions known.  

Kelly does have a CPAP machine but she has significant difficulties in using it and keeping it in place and having it function.  She wakes up at times with a lot of air in her stomach likely from the machine.  She says that it tends to make her feel like the back of her throat is being closed off.

Kelly's problems began in December of 1994 when she was involved in a motor vehicle accident sustaining multiple mid facial and mandibular fractures.  She had open reduction internal fixation in 1994 of the facial fractures.  
KELLY LYDE				02/03/2006				Page 2


She then had dental reconstruction done.  She did reasonably well until about 1998 when her headaches began.  In June of 2000, Dr. Steve Sullivan performed what sounds like vertical oblique osteotomies to "create joint space" in the joints.  This was not very successful.  Kelly in addition has gone through some significant physical therapy and she also has had previous splints that have not worked for her.  Kelly has some decreased sensation to the right lower lip and chin area secondary to a previous bone graft that was placed to help rebuild the right side of her jaw.  She gets daily headaches at a level of 7 in the frontal, temple and posterior head area.  She wakes up with a headache everyday.  She has TMJ pain she rates at a level of 8, average daily facial pain at 8, jaw function and diet at 4 and disability at 7. 

Kelly has significant problems with snoring that is rated at a moderate to severe level.  She has daytime somnolence of moderate to severe levels.  She has moderate to severe sleep apnea and in addition has a sleep disorder and cannot sleep more than two hours at a time.  To palpation, she has moderate discomfort over the temporalis and milder tenderness over the TMJs, shoulders, moderate tenderness over the left styloid area.  Maximal incisal opening is about 39 mm of opening, without significant pain 20 mm.  Excursive movement to the right about 5 mm, to the left 7 mm.  

In frontal view, Kelly has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 26 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1.  Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 2 to 3 mm to the right.  Chin and mandibular dental midline are fairly well aligned and chin is also off to the right.  In profile view, upper lip is probably retruded by probably 3 to 4 mm.  The chin is retruded by 20 to 25 mm.  Chin neck-line and chin-neck angle are not well defined.  Kelly has a head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, Kelly is missing teeth on the left central incisor back through the first molar on the right side.  The second molar is in place.  She has a removable partial denture to replace the missing teeth.  She is missing the two central incisors and the right lateral incisor.  Kelly has a Class II occlusal relationship.  She has about 2 mm anterior overbite and an overjet of about 4 mm.  She is a full Class II.  She has a crossbite on the right side and a tendency towards the buccal crossbite on the left side.  The uvula, soft palate and the faucial pillars all appear relatively normal.  The tissues appear fairly healthy.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  She appears to have an adequate airway.  The septum appears relatively straight.  The columella is somewhat wide at the base.  The nostrils are a little bit narrow.  The luminal valves are probably okay. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the sinuses appear relatively clear.  She is missing the following teeth.  Maxillary right third molar, left third molar and first molar replaced by a Pontic as well as the two central incisors and the right lateral incisor.  She has root canals on the maxillary right cuspid, first bicuspid, left lateral incisor cuspid.  In the lower arch she has root canal on the lower bicuspids.  In the lower arch she is missing the left second third molar, left central incisor, right central incisor, lateral incisor, second bicuspid and first molar but she does have her right cuspid, partial overlay on top of the right cuspid and first bicuspid.  
KELLY LYDE 				02/03/2006				Page 3


There is a plate in the mandibular right body area.  Joints look arthritic with the left one being much more arthritic appearing than the right side.  Kelly has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4 mm.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is relatively straight but it could be septal spur posteriorly on the left side.  The turbinates are moderate in size.  It appears that there is adequate airway.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows that there appears to be some arthritic changes in this joint with flattening at the head of the condyle and decreased joint space vertically.  Articular eminence is moderate steep.  The styloid processes are fairly prominent. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a joint that is quite arthritic.  Joint space is very difficult to identify.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle is actually postured forward in the fossa.  On opening, there is moderately good translation in the joints.  The styloid process on the right side is more prominent that what I can see on the left side.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Kelly has a retruded mandible.  The occlusal plane is moderately high but not real severe.  The oropharyngeal airway measures a little bit less than 3 mm at the soft palate level and about 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  She has a bone plate in the mandible and she has an impacted third molar in the mandible as well.  She has a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with the left side worse than the right side.
Severe AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Class II occlusion.
Missing maxillary central incisors, right lateral incisor, left first molar and bilateral third molars as well as mandibular left central incisor, right central and lateral incisors, second bicuspid, first and third molars and the left second and third molars.  
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of only 3 mm AP dimension (normal 11 mm.)
Severe snoring. 
Moderate to severe daytime somnolence.
Moderate to severe sleep apnea.
Sleep disorder with inability to sleep more than two hours at a time.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
Masticatory dysfunction.
Speech affected.
KELLY LYDE				02/03/2006				Page 4


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
CT scan of TMJs, maxilla and mandible following TMJ Concepts protocol.
Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular condylectomy, debridement, reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward, down graft it posteriorly and expand it.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Placement of arch bars.
Restorative dentistry to improve facial balance. 