SUSAN LYMAN									12/05/2007

Susan is 52 years old and is referred by Dr. William Hang.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Her teeth do not fit together properly. 
She has been told she will loose her anterior teeth if her bite is not corrected. 
Sleep apnea. 
Tongue feels enlarged.

Susan has had some ongoing problems with extreme tiredness.  In roughly 2002/2003 she was diagnosed with sleep apnea.  Since 2004 she has been on CPAP machine that has improved her situation significantly.  However, she still has the significant problems with daytime tiredness.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Wellbutrin 300 mg daily. 
Effexor 150 mg daily. 
Estrogen patch 0.05 mg for 2 weeks and then 25 mcg vaginal suppositories for 2 weeks.
Progesterone 200 mg daily.
Red rice yeast tablet.
One-A-Day multiple vitamins.

Susan has no problems with headaches and only gets a headache once every 4 to 5 months.  She has no TMJ pain.  She does get some pain in her neck and back at about a level of 6 on a daily basis.  She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 0.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo.  She has some slight hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her fingers, toes and left elbow.  In addition, she does have problems with depression and anxiety.  She states that arthritis does run in both sides of her family.

In frontal view, Susan has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  She has a brachiocephalic.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0 on the left side and about 
1 mm on the right side.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is a little bit to the left about 1 mm but the chin is very close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency probably about 3 to 4 mm.  The mandible may be AP deficient by about 5 mm or so.  Intraorally, Susan has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  The lower left cuspid is in lingual inclination. Very minimal crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  There may be some slight angulation of the lower incisors.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has diastemas around the anterior four incisors with the large one in the center being approximately at least 2 mm.  In centric relation she has pretty much a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of probably about 4 mm.  The tongue appears moderately large.  She has crenations around the border of the tongue.  To palpation she has some very minimal tenderness over the right masseter and right TMJ area.  Joints seem to function reasonably smooth.  Maximal incisal opening is about 58 mm counting the overbite.  Excursive movement to the right 9 mm, left 10 mm.  

SUSAN LYMAN				12/05/2007				Page 2

Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  The uvula is a little bit elongated and soft palate appears moderately elongated as well.  Faucial pillars show significant constricture and transverse narrowness.  Tonsils look relatively normal.  She has a wide columella base that causes constricture of the nostrils.  Holding the nostrils open with a nasal scope significantly improved her ability to breathe through her nose.  Turbinates are moderate in size particularly on the right side.  Septum is deviated a little bit towards the right side.  Probably moderate nasal airway obstruction.  Luminal valves appear relatively normal.  Susan has moderate snoring.  She is not sure exactly how it has been affected with the CPAP machine.  She still has moderate to low severe daytime somnolence but she feels in part it could be related to her medications.  She has not had sleep apnea where she wakes up at night unable to catch her breath since she started the CPAP machine.  She may have a mild sleep disorder at times. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:                                                                                                        
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has crowns on most of the posterior teeth except for the maxillary second bicuspids and the second molars.  The left sinus appears a little bit cloudy compared to the right side.  TMJ condyles look relatively normal.  She appears to have a low vertical mandibular height and a low angle facial plane morphology.  Styloid processes are moderate in length.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is slightly posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  A little sclerosis around the head of the condyle.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Difficult to determine disc position.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows fairly well joint space.  A little sclerosis in the head of the condyle.  Posterior joint space, however, looks a little bit better than the other side.  On opening there is good translation of both condyles.  

Waters view shows that the septum is relatively straight.  Right turbinate is a little bit larger than the left turbinate.  Sinuses are relatively clear. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a low mandibular plane and occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  Anterior vertical maxillary height and anterior mandibular vertical anterior height appears less normal.  Oropharyngeal airway appears to be about 3 mm at the base of the soft palate.  At the posterior pharyngeal wall and at the base of the tongue it appears to be closer to 7 to 8 .  There appears to be band of tissue going into the posterior pharyngeal wall area from the soft palate.  Tongue appears to fill the majority of the oral cavity.  There is some mild hypereruption of the mandibular left cuspid tooth.  Otherwise, the lower arch and upper arch are fairly lateral relative to the curve of Spee.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Maxillary hypoplasia.
Mandibular hypoplasia.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Significant constricture of posterior faucial pillars.
SUSAN LYMAN				12/05/2007				Page 2

Sleep Apnea (without CPAP).
Macroglossia.
Wide, deformed columella creating narrow nostrils.

Recommended treatment:
MRI of TMJs.
Presurgical Orthodontics.
Align and level the maxillary arch.
Align and level the mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance it.
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP).
Reduction glossectomy.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the chin.
      4.	Post surgical orthodontics to refine and retain the occlusion.
