KRYSTLE LYNN									01/24/2008

Krystle is 24 years old and is referred by Dr. Hilton Goldriech, 3105 Legacy Dr., Ste. A, Plano, TX 75023.  She has had problems with her thyroid.  Krystle does have some elevated liver enzymes that are being evaluated.  She has had a number of surgeries including tonsils and adenoids, ear surgery at least 10 to 12 times, myringotomy and tubes and some sinus surgery.  She had to have some grafting in her ears to close over the tympanic perforations.  She has had some trauma to her nose and has had some nasal surgery on it externally and internally as well.  She also had some chin surgery where the chin has been advanced and also apparently there is an implant in the chin as well.  She has apparently had some cartilage grafting to the nose.  She also has had Lasik surgery. 

MEDICATIONS: 
Focalin XR 50 mg one per day.
Tapazole 20 mg two at night. 
Nasonex two times a day.
Vitamins and minerals and other dietary supplements.

PRIMARY CONCERNS: 
Difficulties breathing through the nose.
Tongue thrust.
Speech problems.
Produces too much saliva.
Biting difficulties. 
Narrow arches transversely.
Anterior open bite.

In frontal view, Krystle has fairly good balance in the upper and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about –1.  Maxillary midline is shifted a little bit off to the left side as is the mandibular dental midline by at least about 1 mm and the chin is off to the left about 1 to 2 mm.  The nasal tip is off to the right side 1 to 2 mm.  The upper lip appears to be retruded maybe about 1 mm and chin maybe back about 8 to 10 mm.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  Teeth appear somewhat small in size.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  There is lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  In the upper arch, Krystle has all of her upper teeth back through the second molars present.  In the upper arch the left cuspid is about 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  She has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side by about 2 mm but the left side appears closer to a Class I.  The maxillary left cuspid is 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 2 mm higher than the right side.  The left eye is about 2 mm higher than the right eye.  The lateral canthal on the left eye is a little bit inferiorly positioned compared to the opposite side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Transverse widths of the arches appear somewhat narrow.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderate in size.  She has some good stricture of the nostrils.  On the right side the septal cartilage is deviated a little bit off to the right side.  There is some significant narrowing of the luminal valve.  
KRYSTLE LYNN				01/24/2008				Page 2

On the left side it is to a lesser extent.  Krystle's first nasal surgery was done by Dr. Rod Rorich and the chin was built up by Dr. Craig Hobar.  The second nasal work which took about 7 hours was performed by Dr. Jack Gunter and the second chin implant was done by Dr. Fearon.  To palpation, she has no tenderness to the temporalis area but a little bit over the masseter particularly on the right side.  It appears that there may be some kind of foreign material implanted into angle of the mandible on the right side.  To palpation she has some mild tenderness over the right masseter and right TMJ area.  On opening, she has an occasional loud audible pop that occurred somewhere around 35 mm but is not consistent.  Maximal incisal opening is 42 mm.  Excursive movement is about 7 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex evaluation shows that she has a 3 x 3 lower retainer.  All four third molars are absent.  Her sinuses look reasonably clear.  She has had some chin surgery done, as there is a bone plate present and also an implant by history.  It appears that there may have been some implants placed at the angles of the mandible particularly on the right side and maybe to a smaller degree on the left side but difficult to tell.  The left condyle appears quite arthritic and appears to have lost some condylar volume.  It is quite a bit shorter vertically as compared to the opposite side. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear fairly clear although the right one is a little bit cloudy.  The septum is fairly straight.  There are some pins in the septum likely to help keep it centered.  Turbinates may be somewhat large posteriorly.  Maxillary and mandibular arches are narrow transversely. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is small in size and appears arthritic.  Joint space looks fairy good, however.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is postured forward in the fossa so she may not have been in centric relation.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  There is some kind of metal object in the right ramus area.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles.  The left eminence is quite a bit more flat as compared to the opposite side.  On the x-ray she may have been posturing her mandible forward.  In remanipulating her mandible she has a little bit more end-on Class II occlusion bilaterally.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some maxillary and AP mandibular deficiency. Class II skeletal and Class II end-on occlusal relationship.  She has a metal pin through her maxilla that extends up into the nose.  There is some kind of implant at point A and subnasale bone position.  There is a bone plate in the chin.  The chin was advanced probably about 4 mm.  There was a low chin advancement.  The implant probably is Silastic and is sitting above the chin area somewhat.  Occlusal plane is moderately high.  Her oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 6 mm but at the base of the tongue it measures about 2 mm.  Krystle has only one kidney.  Also, she never had periods except when she was placed on birth control pills.  They were not even regular during that time.  She currently is off birth control pills as they are evaluating her liver and she does not have periods currently.  Bolton's analysis shows that there is a tooth size discrepancy of almost 5 mm.
KRYSTLE LYNN				01/24/2008				Page 3

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with occasional reduction. 
Right TMJ possible disc location.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Transverse deficiency of both maxilla and mandible.
Maxillary arch asymmetry and mandibular arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side.
Wide nasal dorsum.
 Nasal tip deviated to the right 2 mm. 
 Bilateral infraorbital hypoplasia.
 Wide chin secondary to previously placed chin implant.
 Obstruction of right nares secondary to septal cartilage shifted towards the right and 
       luminal valve constricture.
 Class II end-on occlusion.
 Maxillary midline shifted 1 to 2 mm to the left at the mandibular dental midline and   
             facial midline.
 Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4 to 5 mm. 
 Moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.
 Slightly reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch.
 Anterior open bite.
 Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 to 3 mm (normal 11 mm.)
 Moderately high occlusal plane.
 Previously placed implant in right mandibular ramus. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
MRI of left and right TMJs. 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider expanding the lower arch if possible 4 to 5 mm in the first molar area.  If it is difficult to do this, it can be done surgically. 
Open spacing around the upper anterior teeth if possible.
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ surgery (depending on MRI findings.)
Bilateral ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance, expand and rotate in a counterclockwise direction.

KRYSTLE LYNN				01/24/2008				Page 4

Remove previously placed chin implant.
Consider placement of bilateral infraorbital implants.
Nasal reconstruction to narrow the dorsum, straighten, and open the right nares.
Consider partial turbinectomies if indicated to improve function of nasal airway.
Consider removal of implant of right mandibular ramus area.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to buildup the teeth including possible anterior Veneers particularly on the upper arch.
