THERESA GANTZ-LYONS								11/2/05

Theresa is 49 years old, referred by Dr. F. A. Davis, 2375 N. Thompkins, Bethany, Oklahoma 73008 and also Dr. Weirich, Oklahoma City.  The only previous surgery that Theresa has had is a hysterectomy performed in December of 2003.  She was anemic prior to the surgery, but since having that performed, her anemia problems have been corrected.  She is on the Vivelle patch and she occasionally will take ibuprofen or Tylenol for her headaches.  She has had an adverse reaction to penicillin and sulfa.  Otherwise, she is in pretty good heath.  She does have some allergy problems and some stuffiness with her nose.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Headaches.
Pain in the jaw joints.
Some muscle soreness.

She does have some problems with earaches.  She gets occasionally tinnitus, rarely vertigo and she has no hearing loss.  The other joints that bother her include her neck, her hands and fingers occasionally, hips, and left knee occasionally.  She has problems wearing cheap earrings.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  She gets headaches almost daily that occur predominately in the temporal and posterior head area at a level of 3 but can escalate to 7.  She has TMJ pain at about a level of 3 and average daily pain at 5.  She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 3, disability at 4.  

In frontal view, he has fairly good balance in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is about -2 mm.  Nasal tip is deviated off to the left side probably about 3 mm.  Maxillary dental midline is actually fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm to the left of the maxillary midline.  Chin is probably about 6 mm off to the left side.  Upper lip is a little bit AP deficient by probably about 4 mm or so.  Chin is deficient by 6 to 8 mm.  Intraorally, she has crowns on the mandibular right second bicuspid, first second molar and left second molar.  She is missing mandibular left second bicuspid and has multiple diastemas between the lower anterior teeth.  She is also missing 1 central incisor.  It appears that it is the left central that is absent.  In the upper arch, she is missing second and third molars.  She is missing the left lateral incisor but may have retained primary C which is in the lateral incisor position.  Theresa states that she never developed her wisdom teeth.  She has almost a full Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and just a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the left side.  This is using what appears to be the left C as the cuspid.  She has an anterior overbite of about 1.5 mm.  She has a left-sided crossbite.  The oropharyngeal area looks normal and healthy and the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear relatively normal.  As Theresa shifts her mandible to the right where the center of the lower right central incisor is pretty much in line with the upper incisor significantly improves her facial symmetry.  However, it throws her into a full almost crossbite on the right side and on the left side the crossbite is corrected.  If she does shift to the right, the right mandibular angle and the right of the face is much fuller as compared to the left side by probably 5 to 6 mm.  Anteroposteriorly, the cuspids appear in fairly good alignment in the maxilla as well as in the mandible.  She does have some spacing between the maxillary left cuspid and primary cuspid.  She also has a little bit of spacing on the right side in the cuspid bicuspid area.  
THERESA LYONS-GANTZ			11/02/2005				Page 2


Intranasally, the septum is deviated significantly off to the right side but there is also a large septal spur off to the left side.  Turbinates are moderate in size but it may be causing some obstruction because of significant deviation of the septum and the septal spur that are present.  She has some loud snoring.  She does have some moderate daytime sleepiness but she relates that to lack of sleep and she gets up early but tends to go to bed late.  She is not aware of any sleep apnea symptoms.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, left second bicuspid, mandibular central incisor and maxillary lateral incisor.  She does have a retained primary C in the upper arch sitting in the cuspid area but virtually no root left on it.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  The condyles appear arthritic particularly on the left side.  Condylar head and neck appears a little bit longer on the right side as compared to the left side. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear.  The bony septum appears relatively straight so most of the deviation as noted clinically is in the cartilaginous portion of the septum.  The left turbinate appears enlarged and it appears to block a lot of the airway posteriorly.  The left turbinate posteriorly at least is more normal in size but anteriorly it appears larger clinically.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some significant arthritic changes associated with it.  Decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence has a relatively normal slope to it.  The condylar head and neck appear much shorter than the opposite side. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  The condyle appears a little bit better formed than the opposite side.  The condylar head and neck appears longer than the opposite side.  I can see the shadow of the styloid process.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both joints.  

Cephalometrically, Theresa does appear to have some AP mandibular deficiency.  However, oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal.  She has a slight increased occlusal plane angle.  Maximal incisal opening is 52 mm.  Opening without discomfort is 45 mm.  Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over her shoulders but no other soreness or pain around the head and neck area.

BASIC DIAGNOSES 
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction.  "Disc appears still salvageable."
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Class III cuspid relationship on the right side, slight Class II (1 to 2 mm) on the left side.
Missing mandibular left central incisor, second bicuspid, maxillary left lateral incisor and bilateral second and third molars.  
THERESA LYONS-GANTZ			11/02/2005				Page 3


Retained primary C in the cuspid position in the permanent cuspid in the lateral incisor position.  Primary C has virtually no root structure.
Multiple diastemas between the lower teeth and also in the upper arch in the cuspid and bicuspid areas.  
Mandible deviated off to the right side 5 mm at the dental level and 6 mm at the chin level.  (Mandibular dental midline is towards the midline of the right lateral incisor.)
High occlusal plane angle.
Severely deviated nasal septum off to the right side with a large bone spur off to the left side. 
Moderate hypertrophy of the turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary teeth.  Maintain some of the spacing around the primary C.  Retain maxillary left primary C being as it should help maintain bone in the alveolar area.  Maintain forward position of the root on the maxillary right lateral incisor and distally incline the cuspid.  On the maxillary left side, tip the cuspid root mesial to help aide in the interdental osteotomies (the cuspid is functioning as lateral incisor.)  Also, consider distalizing the cuspid and placing  a dentulous space in the lateral incisor area for subsequent implant placement and reconstruction of the lateral incisor.  This would require an initial extraction of the maxillary left primary C.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Open up space between the right central and left lateral incisors to replace a lower left central incisor.  Maintain space in the left second bicuspid area.  
Surgery.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back onto the facial midline and advance it in a counterclockwise rotation of approximately 8 mm. 
Maxillary osteotomies to expand, advance and down graft it posteriorly to level the occlusal plane.
Osseointegrated implants in the mandibular left central incisor area, left mandibular second bicuspid area and left cuspid area.
Nasoseptoplasty.
Partial inferior turbinectomies.
Extract primary C.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to finalize the occlusion. 