JEAN MACKIE									05-28-04


I saw Jean in her husband’s office, Dr. Curtis Mackie, in Harlingen, Texas. Jean is a 48-year-old female. 

Patient History

She gives about a six-month history of having clicking and popping in the right TMJ. She had orthodontics in 1998 for about two years. She currently takes no medications. She has tried splint therapy without success. No earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. The only other joint that bothers her is her lower back around L5-S1. No known allergies. Cheap earrings do bother her ears, however. She is aware of clenching at nighttime and during the day. She gets headaches about two times a month at a level of 6 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. No pain per se in the TMJ, but her jaws do get extremely tired. She rates her average daily pain at 1. Rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 4, and disability at 0. 

Incisal opening is 54 mm maximum but only 29 mm comfortably. Excursive movements to the right are 8 mm and to the left 10 mm. She has a Class I occlusion on the left side and Class II end-on occlusion on the right side by about 2 to 3 mm. mandibular dental midline is shifted slightly off to the left side about a millimeter as is the chin. She has an overbite of 4 to 5 mm anteriorly. On opening, the left joint functions relatively smoothly, but in the right joint she has an opening click at about 15 to 20 mm of opening and closing click at 5 to 10 mm. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the right TMJ and milder pain to palpation in the temporalis muscles, masseter muscles, and right styloid area. She has decreased sensation in the lower left lip and chin area secondary to previous third molar removal. 

She has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4.5 mm.

Clinical Examination

She has an upper lip length of 20 mm and tooth-to-lip relationship of 0. Mandibular dental midline and chin are shifted to the right about 1 mm in the dental area 2 mm at the chin area. 

In profile, the maxilla appears AP retruded by probably about 4 or 5 mm as does the lower lip. Chin, appears quite strong as she has a component of macrogenia. 

No complaints of nasal airway function.

Basic Diagnoses

Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction
Left TMJ mild arthritis and possible medial displacement of the disc; however, the left joint appears totally asymptomatic at this time
AP maxillary deficiency
Vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
AP macrogenia
Low occlusal plane angulation
Class II end-on occlusion on the right but Class I on the left
Reverse curve of occlusion, upper arch
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4.5 mm with small upper lateral incisors
Right TMJ pain
Headaches
Myofascial pain

Recommended treatment would be as follows: 

Treatment Option #1:

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Open spacing around the upper lateral incisors of an additional 1 mm around each upper lateral incisor so all together there would be at least 1.5 to 2 mm of spacing around each lateral, 1 mm distal and 1 mm mesial, to correct for the significant tooth-size discrepancy 
Align and level mandibular arch 

Surgery
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and increase the occlusal plane angulation and decrease the vertical overbite relationship
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a clockwise direction, increasing the occlusal plane angle
Possible AP reduction genioplasty

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Restorative dentistry to provide bonding veneers or crowns to the maxillary lateral incisors to make them more normal size

Treatment Option #2

Placement of orthodontic appliances on the maxillary and mandibular teeth

Surgery
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Right mandibular ramus osteotomy to maintain current occlusion but create space for the articular disc in the right joint

Postsurgical orthodontics to finalize occlusion 


