THOMAS HEARTLAND-MACKIE							02/26/2007

Thoms is 19 years old, referred by Dr. Ryan Zastrow from Vail, Colorado.  He is a general dentist up there.  The only previous surgery Thomas has had is he has had his adenoids removed.  Otherwise, Thomas is in good health with no major medical problems.  He did have his wisdom teeth removed about 4 or 5 years ago.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Lower jaw and bite are off.
Missing 2 permanent teeth.  

Sometime around 1992 or 1993, he had a fall on his bike and hit his head.  He was told that this knocked his skull symmetry out of kilter.  This affects his neck and back to a certain extent.  He also has some problems with both shoulders due in part to the configuration of the socket portion of the joint.  No other joints bother him.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  Only medication he takes is occasional Tylenol.  

Thomas probably had an open bite to begin with.  He had orthodontics from 1999 through 2000 and apparently had some relapse.  Braces were placed again from 2001 to 2002.  He had his third molars removed about 4 or 5 years ago.  He has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain.  He rates his jaw function, diet and disability at all 0.  He has no problems with earache, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  

In frontal view, Thomas has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are pretty much on the facial midline.  The maxilla may be just slightly to the right side by about 1 mm but not too significant.  In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is about 3 mm posterior subnasale. There is probably about 4 to 6 mm of AP maxillary deficiency.  The chin appears to be retruded by about 10 to 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is short.  Chin-neck angle is not well defined.  As Thomas postures his mandible forward about 8 mm or so, it does improve his overall facial balance particularly when filling out the upper lip.  Intraorally, he is missing the lower second bicuspids and has pontics in position that appear to be bonded on to the adjacent teeth.  The teeth otherwise seem to be fairly well aligned and leveled.  He has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  He has a high labial frenulum but otherwise, appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.  He also has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch.  He has just a slight Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally by probably a couple mm.  It is almost an end-on incisor relationship.  He has a 2 mm anterior open bite.  Thomas has bilateral posterior crossbites being a little bit worse on the right side as compared to the left side.  Thomas appears to occlude on his left side with the second bicuspid, first second molar and also the cuspids.  On the right side he appears to occlude only with the first and second molars.  All other teeth are out of occlusion. The uvula appears a little bit broad but it may be slightly elongated but not too significant.  Soft palate and faucial pillars appear relatively normal.  Thomas does tend to breathe through his mouth when he is sleeping.  He also has some mild snoring.  He apparently has no problems with daytime somnolence and no sleep apnea symptoms.  Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged.  
THOMAS HEARTLAND-MACKIE         		02/26/2007				Page 2

The septum is deviated off to the right side particularly at the columella area.  It extends almost lateral to the columella.  He probably has some moderate nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation he has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints function smoothly.  Incisal opening is about 53 mm.  Maximal incisal opening is about 53 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is 8 mm, left about 9 mm.  Joints function smoothly.  Slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being maybe ½ mm to 1 mm higher than the left side.  AP position of the cuspids is fairly symmetric.  Maxillary right central and lateral incisor are slightly elevated compared to the left side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars and also the congenitally missing second bicuspids.  There are pontics replacing the missing second bicuspids.  Sinuses look relatively clear as best as can be told from this radiograph.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  

Waters view shows that there is a little curvature to the bony septum.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged with very narrow airways.  On the left side it appears that the ethmoid sinuses may extend down into the maxillary sinuses as there are significant air cells present in the medial aspect of the left maxillary sinus.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has good morphology and it appears to be sitting in a well-balanced position within the fossa.  Articular eminence has a moderate decreased inclination.  

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle with fairly good confirmation and good space around it.  Articular eminence is relatively normal in steepness.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that both the maxilla and mandible appear to be AP deficient.  There may be some slight anterior vertical maxillary excess.  There is a C-shaped curve to the upper lip.  Moderately high occlusal plane is present.  There appears to be decreased oropharyngeal airway at the uvula area of only about 5 to 6 mm and at the base of the tongue about 7 mm.  There is an anterior open bite and almost an end-on incisor relation.  The first molar area looks significantly a Class III but in the cuspid area it has just a slight Class III tendency.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
AP maxillary deficiency.
Slight anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Transverse maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
Apertognathia.
Slight Class III end-on occlusion. 
Bilateral posterior crossbite. 
Accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. 
THOMAS HEARTLAND-MACKIE			02/26/2007				Page 3


Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm. 
 Deviated nasal septum.
 Hypertrophied turbinates. 
 Partial nasal airway obstruction.
 Missing bilateral mandibular second bicuspids.
 Bilateral mandibular alveolar atrophy. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch.  Be sure the lateral incisors roots are tipped mesially and cuspid roots are tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the tooth size discrepancy. 
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it forward, decrease the occlusal plane angle, and expand it.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Nasal septoplasty. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Bilateral mandibular alveolar bone grafting (harvest bone grafts from the mandible.)
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Bilateral mandibular dental osseous implants. 
Restorative dentistry to place crowns on bilateral mandibular implants.

