MARY MADDEN-GRAFF								09-12-02

Mary is 45 years old and referred by Dr. Czarnecki.

Chief Complaints

Mary’s primary concerns include the following:
TMJ pain
Headaches
TMJ noises
Teeth and jaws don’t fit together 
Difficulties eating and chewing
Difficulties breathing 
Nasal airway obstruction
Jaws are retruded
Very tired during the day
Sleep difficulties related to difficulties breathing

Patient History

She has had no previous surgeries for any reason. She had a history of asthma as a child but no problems with it now. She does have some thyroid problems and takes Levoxyl 100 mg. She also takes Vioxx 25 mg. She has a heel spur for which she is taking the Vioxx, and that prescription should be done in about a week. Mary does believe she probably breathes through her mouth when she sleeps but otherwise is not aware of problems breathing through her nose. Mary has no problems with earaches or vertigo but does get occasional tinnitus. She cannot wear cheap jewelry as it causes her ears to get red and inflamed. Other known allergies that she has include dogs and dust, but she is not aware of any food allergies.

She gets headaches no more than one time per week, and they occur in the frontal and temporal areas at about a level of 3. She rates her TMJ pain at about a level of 3. They can occur when she is talking or eating, and this pain comes and goes depending on her activities. Overall pain is about a level of 3, jaw function and diet at 3, disability at 0. She is aware of having developed TMJ problems about one year ago of unknown etiology. She is not aware of having joint problems prior to that. Other joints that bother Mary include her neck, hands (which are just beginning), and she has a heel spur on her left foot.

Current Medications

Levoxyl 100 mg.
Vioxx (that prescription should be done in about a week).

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Mary has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is 5 mm. Maxillary dental midline and mandibular dental midline are pretty much on the facial midline. Chin is shifted a little bit off to the left side probably about 3 mm, and the tip of the nose is off to the right side a couple of millimeters.

In profile view, Mary demonstrates some AP maxillary deficiency of probably a good 6 to 8 mm. Chin is retruded 25+ mm. Chin-neckline is not well defined. 

She is missing mandibular right second and third molars and mandibular left probably second bicuspid, first molar, with perhaps the second molar drifted into the first molar position and a three-unit bridge in that area. In the upper arch, she is missing the left second and third molars and probably the right third molar. She has a lot of crown and bridges and has a lot of root canals present.

Intraorally, uvula is moderate-sized. Posterior faucial pillars appear to be somewhat posteriorly positioned. Soft palate appears to be posteriorly postured in the oropharynx perhaps. 
She has a full Class II cuspid relationship, and she has bilateral posterior crossbites. Transversely, the occlusion plane appears relatively level to the ears. She has about a 1-mm overbite relationship and probably about 6 mm of overjet. 

She is tired a lot during the day. She is not sleeping well at night. Transverse width of the nose is quite constricted. Nostrils are somewhat narrow and tapered. Turbinates are moderately enlarged but may be a significant enlargement compared to the width of the nose. She does have a septal spur off the left side of the septum that is almost touching against the turbinate on that side. 

To palpation, she only has some mild tenderness over her shoulders but nowhere else. On opening, she has an opening click of probably about 45 mm on the right side and a closing click at about 35 mm that is fairly obvious. On the left side, she has a glitch on opening at probably around 30 mm of opening, and on closing, she has a more definitive click at probably 30 to 35 mm. There were some noises in excursive movements on the right side but not a discrete pop. Incisal opening is about 45 mm, excursive movements to the right 10 mm, to the left 12 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of mandibular right second and third molar, mandibular left first molar and third molar. The second molar drifted forward into the first molar position. Pontic replaces the bicuspid tooth, although the crown is larger than a regular bicuspid. She has root canals on the mandibular left first bicuspid, right first and second bicuspids, maxillary left cuspid, first bicuspid, second bicuspid. Most of the posterior teeth have crowns on them. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Condyles show some degenerative changes but not too significant with the left side being a little bit worse than the right side.

Waters view shows the septum deviated off towards the left side. Turbinate appear significantly enlarged, and no clear airway is seen. Maxillary sinuses have lots of loculations. Sinuses appear as though they may be relatively clear. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone obvious osseous changes with some sclerosis on the head of the condyle. There appears to be some loss of height. Some anterior beaking present. A little osteophyte sticking off the superior aspect of the condyle. Joint space actually looks reasonably good, except anteriorly the joint space is decreased between the condylar head and the articular eminence. Articular eminence is just moderately steep.

On opening, there is fairly good translation, but the extreme flattening on the anterior head of the condyle is observed. 

Right TMJ tomogram is not as clear. Appears to be decrease joint space vertically. Appears to be more of a hockey stick shape to the condyle on this side. Articular eminence is more shallow than the opposite side. Appears to be decreased joint space between the condyle and fossa. On opening, there is better translation on the right side than the left side, although the condyle is difficult to see.
Cephalometrically, her mandible was postured quite a ways forward and not taken in centric relation. We will repeat this x-ray. Turbinates appear fairly good size in a vertical dimension. Maxilla appears AP deficient and so does the mandible. Soft palate looks as though it is moderate in length. At least with the mandible postured forward, the oropharyngeal airway between the soft palate and posterior pharyngeal wall is about 5 mm. At the base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall, the distance appears to be probably 2 to 3 mm. 

Dental model analysis reveals that she has a tooth-size discrepancy of 2 mm. However, she has a number of teeth that have disproportionate crown sizes such as the maxillary lateral incisors, where the right crown is much larger than the diminutive left crown. In the cuspid area, the left cuspid is unusually large compared to the right cuspid. In the lower arch, the left cuspid is much larger as compared to the mandibular cuspid. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla is AP deficient. Mandible is AP deficient severely. High occlusal plane angle is present. Turbinates look fairly large vertically although they do not extend much beyond the hard palate. Oropharyngeal airway in the soft palate area measures about 3 mm, and at the base of the tongue, one shadow shows probably less than 1 mm and another area shows maybe about 4 mm. There is significant constricture of the airway.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc dislocations with significant deformation and non-reducing. 
AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of only 2 mm (normal 11 mm).
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Left-sided nasal septal spur.
Significant nasal airway obstruction.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Missing maxillary right third molar, left second and third molar, mandibular right second and third molar, left first and third molar, and second bicuspid with a pontic replacing the second bicuspid.
Class II occlusion.
Bilateral posterior cross bites. 
Disproportionate crowns on the maxillary cuspids and on the lateral incisors as well as involving the mandibular cuspids.
Overangulation of the lower incisors.
Moderate crowding, lower anterior arch.
Moderate crowding, upper anterior arch.
Lip incompetence.
Significant gingival exposure when smiling.
Narrow and posteriorly positioned posterior faucial pillars.
Daytime somnolence.
Sleep disorder.

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch getting the teeth out in proper position. Open a millimeter of space around the upper left lateral incisor.
Align and level lower arch. Strip lower anterior teeth, removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to help compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy.

Restorative dentistry
Replace crowns on the upper left cuspid, right lateral incisor, and restore the cuspids and lateral incisors to be of more normal size and compatible with each other across the arch.

Surgery
Reconstruct the mandible by one of the following:
Option #1:
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, meniscectomies, and reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Fat grafts to bilateral TMJs (harvested from abdomen).
Option #2:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair versus sternoclavicular disc graft to reconstruct the TMJ.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it, downgraft it posteriorly, move it upwards anteriorly, and expand it using bone plates and hydroxyapatite grafting.
Augmentation genioplasty.
Nasoseptoplasty.
Turbinectomies.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

Restorative dentistry to reconstruct the arches