EVA MADISON										04-11-03


Patient History 
Eva is 31 years old and was referred by Dr. Rick Roblee.  Her only previous surgery was removal of her wisdom teeth.  Eva’s problems began within the past 5 years of unknown etiology.  She did have orthodontics as a teenager with extraction of upper 1st bicuspids and lower 2nd bicuspids.  She has had a splint for the past 4 months that has helped some with the pain.  Current medications include: BCP, Advil, and Claritin occasionally.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  She gets headaches 3 to 4 times per week and usually wakes up with them.  The headaches are in the temporal and frontal areas at a level of 5.  She rates her TMJ pain at 0, overall pain at 5, jaw function at 5, diet at 1 and disability at 3.  She has no known problems with jewelry.  She is aware of having nocturnal and daytime clenching and bruxism.  She has no other joint problems.
Patient Concerns
Patient Concerns Teeth and jaws don’t line up very well
Headaches 
Pain through the muscles of the jaws


Clinical Examination

Lower lip and dentoalveolus is retruded significantly posterior to the chin and retruded posterior to the upper lip as well. As Eva postures her mandible forward to correct the occlusion, her lips become in much better balance, but her chin is quite prominent and probably is 4 to 6 mm stronger than it should be. Chin-neckline is perhaps a little bit short in dimension, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined.

Intraorally, Eva is missing the mandibular second bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. Crowing in the lower anterior arch with much better crowding on the left side as compared to the right side. Attached gingival is somewhat sparse, but there may be adequate tissue there. She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch. There is probably 5 mm of crowding on that left side, which will be beneficial to us. In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids. Has a V-shaped upper arch. She has a Class II cuspid-molar relationship, but the overjet is significantly greater than the Class II relationship. Overjet is probably about 8 mm. Anterior overbite is about 4 to 5 mm. As Eva slides her mandible forward into a Class I cuspid relationship, her incisors are fairly tight, which is indicative of probably a significant tooth-size discrepancy. 

Intranasally, the turbinates are of moderate size, and it appears they are a little bit inflamed. Airway may be somewhat decreased on both sides. Eva is not sure if she breathes through her mouth or her nose when she sleeps. 

Transversely, the lower arch appears to have fairly reasonable symmetry. Likewise, the upper arch appears to have fairly good AP symmetry. Could be just a slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being just slightly vertically longer than the right side but by no more than a millimeter. 

To palpation, she has some very mild tenderness over the styloid areas and some minimal tenderness over the right masseter area. No tenderness over the TMJs. TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly. Excursive movements are about 11 mm in each direction, and incisal opening is 53 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars as well as the mandibular second bicuspids and upper first bicuspids. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Condyles appear large but relatively normal in architecture. Significantly accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch is present. Can’t really identify the nasal airway structures very well on this radiograph.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. Septum appears fairly straight. Left nasal airway appears open, but the right side appears somewhat blocked. May be a little cloudiness in the left sinus. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit of flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of peaking at the top. A little hockey stick shape to the condyle. Articular eminence is fairly steep. However, articular disc appears to be in position. The joint space appears relatively well-balanced. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it and a little flattening on the posterior head and a little flattening on the anterior head. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Joint space is fairly well-balanced. Disc may be in satisfactory position although might be in a little bit of vertical orientation.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles and adequate space between the eminences and the condyles.

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship. Some slight over-angulation of the upper incisors perhaps and decreased angulation of the lower incisors. Oropharyngeal airway space looks adequate. 


Dental Model Analysis

Dental model analysis shows there is some significant attrition on the upper cuspids. Significant tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 4.6 mm. Posturing the models into a Class I position shows that there is a bilateral posterior crossbite tendency.

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary excess
Transverse maxillary deficiency
Severe AP mandibular deficiency
AP macrogenia
Class II occlusion 
Missing mandibular left and right second bicuspids, maxillary left and right first bicuspids
Significant crowding, lower anterior arch
Mandibular dental midline shifted 2 to 3 mm to the left of the chin midline and 1 mm to the left of the maxillary and facial midlines
Significant mesial inclination of the mandibular first and second molars
Headaches
Myofascial pain
Anterior deep-bite
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism
Significant tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 4.5 mm
Hypertrophied turbinates
Partial nasal airway obstruction

Recommended Treatment

Medication (Klonopin 0.5 mg tablet, 1 q.h.s.) to help control nocturnal clenching and bruxism

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Try to create a little bit of space around each upper lateral incisor to equal about a millimeter. If this will cause too much over-angulation of the upper incisors, then the spacing can be created at the time of surgery
Align and level mandibular arch. Try to shift the dental midline a little bit toward the right side a millimeter or so. Strip lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure. Try to upright the molar teeth. Increase angulation of lower incisors by tipping the incisal edges forward as the crowding is corrected

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand, move the posterior aspect superiorly, and advance about 3 to 4 mm
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a clockwise direction
AP reduction genioplasty
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
