TERESA (TERRI) MAHANNA							11/04/2005

Terri is 36 years old and is referred by Dr. Tom Pitts.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Headaches.
Previous orthodontics with teeth extracted and the teeth pulled backwards.
Teeth becoming a little bit crooked. 

Terri does have some problems with headaches that she gets 5 to 7 days per week at times.  She rates them at about a level of 5 and these occur predominately in the frontal and temple area perhaps occurring a little bit more frequently on the right side than the left side.  She rates her average TMJ pain daily at 2, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 0, diet at 2, disability at 0.  She does have some noises in the left jaw on opening with a slight pop at 5 to 10 mm of opening and closing pop at the same level.  The right joint seems to function reasonably smoothly.  No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  

Terri's problems began around 10 years ago when she became aware of clicking and popping in her jaw joints.  The etiology is unknown.  She did have orthodontics at approximately the age of 20 to 24 and she had 4 bicuspids extracted.  

Approximately 5 weeks ago, Terri had a hysterectomy and an oophorectomy performed.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS
Female hormones including estrogen and progesterone.
Vitamins.
Thyroid supplement. 
Advil or Aleve occasionally for headaches.

She thinks that she has some environmental allergies.  No earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She does have some problems perhaps wearing cheap earrings.  She is aware of clenching of her teeth at night and also during the day.  To palpation she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  

In frontal view, Terri has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm.  Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 1 mm to the left.  Mandibular dental midline and chin appear to be pretty much in line with each other.  In profile view, Terri has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 to 6 mm.  The upper lip is retruded by probably about 4 to 6 mm and the lower lip is retruded by probably about 6 mm as is the chin.  The lower lip is a little bit more retruded than the chin.  Chin neckline is just a little bit short but not too bad.  Chin-neck angle is very well defined.  Terri has a Class II end-on occlusal relationship.  She has about a 3.5 to 4 mm vertical overbite relationship.  The right joint functions smoothly.  The left one has a click at about 5 to 10 mm of opening and about 5 mm of closing.  No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  

TERESA TERRI MAHANNAH  		11/04/2005				Page 2


Maximal incisal opening is about 41 mm.  Excursive movements to the right 9 mm, to the left 8 mm.  On reevaluation, on opening it appears she has a little bit of click in the right side also probably about 5 mm of opening and closing though the left side is more obvious and prominent than the right side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION – Date of radiographs are 2/28/2005:
Panorex shows the absence of all mandibular second bicuspids, maxillary first bicuspids.  All 4 third molars are also absent.  The condyles appear large in size.  Lateral pole appears fairly prominent.  Right maxillary sinus appears more opacified than the left side.  Terri gives no history of chronic sinus problems.   She reports no problems breathing through her nose.  

Lateral cephalogram shows that the nasal septum is reasonably straight but some curvature to it and may be little spur off the left side.  Turbinates appear moderately large.  The right sinus appears opacified as compared to the left one.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES 
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with early reduction. 
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency predominately in the alveolus.
Macrogenia. 
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Anterior deep bite. 
Absent maxillary first bicuspids and mandibular second bicuspids and all 4 third molars.
Vertical inclination of maxillary and mandibular incisors.
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.
Low occlusal plane angle. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Open up space around the maxillary lateral incisors and cuspids to help increase the axial inclination of the maxillary incisors and to correct the tooth size discrepancy.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and increase the occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward in a clockwise direction.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
