TRICIA MAIBACH									04-28-03

Tricia is 41 years old and referred by Dr. Al Bishop, 3001 Brown Trail, Bedford, TX  76021.

Patient History

The only previous surgery she has had is her adenoids removed. Tricia had previous orthodontics when she was in the sixth grade through the eighth grade. She had four first bicuspids extracted, and she has had her two lower third molars removed, her right third molar never developed, and her left third molar is present, deformed, and hypererupted. 

Current Medications

She takes Demulen for birth control but no other medications.

Patient Concerns

Teeth don’t fit together very well
Jaws are malaligned and asymmetric
Gets popping in the right jaw joint
Possible nasal airway breathing problems as she breathes through her mouth when she sleeps
Snoring

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Tricia has fairly good facial balance in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about a millimeter to the left, and chin is about 2 to 3 mm to the left. As Tricia shifts her mandible to the right a millimeter or so, it does improve her facial symmetry. She does, however, have some increased fullness in the masseter muscle in the right side as compared to the left side. The right masseter muscle is probably about 3 mm or so more prominent than the left one. She does have hypertrophy of the masseter muscles with the right side being moderately larger than the left one.

In profile, maxilla is about 4 to 5 mm AP deficient. Chin actually may be in fairly good AP balance. Chin-neckline is relatively normal in length, and chin-neck angle is moderately well-defined. Some just slight fullness in the submental area. She does have some prominence of the nasal dorsum.

Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids in the lower arch and has the lower teeth retracted backward. Has fairly good attached gingival around the lower anterior teeth. Right cuspid may be about 0.5 mm to 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid. In the upper arch, Tricia is missing the upper first bicuspids. She has a crossbite on the left side from the left lateral incisor all the way back through the second molar. On the right side, she does not have a crossbite. Probably just slightly Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and on the left side as well. 

Tricia has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. On opening, she has a definite pop in the right joint at about 30 mm of opening and about 25 mm of closing. Left joint seems to function relatively smoothly. She does have about a 2-mm overbite anteriorly. Maximum incisal opening is about 40 mm. Excursive movements are about 5 mm in each direction, but it is quite painful for her in her right joint as she does the excursive movements. Tricia has no headache problems. She does rate her TMJ pain and discomfort at about a level of 2 and overall pain around the head and neck area at about a level of 2. She rates jaw function and diet at 3 and disability at 1. 

Oropharynx looks clear. In the nose, the septum is deviated off toward the right side some. Right turbinate is moderately large and seems to be a narrow airway there. On the left side, the turbinate is somewhat hyperplastic, and the airway may be somewhat constricted on that side as well. Has a significantly increased curve of Wilson on the right side of the lower arch. The left side appears pretty much okay. This might account in part for why there is a crossbite on the left side but not on the right side. Transversely, the maxilla appears fairly level with the facial structures. In the mandibular arch on the left side, the cuspid is about a millimeter lower than the right side. A little bit better vertical overbite on the right side as compared to the left side that probably accounts for this difference. Left side of the mandible may be just slightly longer vertically at the inferior border by 1 to 2 mm compared to the right side. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four first bicuspids, mandibular third molars, and maxillary right third molar. Maxillary left third molar is hypererupted and malformed. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear moderately large, but there does appear to be some airway there. Left condyle appears to be flattened anteriorly with some mild anterior beaking. Right condyle appears to be flattened anteriorly and also has some anterior beaking. The condylar head on the right side appears a little bit more narrow than the left side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Septum is deviated off toward the right side. Turbinates are moderately large and particularly the left side is more hyperplastic than the right. No much airway is visualized. Inferior border of the mandible appears a little bit balanced here than perhaps clinically.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a pseudocyst in the anterior part of the condylar head. Condylar head appears very narrow anteroposteriorly at the superior aspect but has several large anterior beaking components about 8 mm or so below the top of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle is positioned posterior in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space. Posterior and superoposterior spaces are significantly reduced. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some significant flattening on the anterior head and some anterior beaking present. Joint spaces look narrow all the way around, even including anteriorly, superiorly, and posteriorly. She may have some slight medial displacement of the articular disc as well as some slight anterior displacement. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Condyle appears to fill most of the available space. It is a little bit narrow at the superior aspect of the condyle but widens out about 5 mm inferior to the crest with some anterior beaking. May be a pseudocyst on the head of the condyle as well. 

On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyles. On the left side, there appears to be decreased joint space between the condyle and the articular eminence and likewise on the right side. The right side looks a little bit more arthritic than the left side. Articular eminences are fairly steep on both sides. 

Cephalometrically, Tricia appears to have AP maxillary deficiency, AP mandibular dentoalveolar deficiency, and a very prominent chin, probably in part iatrogenic due to retraction of the anterior teeth. Occlusal plane may be just slightly increased but not too bad. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 5 mm and at the base of the tongue about 7 mm. Does not appear to be any significant tooth-size discrepancy with the anterior six teeth. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with reduction
AP maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency and asymmetry
AP macrogenia
Slight Class III end-on cuspid relationship (approximately 2 mm)
Left-sided crossbite
Missing all four first bicuspids as well as bilateral mandibular third molar and maxillary right third molar with retained malformed, erupted maxillary left third molar
Slight transverse cant in the mandibular occlusion with the left side being about a millimeter lower than the right side
Slight dental arch asymmetries with the mandibular right cuspid being 0.5 to 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid and the maxillary left cuspid being 0.5 mm to 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid
TMJ pain
Hyperplastic turbinates 

Recommended Treatment

MRI of bilateral TMJs

Presurgical orthodontics 	
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip maxillary lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch. Try to upright the right mandibular second bicuspid, first and second molars, probably with cross-arch elastics. Will need to have good stabilization of the maxilla in performing this. May need a transpalatal arch wire or other device to keep from collapsing the maxillary arch any further transversely. This should help correct the accentuated curve of Wilson in the lower right arch
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand it and advance it forward
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance it and properly align it
Partial inferior turbinectomies
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy for AP reduction of the chin and bone screw stabilization

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

There are two other treatment options that I discussed with Tricia. Treatment option 2 would involve doing in the mandibular arch first an isolated procedure where we would do vertical bone cuts between the lower cuspids and second bicuspids as well as a mandibular anterior horizontal osteotomy linking to the vertical osteotomies. Distraction osteogenesis could then be placed and the anterior dentoalveolus brought forward about 5 to 6 mm. Difficulty with this is the time consumption it would require and the numerous visits to make sure everything was maintained and progressing properly. Also, Tricia would have to wear probably intraoral devices that would be bulky and somewhat unaesthetic-appearing. This, however, would allow us to advance the dentoalveolus without affecting the chin significantly. This then would require probably dental implants or crown and bridgework to replace the missing lower first bicuspid teeth. 

Option 3 would involve setting the teeth up with the same orthodontic movements as outlined for option 1. The only difference is that we would perform a mandibular total subapical osteotomy to advance the dentoalveolus, and, thus, decreasing the prominence of the chin. There would certainly be a greater risk of damage to the inferior alveolar nerve with this technique as compared to treatment option 1.