ROBERTA MAIZ									04/27/2007

Roberta is 14 years and 10-1/2 months of age.  Her orthodontist is Dr. Carlos Trevino Canamar, Rio Tiber 100-4, Colonia Del Valle 66220, Garza Garcia N. L. Mexico.  Roberta began orthodontic treatment in about 2001 and finished in December of 2006.  She takes no medications.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  She has no joint problems.  She has no history of TMJ problems.  She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain or myofascial pain around the head and neck area.  She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 0.  She has no problem with numbness. 

In frontal view, upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 5 to 6 mm.  Maxillary dental midline, mandibular dental midline and chin are pretty much on the facial midline.  The nasal tip may be just 1 mm off to the right side.  Lip incompetence is about 9 to 10 mm.  In profile view, upper lip is C-shaped and maxilla pillars are retruded by 3 to 4 mm.  She has some infraorbital hypoplasia of about 4 mm.  Chin appears retruded by about 15 to 18 mm.  Chin-neckline is short although the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  The lower third face appears somewhat elongated.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth are fairly well aligned.  Lower incisors appear somewhat over-angulated. Transverse width in the molar and bicuspid area appears a little bit narrow.  She is developing a little bit of lingual tori.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  Teeth likewise are fairly well aligned.  Upper lateral incisors appear somewhat enlarged particularly the right one.  She is just slightly a Class II by maybe 1 to 2 mm.  She has a vertical overbite of about 2 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  The uvula may be a little bit elongated.  Soft palate appears moderately elongated.  Faucial pillars appear significantly constricted and the tonsils are fairly large particularly the left one moreso than the right one.  This seems to contribute to the narrowing of the faucial pillars and posterior positioning of the pillars.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged with the left one being larger than the right one.  Columella is somewhat wide and nostrils are somewhat narrow.  Roberta is not aware of having problems with snoring, daytime somnolence or sleep apnea.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints function relatively smoothly.  Incisal opening is 58 mm.  Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars but all the rest of the teeth are present.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Condyles appear maybe a little bit short in vertical height. 

Waters view shows that the septum is deviated significantly off towards the right side with a bony spur on the right side.  Turbinates appear significantly enlarged.  There does not appear to be much airway present.  Sinuses appear clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The condylar neck appears somewhat short.  Joint space may be a little decreased.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it.  
There may be some decreased vertical joint space.  Articular eminence appears a little bit steeper on this side than the opposite side.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

ROBERTA MAIZ				04/27/2007				Page 2


Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Roberta has an anterior vertical maxillary excess and a posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.  The mandible appears AP deficient.  Oropharyngeal airway is quite large.  She does have what appears to be relatively large tonsils.  She has a little bit of adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx but not too significant.  She has a high occlusal plane angle and significant lip incompetence.  Lip incompetence cephalometrically measures about 12 mm.  She had some problems in the nasal dorsum and appears to have a C-shaped curve to the upper lip.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
AP microgenia.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Over-angulated lower incisors and to a lesser degree the upper incisors.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Nasoseptal deviation with a spur off to the right side.
 Nasal airway obstruction. 
 External nasal deformity.
 High occlusal plane angulation.
 Rule out TMJ pathology. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
MRI of left and right TMJ to rule out TMJ pathology. 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the significant tooth size discrepancy and retract.  Try to gently expand the lower arch in the bicuspid and first molar area with very low forces overtime.
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior maxilla superiorly.  Reposition the posterior aspect inferiorly to level the occlusal plane with slight advancement.
Bilaminar ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Augmentation genioplasty of 5 mm. 
Nasoseptoplasty. 
Bilateral inferior partial turbinectomies. 
External rhinoplasty. 
TMJ surgery if indicated based on MRI findings. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
