NICOLETTE MALINOFF								01/14/2011

15 years old, birth date 12/01/1995.  She had previous orthodontics from the age of 13 to 14 for about 8 to 9 months.  Primary concerns are as follows:

TMJ pops.
Occasional headaches. 
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Mouth breather.
Gummy smile.
Retruded jaws.  

The onset of her TMJ problems was approximately 4 years ago when she first noted the clicking and popping in the joints.  She just pops on the left side now and the right side does not pop any more.  She rates her TMJ at about 4, headaches at 0 as they only occur once or twice a month, jaw function at 3, die at 3, and disability at 0.  She has no trouble with earaches, vertigo, or hearing loss, but does get some occasional tinnitus.  She has a history of snoring, but says she does not snore now, although she does have moderate daytime somnolence but does not feel she has any sleep apnea issues.  She is a mouth breather.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  Upper lip is 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 5 mm.  The maxillary incisors are shifted to the left 1 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is 2 mm to the left and chin is 4 mm to the left.  Nose is 1 to 2 mm to the right.  She just recently had rhinoplasty in December 2010.  She had adenoidectomies performed in 2008.  She has a Class II end-on occlusion with an over bite of 2 mm and an over jet of 3 mm.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded 4 mm and the mandible is retruded 15 to 18 mm.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the temporalis muscles, masseters, right retromandibular area, and high moderate pain over the TMJs.  She has milder pain over the shoulder muscles.  Right joint seems to function reasonably smoothly, but on the left side she has a click at about 30 mm of opening and about 20 mm of closing.  Other joints that bother her include her left elbow.  Her wrists, ankles, and neck crackle on function.  She states she has previously fractured both wrists that were significant breaks.  She occasionally has some knee problems.  She is allergic to cats, dogs, red dye and milk.  The incisal opening is 46 mm, excursion movement in each direction about 8 mm.  She has been told that she has hyperplastic tonsils and she likely has hyperplastic turbinates and possible deviated septum.  The only medication she currently takes is Advair p.r.n.  She has no known allergies to jewelry.  


Based on history and clinical evaluation, basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction the left side and without reduction on the right side with changes that may be compatible with AICR.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Class II occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle. 
Myofascial pain. 
TMJ pain. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Probable decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Probable impacted third molars. 

There were no x-rays available at the time of this appointment.  Nicki has been to see a number of other doctors and has had several surgical opinions as well as orthodontic opinions.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

l.	MRI of left and right TMJ. 
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
	b.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward, move the anterior aspect 			superiorly, and posterior aspect inferiorly.  
	c.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 				counterclockwise direction.
	d.	Turbinectomies. 
	e.	Possible tonsillectomy.
	f.	Possible genioplasty.
	g.	Possible third molar removal.
