EMMA MALONE									10-18-02

Emma is 34 years old and referred by Dr. Duane Keller.

Patient History

Emma’s problems began in 1988 when she had a swimming pool accident and hit her head on the bottom of the pool. This started her TMJ problems. In 1989, she saw Dr. Duane Keller, and he made splints for her. In 1992, Dr. Scott Nolen in St. Louis performed a left TMJ arthroplasty and disc repositioning procedure and a right TMJ arthroscopy. She did fairly well for 10 years. About six months ago, her problems began to worsen. About that same time, one of her kids accidently hit his head underneath Emma’s chin, and this really exacerbated her situation. Dr. Keller has since made two splints, and she has also gone through physical therapy, but the effects of that combination last only about a day. She currently takes some muscle relaxers that she doesn’t know the name of, and she takes those just p.r.n. She has earaches, no tinnitus, but experiences vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her left shoulder (she had surgery in 1995) and left elbow. She has pain in her neck, back, and shoulder area, but it appears that it may be more of a neuromuscular origin. She currently cannot eat or chew without experiencing severe pain, and, thus, has limited her diet to strictly a liquid diet.

She has no known allergies. She has no problems wearing jewelry. She experiences nocturnal clenching. She is in constant pain, and that includes waking up in the morning where there is no really significant difference in her pain levels at all during the day. Her pain is significantly exacerbated with any jaw function. She finds it extremely difficult to eat or chew and is on a liquid diet at this time. 

She rates her headaches in the temporal and posterior head area at a level of 6, and they are constant but can escalate with eating and chewing. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, although this can escalate significantly with jaw function. Overall pain is at about a level of 6 without jaw function and on a liquid diet, but any movement of the jaws can exacerbate it up to a level of 8. Jaw function rate is at 9, diet at 10, disability at 6. 

Primary Concerns

Primary concerns that Emma has include the following:

Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Severe myofascial pain.
Total inability to eat and chew.
Significant sleep disorder related to the pain
Significant difficulties managing her kids because of the sleep deprivation and severe pain problems.
Back teeth do not touch.


Clinical Evaluation

Emma has good facial symmetry and balance in the frontal and profile views. 

Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. May have a slight division II inclination of the maxillary incisors. She has basically a slight Class II cuspid relationship. Posterior teeth are slightly apart. Gap is greater on the left side as compared to the right side. She is missing all four third molars and maxillary left second molar. She has an anterior deep bite of about 2.5 mm. 

To palpation, she has moderate pain over the TMJ/SCM areas and moderate to severe pain over the posterior neck, right masseter areas, and the styloid areas. She has moderate pain over the temporalis muscles and medial pterygoids. To palpation, left joint seems to function reasonably smoothly, however, the right side has a very soft opening click at about 20 mm and more obvious closing click at 15 mm. Maximal incisal opening is 41 mm, and she can open to about 30 mm without too much pain. Excursive movements are about 5 mm in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and maxillary left second molar. She has root canals in bilateral maxillary first molars and mandibular right first molar. She has crowns on all the molar teeth. Sinuses appear relatively clear, and nasal airway appears clear. Condyles look relatively normal as best can be evaluated for this x-ray.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a hockey stick shape to it and decreased vertical dimension posteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle appears to have fairly good morphology with a little flattening on the anterior head. If disc is present, it is probably anterior and could be in a vertical orientation.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology with a slight hockey stick shape to it. Decreased superior posterior joint space significantly. Anterior joint space may be slightly increased. Joint space would indicate that perhaps the disc is in a vertical orientation. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Translation is good in both joints with the right side being slightly better than the left side. 

Waters view shows the sinuses appear clear. Nasal airway appears reasonably good.

Cephalometrically, Emma has a slight skeletal Class II jaw relationship and slight Class II occlusion with a slight division II orientation of the maxillary incisors. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations.
Maxillary hyperplasia.
Class II division II end-on occlusion.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Severe myofascial pain.
Inability to eat and chew.
Sleep disorder.

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Eliminate the division II relationship of the upper anteriors.
Align and level lower arch. Consider stripping lower anterior teeth to keep from tipping them any further forward. 

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

Other Systems

In reviewing other systems, she has problems with the left shoulder and left elbow. No urinary tract problems. However, her periods are irregular, and she has excessive pain associated with them. She had fertility problems but does have two children, ages 3 and 1. She did have endometriosis that apparently was affecting her ability to get pregnant. She had surgery for her endometriosis and was able to get pregnant after that. She has some problems with dry eyes. She has had previous eye surgery. She smoked for four years during college about a half a pack per day but has not smoked in 10 years. She does have earaches and vertigo. She does have some fatigue problems but relates that to her sleep disorder caused by her TMJ problem. She has no thyroid problems herself, but there is a strong family history with a number of individuals in her family with thyroid disease. For about five years from the age of 19 through 24, she had two lovebirds and one cockatiel. One of the lovebirds died, and the fate of one of the cockatiels is unknown at this time. She had two cats for about five years, and one may have been able to eat birds, but they were primarily indoor cats. She has had a dog for 15 years that is primarily an inside dog. No exposure to hoofed animals. She has no implants in her body. 