GABRIEL MANLEY 								10/16/2006

Gabriel is 27 years old, referred by Dr. Tom Lowder 2709 W. Huntsville Ave., Springdale, Arkansas 72762.  Gabriel has had her wisdom teeth extracted but has had no other surgeries.  She is in good health. 

MEDICATIONS:
Valium 5 to 10 mg at night.
Trazodone 150 mg at night.
Ultracet 2 tablets twice daily.

Gabriel's TMJ problems began in 2003 when she became aware of clicking and popping in the jaw joints of unknown etiology.  Her pain became worse.  On November 17, 2005, she began orthodontic treatment for TMJ related problems.  In 2005, earlier on she also had 3 splints made, none of which corrected her problems.  Orthodontics also has not controlled her pain problems.  She has been in pain management and several different pain medications have been used without good effect.  She currently takes the Valium, trazodone and Ultracet although she feels that these medications are beginning to fail as well in keeping her reasonably comfortable.  She rates her daily TMJ pain at a level of 9 with the right side worse than the left side.  Average daily pain 7, jaw function 7, diet 9, disability at 8.  She gets daily headaches at about a level of 9 that occur in the frontal, temple, posterior head and top of the head bilaterally.  She gets earaches, right side worse than the left side and gets occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  With her headaches she does experience decreased hearing but otherwise is relatively normal.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also during the day.  She is aware of snoring and some difficulties breathing through her nose particularly at night.  She has some daytime tiredness but is not aware of any sleep apnea factors.  She had her wisdom teeth extracted in October of 2005.  Spends a lot of time in bed and misses a lot of work related to her severe TMJ related pain and headache problems.  

In frontal view, Gabriel has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 5.5 mm.  Nasal tip is a little bit off the right side by probably a 1 or 2 mm.  Maxillary midline is off to the left about 1 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, she has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip.  Upper lip supralabrale is slightly posterior to subnasale with probably 3 mm of AP deficiency in the maxilla.  Gabriel has lip incompetence of about 9 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded about 12 to 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is quite short although the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  She has a high mandibular occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  Intraorally, Gabriel has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Also, in the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class II end-on (5-6 mm) occlusion and has probably a 4 mm overjet relationship and 0 overbite.  In centric relation, she occludes only on the right second bicuspid, first and second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look healthy and normal including the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear relatively normal in size as best as can be seen.  Septum is deviated off towards the left side.  She has very narrow nostrils and relatively wide columella.  The luminal valves are somewhat constricted.  Using a scope and holding the nostril open significantly improved Gabriel's ability to breathe through her nose.  
GABRIEL MANLEY				10/16/2006				Page 2


To palpation, she has severe pain over the masseters, TMJ, styloid areas and shoulders with high moderate pain over the medial pterygoids, temporalis and moderate tenderness over the SCMs.  Maximal incisal opening is 57 mm but without significant pain and discomfort only 14 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 9 mm, to the left 10 mm.  Opening pops somewhere between 35 and 40 mm of opening on both sides with the left side occurring probably slightly before the right side and closing pops in both joints as well somewhere around 20 to 25 mm. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars but the rest of the teeth are all present.  She has root canal in the mandibular left first molar.  The condyles appear a little bit arthritic.  Difficult to evaluate the sinuses and nasal airway.  

Waters view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side.  Turbinates appear relatively normal in size and nasal airway appears reasonably good at least back by the bony septum although there is a spur coming off the left side of the bony septum blocking part of the airway.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit sclerotic on top.  There is decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that does also appear a little bit sclerotic and there appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Gabriel has a skeletal Class II occlusal relationship.  Both the maxilla and mandible appear to be retruded.  She has an overbite of probably about 4 to 5 mm.  Oropharyngeal airway actually looks fairly good.  Occlusal plane actually looks reasonably normal.  She does have vertical maxillary excess and AP mandibular deficiency.  Gabriel does have bilateral posterior crossbites due to transverse maxillary deficiency.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Anterior vertical maxillary excess. 
AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Class II occlusion.
Anterior open bite.
Occluding only on the right second bicuspid, first and second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.
Bilateral posterior crossbites.
Severe headaches. 
Severe TMJ pain.

GABRIEL MANLEY 			10/16/2006				Page 3


 Severe myofascial pain. 
 Deviated nasal septum.
 Narrow nostrils. 
 Wide columella.
 Nasal airway obstruction.
 Snoring. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Try to level the marginal ridges of the bicuspids and molars with each other.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly, expand it and advance it slightly. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.  
Nasal septoplasty.
Reconstruct columella. 
Post-surgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

