KRISTIN MANNINO								03/14/2007

Kristin is 19 years old, referred by Dr. Moody Alexander.  Kristin had lower jaw surgery on December 11, 2006, by Dr. Steve Sewell.  She had mandibular advancement.  Post surgery everything went well.  Last time Dr. Sewell saw her she had about a 40 mm incisal opening.  She has done well until about a month and a half ago when she began to have problems with her abilities to open and pain.  She has developed some pain on the left side but the major problems are on the right side.  She had a bad taste in her mouth right after surgery but not since then.  She feels that the swelling in the right side of the face is getting worse.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Pain in her jaw joints particularly the right side. 
Headaches.
Ear pain.
Swelling on the right side of her face.
Difficulties opening the jaws.
Difficulty eating and chewing.

Kristin has been in orthodontic appliance since December of 2005 and then she had her surgery for mandibular advancement in December of 2006.  Her current jaw problems began about 1-1/2 months ago.  She has had a history of headaches since childhood.  Presurgery, she had a history of clicking and popping in her jaw joints.  

Kristin states that when she was about 16 years old she became aware of clicking and popping in her jaw joints.  She also developed headaches and some pain in her jaw joints.  Her headaches currently are worse than the ones that she previously would get. 

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Advil.
Sudafed.

Kristin gets headaches predominately in the right side in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area at a level of 5.  These headaches occur daily and are almost constant at this time.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 5, jaw function and diet at 8, disability at 6.  In frontal view, Kristin has good facial symmetry and balance.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  In profile view, there is some AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch she also appears to have all her teeth back through the second molars.  She fits into a good Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has about a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Intraorally, incisions appear to be well healed.  Excursive movement to the right 6.5 mm, to the left 1 mm, maximal opening is 12 mm.  In frontal view she does have significant swelling on the right side of the fade with there probably being probably 6 mm at least more full.




KRISTIN MANNINO 			03/14/2007				Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows that she had previous surgery with 3 screws in the ramus on each side.  Condyles appear a little small as best can be evaluated and this x-ray is not of very good quality.  Difficult to evaluate sinuses.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to be a little bit deformed.  Decreased vertical and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  It appears that she likely has a displaced articular disc on that side.

Right TMJ tomogram is a little bit harder to interpret but the condyle also appears to be smaller in size than normal and it also appears to be superiorly and posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle appears as though there might be a disc dislocation.  

On open views there is virtually no translation of either condyle or perhaps just slight translation of the left side. 

Waters view shows that there could be a fluid level in the maxillary sinuses.  The other sinuses are clear.  Nasal septum is straight and turbinates appear normal in size.  

Lateral cephalometric view shows that she has a high occlusal plane angle and decreased oropharyngeal airway.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Three months postsurgery for mandibular advancement with bilateral sagittal split osteotomies.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations with closed lock on the right side.
Myofascial pain on the right side affecting the temporalis, masseters, medial pterygoid.
Facial swelling on the right side.
Right-sided headaches.
TMJ pain predominately on the right side.
Severe limited jaw function. 

SECONDARY DIAGNOSES:
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Rule out infection of right mandibular ramus area.

She states that she wakes up with significant headaches in the morning and this is probably due to perhaps clenching and bruxism at night that she may be unaware of.


KRISTIN MANNINO			03/14/2007				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications.
Levaquin 500 mg tablets dispensing 10, 1 tablet daily.
Klonopin 1 mg tablet dispensing 30 tablets, tablet q.h.s., refill x2.
MRI of left and right TMJs.
Consider surgery to correct the TMJ problems with secondary consideration for correcting the dental facial deformity. 





KRISTIN MANNINO 								03/14/2007

Telephone conversation with Dr. Steve Sewell, 414-805-5781:  I explained to him my findings on Kristin relative to her current problems.  He understands.  He would like for me to help manage her.  I told him we are to keep her on antibiotics for a week and if she did not improve then we would get the MRI on her.  I will keep him informed of her progress.
