ASHLEN MANOS									10/28/2005

Ashlen is 20 years old and referred by Dr. George Davis Jr., 1930 Village Center Circle, Las Vegas, NV 89134.  Ashlen had previous problems with strabismus and had eye muscle surgery to repair that.  Ashlen otherwise is in good health with no major medical problems.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS
Yasmin.
Spironolactone 50 mg per day.
Advil occasionally for headaches.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Teeth and jaws do not fit together.
Difficulties eating.
Headaches.

Ashlen believes that her problems began probably around 6 to 7 years ago or at least that is when she first was aware of clicking or popping in her jaw joints.  Etiology is unknown.  She has had orthodontics from somewhere around the age of 11 to 12 for about 2 years to the age of 13 to 14.  After completion of her orthodontic treatment, she had an open bite almost immediately after the braces were removed.  Her bite has probably gotten progressively worse but she is not aware of much of a change during the past year or so.  She does get occasional earaches, no tinnitus, occasional vertigo but no hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  No known allergies and no known problems with jewelry.  She does not believe that she clenches or bruxes her teeth.  She gets weekly headaches at about a level of 6 that occur in the temple areas bilaterally.  They can escalate to 7.  She is not aware of any specific TMJ pain on an average day but occasionally will get pain and discomfort in the joints.  On an average day she does not really have much of a pain problem.  She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 4 disability at 2.  

In frontal view, Ashlen has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 5.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left.  Chin is pretty much on the facial midline.  Lower dental midline may be just 1 mm to the left of the chin midline.  In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably about 2 to 3 mm.  Maxilla is AP deficient by probably at least 6 mm.  Chin is retruded by probably about 12 to 15 mm.  The lower third face is somewhat elongated.  She has probably about 7 mm of lip in competence.  Chin-neck line is a little bit short but chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Ashlen has a slight head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, Ashlen has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  Teeth are fairly well aligned.  She has adequately attached gingiva of lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  In centric relation, Ashlen touches first on the posterior teeth on the right side.  It hits predominately on the first and second molars.  The rest of the teeth are probably out of occlusion.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being probably 3 mm Class II on the right side and about 5 mm Class II on the left side.  She has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm.  


ASHLEN MANOS				10/28/2005				Page 2


Transversely, the maxilla is fairly level.  Intraorally, the oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  The uvula is a little bit hyperplastic.  The faucial pillars are moderately constricted.  Tonsils are present but do not appear too inflamed although she does have a tonsillitis problem currently.  Intranasally, she does have a wide columella.  The turbinates are probably moderately enlarged but not too significant.  She has a fairly good sized septal spur off the right side of the septum that could cause a little bit of airway obstruction.  She has a fairly large septal spur on the right side that could possibly cause some nasal airway obstruction.  However, Ashlen does not report any problems in reference to nasal airway obstruction.  She does not know if she breathes through her mouth or her nose when she sleeps.  She is not aware of any snoring problems except that she sleeps in a funny position.  She is not aware of any sleep apnea symptoms.  Although she takes a nap every day she is really not aware of being excessively tired because she has fairly rigorous school day and work schedule.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the TMJs, temporalis, masseters and right medial pterygoid as well as bilateral styloid area.  The joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Incisal opening is 55 mm.  Excursive movements about 9 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth including the third molars.  The mandibular left and right third molars are still probably partially impacted but the upper thirds appear to be fully erupted.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints.  The sinuses are difficult to evaluate on this particular radiograph.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are fairly clear.  The nasal septum has a little bit of deviation to it in the bony aspect.  The airway, however, looks reasonably good.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be fairly good size.  It fills a good part of the fossa area.  Articular eminence is about normal.  The joint space appears decreased superior and posterior.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly reasonable morphology.  There may be some decreased joint space vertically and posteriorly.  Articular eminence is relatively normal on inclination.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Ashlen has probably a 2 to 3 mm anterior open bite.  Oropharyngeal airway is moderately decreased with a dimension of the soft palate about 6 mm with the base of the tongue about 7 to 8 mm.  She has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship and high occlusal plane angle particularly in the lower arch.  Tooth size analysis reveals a Bolton's difference of about 1 mm.  





ASHLEN MANOS				10/28/2005				Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction.
Left TMJ multilocular synovial cyst.
Vertical maxillary excess.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Apertognathia.
Class II end-on occlusion being worse on the left side than the right side.
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Lip incompetence.
Malaligned maxillary third molars and impacted mandibular third molars.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open about 1 mm space around the upper right lateral incisor to help correct the tooth size discrepancy.   Align the upper arch to occlusal plane levels which include aligning the 4 incisors at an elevated plane level compared to the cupids, bicuspids and molars.  Place a step in the archwire to accomplish this.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Remove multilocular synovial cyst from left TMJ
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it upwards and level the curve of Spee.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in counterclockwise rotation to decrease the occlusal plane angle.  
Removal of 4 third molars.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

In my discussion with Ashlen and her mother, I did talk about other options.  One option would be to go ahead and do the TMJ disc repositioning surgery in December.  She has significant degenerative changes in her joints and discs and I told them we had probably about a 70% chance of those discs doing well.  If we did the surgery and the joints first, that would give us about 6 months to make sure the joints are going to hold up before the orthognathic surgery was done.  Thus, if they did not hold up we could go to a total joint prosthesis and use that to reposition the mandible and then just complete the maxillary work.  If the joints do hold up, then that would be helpful to know so that when we do the orthognathic surgery, we would have hopefully a fairly predictable and stable result.  

ASHLEN MANOS				10/28/2005				Page 4


They understand and they will think about the options of separating out the surgeries versus doing it all at the same time which would be probably next May.  

The onset of Ashlen's TMJ problems may go back to her early teen years as she was going through puberty and she may have had idiopathic condylar resorption that resulted in subsequent condylar resorption that may have lead to the severe open bite.  I explained to them that if we could have done this surgery on Ashlen 5 or 6 years, the results would have been much better as compared to doing them last year as compared to doing them this year as compared to doing them anytime during the future.  They do understand this.  They do understand that the discs are significantly degenerated.  I actually showed them on tracings of the discs and also the synovial cyst in the left joint.  They have a fairly good understanding.  I answered all the questions that they had today.  Consultation lasted almost 3 to 4 hours.  