MICHAEL MANTHEY								12-23-02

Michael is 18 years old and referred by Dr. Frank Sindoni, 40 N. Union Road, Williamsville, NY  14221.

Patient History

Michael was diagnosed with Nager’s acrofacial dysostosis. Michael has had quite a few procedures performed, the first being a tracheostomy in March of 1984. The list is included in the chart. He has had a lot of dental extractions performed. He has had previous attempts at distraction osteogenesis, and they were unsuccessful. In July of 1989, they did tissue expanders and bilateral mandibular osteotomies. In August of 1989, they had staged mandibular reconstruction performed again with mandibular osteotomies and application of cortical expansion devices. This was revised in November, and this was the distraction osteogenesis that failed. In July of 1991, it appears that he had bilateral coronoidectomies and bilateral TMJ explorations. In September of 1998, they attempted again to do distraction on Michael without success. In July of 2000, he had bilateral mandibular osteotomies performed to release mandibular ankylosis, and a gap arthroplasty was performed with Silastic implants placed and a left coronoidectomy. In February of 2001, the TMJs were explored again and Silastic implants removed. He also has had reconstruction of ear canals on several occasions as well.

Michael has had a tracheostomy on and off during his life. He has had a trach apparently all of his life essentially until April 2 of this year. The stoma is still open. He is getting a sleep study done in January to see if they can close the stoma or whether they need to maintain it.

Patient Concerns

The primary concerns that Michael has include the following:

Can’t eat or chew
Can’t open his jaws
Lower jaw is severely retruded
Difficulties breathing
Speech difficulties related to jaw position

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Michael has a little bit of facial asymmetry. Right side of the face is a little bit more full than the left side in the cheek area. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. Nasal tip is deviated a little bit to the left side about 2 or 3 mm. Maxillary dental midline is shifted to the left probably about 2 mm. Michael has severe head postured forward neck position. Maxilla may be 2 to 3 mm AP deficient. Mandibular is retruded about 40 to 45 mm. Chin-neckline is continuous, and chin-neck angle is absent.

Intraorally, Michael has four lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, he is missing the second bicuspids and second and third molars. Overjet is about 18 mm. In the lower arch, he is missing the four incisors and all the posterior teeth and has only the cuspids and first bicuspids bilaterally. He has a severe Class II malocclusion. Incisal opening is no more than 10 mm, and he has virtually no excursive movements. Michael has no pain to palpation around the head and neck area.

Current Medications

Michael is taking no medications currently.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows he is missing the maxillary second bicuspids and second and third molars. In the mandibular arch, he is missing the four incisors, second bicuspids, and all molars. Sinuses appear clear, although the maxillary sinuses are quite small. Turbinate on the right side appears a little bit enlarged. Joints are difficult to identify and may be some heterotopic bone around them. 

Waters view shows the sinuses are extremely small. Has a little polyp in the left sinus hanging down from the infraorbital rim. Nose is very narrow and constricted. Right side appears pretty much obliterated probably due to the turbinate. Mandible appears quite small on the PA film.

Left TMJ tomogram shows there is probably an ankylosis present. There appears to be bone in the bony and ramus of the mandible. There are some vascular clips in the joint area. May be some bony ankylosis present there as there appears to be junction of the condyle to the posterior wall of the fossa. Could be some bone between the coronoid process and the base of the skull as well but difficult to tell from this view.

Right TMJ tomogram shows there appears to be almost a solid bony fusion between the mandible and the base of the skull. It appears there is evidence of previous attempt at an inverted L osteotomy or perhaps that was the evidence of previous attempt at distraction with perhaps little to no bone present in a portion of the ramus running in a horizontal vector. Anatomy is a little bit more difficult to identify on this side. Ear canal appears more sclerosed over here as compared to the opposite side.

Open views show virtually no movement between the mandible.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows severe retrusion of the mandible. The oropharyngeal airway is completely blocked off with no visible airway with the base of the tongue actually touching against the posterior pharyngeal wall. Very little evidence of reasonable palatal bone. Sinuses are very small. Orbital anatomy and internal nasal anatomy are significantly altered. It appears that there is a little bit of air coming out of his trach stoma, but it appears that he breathes more through his mouth and slightly through his nose. 



Basic Diagnoses

Nager’s acrofacial dysostosis 
Severe mandibular hypoplasia
Bilateral TMJ bony ankylosis
Severe Class II jaw relationship
Missing maxillary second bicuspids and second and third molars bilaterally and mandibular four incisors, second bicuspids, and all molars
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway
Severe malformation of mandibular rami
Nasal airway obstruction
Open tracheostomy stoma
Severe airway obstruction
Severely limited incisal opening
Severe speech disorder

Recommended Treatment

CT scan of jaws and jaw joints as well as the cranial base

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ release of ankylosis, removal of heterotopic and reactive bone, and thorough debridement
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement (40 mm) with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Fat grafts to bilateral TMJs (harvested from abdomen or buttocks)
Application of arch bars
Application of surgical stabilizing splint
Closure of tracheal stoma