ALEXIS MARCH									5/27/05

Alexis is 11 years, 11 months and 2 weeks old.  She is referred by Dr. Duane Keller.  In May of 2004, she had a 4-wheeler accident and broke her jaw, probably a left subcondylar fracture.  She had a reaction to penicillin in the past.  She takes no medications at this time.  She gets headaches on the left side but no tinnitus.  She gets occasional vertigo but no hearing loss.  No other joints seem to bother her.  She may have some clenching problems but not verified.  She gets headaches at least 2 to 3 times per week bilaterally, mainly in the temple areas at a level of 5.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain reaches a 9.  She rates her jaw function at 9, diet at 6, disability at 4.  

CLINICAL EVALUATION:  
In frontal view, upper lip length measures about 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 to 2 mm off to the right and chin is about 1 mm off to the right.  In profile view, she has fairly good vertical and anterior and posterior facial balance.  A little bit of fullness in the submental area.  Intraorally, Alexis has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars present.  Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.  High labial frenulum in the lower central area.  The fascia gingiva is relatively thin particularly around the central incisors.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  The second molars are just erupting in now.  Upper lateral incisors look small in size.  There is a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side but Class I on the left side.  She has anterior deep bite of about 2.5 to 3 mm.  The uvula is mildly elongated.  Soft palate and faucial pillars appear relatively normal.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the left TMJ and left styloid areas.  On opening, she has an occasional click in the left side of about 20 to 25 mm of opening and closing about 10.  The click is more demonstrable on excursive movements.  Maximal incisal opening is 41 mm.  Opening without significant discomfort about 29 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 7 mm and left 11 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows a presence of 4 developing third molars.  All other teeth are present.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  The left condyle appears significantly shorter vertically compared to the right side.  Some anterior beaking appears to be present on the left condyle.  The right condyle appears to have a little bit better development although the top looks a little bit flat.  

Right TMJ closed tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit of anterior beaking.  The condyle has a slight hockey-stick shape to it.  Joint space, however, looks well balanced.  Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be quite abnormally shaped.  The condyle is postured down forward in the fossa with increased posterior joint space of probably 4 to 5 mm.  Vertical joint space appears relatively normal between the condyle and articular eminence.  The condyle is postured forward in the fossa fairly significantly.  On opening, there is fair translation of the right TMJ than the left TMJ.

Waters view shows the sinuses are clear.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  Turbinates appear somewhat enlarged.
ALEXIS MARCH				5/27/05				Page 2


Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows she has basically a Class I skeletal relationship and an occlusal relationship.  She has some adenoid tissue in her nasal pharynx sitting up by the posterior choana area.  The occlusal plane looks relatively normal.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 8 mm and at the soft palate level it measures about 11 mm.

Dental model analysis demonstrates a Class I cuspid relationship on the left side and a Class II end-on by about 2 mm cuspid relationship on the right side.  Tooth size also reveals a Bolton's difference of 1.3 mm.

BASIS DIAGNOSES: 
Left mandibular subcondylar fracture with significant mal-position and malunion.
Left TMJ disc dislocation.
Left vertical mandibular deficiency secondary to previous fracture.
Left mandibular condyle postured approximately 5 mm anterior to its normal position and functioning on the articular eminence.
Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Left earaches.
Four bony impacted third molars. 
Masticatory dysfunction. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Place appliances on the maxillary arch. Close the space between the central incisors, but  open space of about 1/2 to 1 mm around each upper lateral incisor.  There is a tooth size discrepancy so this space will need to be maintained in order to achieve a good solid Class I cuspid molar relationship with normal anterior overbite relationship.  
Place appliances on the mandibular arch.
Begin to align and level the arches. 
Restorative dental work for placing bonding of the maxillary lateral incisors to increase their size.  
Surgery.
Reconstruction of left TMJ by arthroplasty and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair.
Left mandibular ramus osteotomy with bone screw stabilization.
Removal of 4 impacted third molars. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine and retain occlusion.  
Continue to monitor facial growth and development.
Consider additional orthognathic surgery if necessary depending on subsequent growth and development. 


ALEXIS MARCH				5/27/05				Page 3


I discussed in detail with the family potential risks and complications including nerve damage, growth problems, bleeding problems, infection, malocclusion, possibilities that pain may not resolve, etc.  I also answered all the questions that Alexis and her parents had today.  


W. Dennis Thousand, DDS
Kahoka Dental Clinic
248 N. Morgan
Kahoka, MO 63445
Phone:  660-727-2828
Fax:  660-727-3071
