CONNOR MARCUM									10-10-03

Connor is 16 years old and referred by Dr. Tony Viazis. His office is on Melbourne in Hurst, TX.

Patient Concerns

The teeth don’t fit together very well
Upper jaw is underdeveloped
The lower jaw is overgrowing

Patient History

Connor denies any problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, headaches, TMJ pain, noises, etc. Connor was not really aware of any changes occurring in his bite. He had previous apparently maxillary palatal expansion to try to correct his bite problem. He was pretty young when he had the palatal expander, and he and his mother don’t remember exactly what age he was at that time but probably somewhere around 7 or 8. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Connor has fairly good facial balance in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -1. Maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about a millimeter to the right, and chin is probably about 2 to 3 mm to the right. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly aligned with each other.

In profile view, he may have some mild deficiency in the upper jaw of maybe 3 to 4 mm. Chin actually appears to be in reasonably good projection. Chin-neckline is relatively normal in length, and chin-neck angle is moderately well-defined. Has some sort of a head postured forward neck position. 

Intraorally, Connor has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Lower incisors are in a little bit lingual inclination. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Connor has an end-on incisor relationship. Has an open bite on the right side involving the lateral cuspid and first bicuspid. Has a posterior cross bite on the right side. On the left side, he is out of crossbite and has just a slight Class III occlusal relationship but not too bad on that side. The lower arch is fairly parallel to the ears and pupillary plane. Right cuspid is elevated about 3 mm compared to the left maxillary cuspid. Connor has a little glitch on opening in the right TMJ. Incisal opening is about 65 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 6 mm and to the left 9 mm. Oropharynx appears clear and tissue appear healthy. He does have fairly large tonsils, but they do not look inflamed at all. He says he doesn’t get many sore throats. 

Intranasally, his septum is deviated off toward the left side. Has fairly large turbinates, therefore, assuming a decreased airway on the left side as compared to the right side. He also has some constricture of the luminal valves.

Current Medication

The only medication Connor is taking right now is Accutane, and he is almost finishing that up.
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses are fairly clear, although the left one may be just a touch cloudy compared to the right one but not too significantly. The left turbinate almost completely obliterates the airway. On the right side, the turbinate appears that it is large but there is some airway present. The septum is deviated off toward the left side. He has four impacted third molars. The condyles look relatively normal, although the left one looks a little bit flatter and maybe a little shorter in height than the right side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Fossa also has fairly good morphology except has a depression up at the superior posterior aspect. Articular eminence has moderate steepness associated with it but is not very long in length. The posterior wall of the fossa appears fairly prominent. Joint space looks fairly well-balanced.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space looks fairly well-balanced. There is some significant formation of the posterior wall of the fossa where it seems to come forward a little bit similar to the opposite side. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. In the open view, the right condyle appears to have relatively normal morphology, and the left one seems to have a little bit of anterior beaking but not too significantly. 

Waters view shows that the septum is deviated off toward the left. Both turbinates appear quite large. Both maxillary sinuses are a little bit more opaque than one would expect, particularly on the right side. Sinuses may be a little bit smaller than normal.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph seems to demonstrate a Class III skeletal relationship. Inferior turbinates are quite large vertically. Tonsils are quite large as well. Oropharyngeal airway is larger than normal. In rechecking Connor’s occlusion in centric relation, his maxillary and mandibular midlines are actually aligned with each other. He has a little bit of a shift in his mandible as he goes into his centric occlusion, and the mandibular shifts about a millimeter to the right. Connor has had a previous hernia repair, and he also had a tympanoplasty and has an artificial bone placed in his left ear to aid in his hearing. The surgery was done about two years ago. Apparently he had an ear infection that he was unaware of, but it destroyed one of the bones in his ears. Connor has a tooth-size discrepancy of 1.5 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary deficiency
Slight Class III occlusion
Right-sided posterior crossbite
Anterior end-on incisor relationship
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4
Hypertrophied turbinates
Deviated nasal septum
Nasal airway obstruction
Constricture of the luminal valves
Recommended Treatment

Evaluate for cessation of jaw growth

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up at least 0.5 mm to 1 mm of space around each maxillary lateral incisor. Tip the lateral incisor roots mesially and the cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch 

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla and advance it
Bilateral inferior turbinectomies
Nasal septoplasty
Removal of maxillary and mandibular impacted third molars (x 4)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors

