JACK MARCUS									07/03/2007

Jack is 13 years and 1 month old.   He is referred by Dr. William Hang.  Jack is in good health with no major medical problems.  He takes no medications.  He has no known allergies.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Teeth and jaws do not line up properly.
Facial imbalance.

Jack has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain, earaches or vertigo.  No other joints bother him. 

Jack started treatment with Dr. Hang in November of 2004 using the bio-block treatment system.  This treatment was continued on for about 1-1/2 to 2 years.  There are still some residual problems with the way the teeth fit together and with the profile.  Jack has no TMJ issues and apparently no real significant difficulties breathing through his nose although sometimes there may be some snoring and sometimes his mouth will be dried out.  

In frontal view, Jack has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  Nasal tip is just a little bit to the right side 1 to 2 mm.  Jack has a lip incompetence of 5 mm.  In profile, Jack has some deficiency in the infraorbital area of maybe 3 to 4 mm.  The nasal dorsum is somewhat prominent.  AP position of the maxilla is actually fairly good.  Chin is retruded by approximately 12 to 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is short although chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Jack has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present.  There is an accentuated curve of Spee.  Some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.  The labial frenulum is a little bit high.  In the upper arch Jack has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  There are fairly good-sized diastemas around the bicuspids, cuspids and lateral incisors.  There is just a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by 1 to 2 mm.  On the left side he is pretty close to being a Class I.  However, he does have almost a full Class III molar relationship.  Vertical overbite is probably about at least 3 mm.  Overjet is about 3 to 4 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Uvula is significantly enlarged.  The soft palate may be slightly elongated.  Faucial pillars appear moderately constricted.  Tonsils appear relatively normal.  Right turbinate looks relatively normal and left turbinate appears just slightly enlarged.  The septum is deviated towards the left side.  There could be some mild nasal airway obstruction on the left.  Jack is not aware of snoring on a routine basis but occasionally he has been told that he snores.  He does not have any significant daytime somnolence.  No sleep apnea symptoms.  He does toss and turn a lot at night.  At night when sleeping he does get hot while everybody else in the family are in regular nightclothes and normal covers.  Jack apparently gets hot and sweaty and discards all those coverings.  To palpation he has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints function smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 53 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is 6 mm, left 9 mm.



JACK MARCUS				07/03/2007				Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows four impacted third molars.  Sinus looks relatively clear as best as can be seen by this x-ray.  Condyles look relatively normal.

Waters view shows that there is a deviated nasal septum off towards the right side.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged particularly on the right side.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be displaced downward and forward in the fossa.  Right TMJ tomogram shows that there appears to be a somewhat small condyle but increased joint space.  Anterior beaking is present.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit small in size.  The condyle appears to be postured forward in the fossa slightly and there appears to be increased superior and posterior joint space.  On opening there is fairly good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there he has some slight vertical maxillary excess and AP mandibular deficiency.  Also the adenoid tissues are quite large.  Jack does have a transverse can in the occlusion with the left side being about 2 mm lower than the right side. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia. 
Class I cuspid with a Class III molar.
Multiple diastemas around the upper teeth.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Hypertrophied adenoid tissue.
Hypertrophied uvula. 
 Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 Impacted maxillary mandibular third molars.
 External nasal deformity.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Monitor facial growth and development.
Presurgical orthodontics to begin probably 12 to 18 months prior to scheduled surgery.
Align and level maxillary arch and close the spacing between the cuspids back to the molars.  Retract the upper incisors slightly but collect all the spacing between the lateral incisors and cuspids.  Try to lose some posterior anchorage. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to expand the bicuspids slightly to try to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward.



JACK MARCUS				07/03/2007				Page 3

Surgery (at approximately the age of 17.)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly, anteriorly and downgraft it posteriorly as well as level it transversely, decrease the occlusal plane angle and eliminate the spacing between the lateral incisors and cuspids.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in counterclockwise direction.
AP augmentation genioplasty.
Partial inferior turbinectomies.
Partial adenoidectomies if the adenoid tissues are still an airway issue.
Partial uvulectomy.
Removal of impacted third molars x4.
External rhinoplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
