AMY MARKISON									12-06-02

Amy is 18 years old and referred by Dr. Fred Voorhees. 

Patient History

She has had some previous surgery including VSD and ASD heart repair at 8 months of age. At three years old, she had a tonsillectomy. On 08/01/01, she had double-jaw surgery. In 01/02, she had bilateral condylectomy or arthroplasties performed, and on 07/17/02, she had some scar resections done intraorally associated with the mandible and bilateral TMJ arthroscopy. She has exercise-induced asthma.

Current Medications

She takes the following medications:

Vioxx 25 mg q.d 
Allegra
Celexa 80 mg per day

She reports that she is allergic to PENICILLIN, KEFLEX, and CECLOR.

Amy has had TMJ problems for quite some time, although they were never very bothersome to her. Prior to her first surgery, she was aware of having clicking and popping. On 08/01/01, she had double-jaw surgery for mandibular advancement and maxillary osteotomies as well as nasal turbinectomies. After the surgery, she couldn’t open her mouth and had significant pain problems. Her original surgeon, Dr. Steven Widner, on two different occasions gave her general anesthetic and expanded her with a mouth crank x 2. At one of the treatments, a tooth was fractured. In 01/02, reportedly she had bilateral coronoidectomies or it may have been arthroplasties in the joints. On 07/17/02, Dr. Fred Voorhees and Dr. Sam Fason took Amy back to surgery and did revision of intraoral scars and did bilateral TMJ arthroscopies and identified perforations bilaterally.

Amy has been in and out of orthodontics for 10 years, and she currently has on her third set of appliances. She gets earaches but no tinnitus or vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her back to a certain degree, and she has scoliosis there, but no other joints bother her. She is aware of having some nighttime clenching. She rates her headaches on the average at about a level of 2, but they are constant for her. They can escalate at times. She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 4 with the right side greater than the left side and overall pain at 4, jaw function at 5, diet at 3, and disability at 6. Amy has apparently completed orthodontics and is in retainers currently. 

Patient Concerns

The primary concerns that Amy has include the following:

Headaches 
TMJ pain
Difficulties opening her mouth and chewing
Difficulties breathing through the nose
Smile is crooked as there are more teeth exposed on the left side as compared to the right side

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Amy has fairly good balance in the middle and upper third face. Maxillary dental midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin are all deviated off toward the right side a little bit. Maxillary midline is off about a millimeter, mandibular dental midline is off 2 mm, and the chin is off probably about 4 mm. Upper lip length is about 17 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is probably about 1.5 mm. 

In profile view, there may be some mild AP maxillary deficiency by probably maybe 3 to 4 mm, and chin appears slightly retruded by about maybe 5 to 8 mm perhaps. Chin-neckline is not well defined. Submental area is full. Chin may be just slightly prominent relative to the AP position of the lip.

Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids but has the rest of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Right second bicuspid and first molar are in fairly significant lingual inclination. In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids as well. Amy has a shift between her CO and CR relationship. It is really difficult to get her in CR, and she does tend to posture her lower jaw forward some. It is difficult to get relaxation. It is very difficult to examine the oropharynx, but it appears relatively clear. Amy has a lot of difficulties relaxing her tongue. 

Intranasally, the turbinates have previously been removed. There is significant deviation of the nasal septum with it going off to the left side superiorly and then off to the right side at the base. There is some increased width to the columella base, and the nostril is a little bit narrow. Using the nasal speculum in the nose and holding open the nostril, she could significantly breathe easier. 

She has about a 2 to 3-mm overbite relationship in the centric relation and probably has a 2 to 3-mm overjet. Maximal incisal opening is about 24 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 3 mm and to the left 7 mm. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, shoulders, right styloid area, and milder pain over the posterior neck area. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four bone plates in the maxilla. One bone plate is quite low down well below the root level on the right side and down most of the gingival level. There are four bone plates in the maxilla. Bone plate has no screws in it but appears above the osteotomy level. She has three screws in each side of the mandibular ramus. There is evidence of previous coronoidectomies. Condyles look arthritic. Sinuses look relatively clear. Difficult to see turbinates. She has a root canal and crown on the maxillary right first molar and mandibular first molar. All four first bicuspids are gone. Root length appears perhaps a little bit short on the incisor teeth. There is calcification in the tuberosity area on the right side. 

On the left TMJ tomogram, there appears that there are some degenerative changes in the condyle with decreased superior joint space. Right TMJ tomogram shows an articular eminence that is fairly steep and very pointed. Condyle appears to have degenerative changes associated with it. Architecture does not look really good. Open views show some translation in the right joint and minimal translation in the left joint. In the right joint on the open view, there appears to be a bunch of radiopacified tissue in and around the joint area. Both articular eminences look quite pointed at the inferior aspect. Both condyles look quite narrow anteroposteriorly and appear to have had erosion.

On opening, she seems to have some significant firmness of the anterior aspect of the masseter muscle on the right side and to a little bit lesser extent on the left side. However, Amy’s perception is that she has more restriction on the left side than the right side.

Waters view shows the sinuses are clear. Septum is deviated. Turbinates appear relatively small. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows Amy in a Class I skeletal position, but the mandible is likely postured forward 2 to 3 mm. Oropharyngeal airway looks very good. Amy has had problems with dyspraxia and developed a little bit more slowly. More currently, she has been under physical therapy for the last year and receiving physical therapy two to three times a week to try to improve jaw function. Amy has had some steroid injections in her jaws in the scar bands intraorally in August and September. That did cause Amy to gain some weight and develop some fullness in her cheek areas.

MRIs taken on 09/06/01 show that there was a much better condyle present at that time, and the discs appeared to be still salvageable. Condyle was much wider anteroposteriorly on the left side, although on an open view, there was minimal translation. The articular eminence was in better condition than its current status. Although there were arthritic changes at the time in both joints, and both discs were anteriorly displaced, there have been severe degenerative changes since the initial MRIs. Both left and right TMJs showed condyles that were arthritic and articular discs that were anteriorly displaced and articular eminences that still had good morphology. The degenerative changes have progressed in the condyle, articular eminence, and with the disc.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain


Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Apply orthodontic appliances to the maxilla and mandible back to and including the first molars. Place a coordinating arch wire

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomy, debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

The family did inform me that they are in litigation against Dr. Widner.