DAVID MARMOR			 					10/19/2011

David is 17 years old and his birth date is 12/14/1993.  David has Goldenhar Syndrome although his facial appearance is similar to Treacher-Collins syndrome.  

In frontal view, upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  He has good cheek lateral projection on the left side, but on the right side the right zygomatic arch is absent from about the malar eminence to the skull base.  He has a reconstructed ear on the right side and on the left side as well.  The ears were reconstructed by Dr. Brent.  The tip of the nose is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The maxillary dental midline is shifted off to the right about 5 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is 5 mm off to the right as well.   The chin has been shifted over towards the left side, so the chin midline is about almost 7 mm off from the mandibular dental midline.  Transversely, the mandible is deficient on the right side compared to the left side by probably about 5 mm.  The nasal septum is deviated off towards to the right side and actually the base in close proximation to the dental midline.  In profile, the maxilla is AP deficient by 10 to 12 mm.  He has a very prominent nasal dorsum.  The nasal dorsum is probably 6 to 7 mm excess in projection.  He has some ptosis of the nasal tip.  The nasal tip is probably about 3 to 4 mm inferior to its normal position.  The chin is retruded about 35 mm.  There is no chin neck angle.  David has a lip incompetence of about 10 mm.  Intraorally, David has all of his lower teeth back through the first molars, but is missing his second and third molars in the lower arch and likewise in the upper arch.  David has at least a 6 mm to 7 mm anterior open bite.  He has a cross bite on the right side in the molar area, but not on the left side except for the left maxillary, second bicuspid is in cross bite.  In centric occlusion, he appears to occlude on the first molars and all other teeth appear to be essentially out of occlusion.  It is very difficult to observe the oropharynx, but I did get a little glimpse of it.  He may have a bifid uvula.  Apparently, the Marmors have been told that David has a cleft palate, but there is no clinical evidence of that.   Mandibular arch asymmetry with the mandibular right cuspid being 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid and the maxillary bicuspid being at least 3 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  In the oropharyngeal airway, I believe he may have a bifid uvula and he has a very short soft palate probably with the submucous cleft that accounts for hypernasal speech that David has.  I could not evaluate the fascial pillars or the tonsils.  David has a tracheostomy that he has had since about the age of 3.  David has had 2 rounds of distraction procedures.  With the last one, he got a fairly serious infection on the left side.  David has anesthesia to his right lower lip and chin area and on the left side he has some sensation yet.  

David takes the following medications:

Albuterol.
Pulmicort.
Levothyroxine.
Claritin.
Famotadine.  
He does use some dermatological creams for psoriasis.  

The maximal incisal opening is 16 mm and he has no excursion movements.  

Basic diagnoses would be:

Bilateral Goldenhar syndrome.
Maxillary AP, posterior vertical, and transverse hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Absence of right TMJ.
Left TMJ fibrous ankylosis.
Velopharyngeal incompetence with hypernasal speech.
Submucous cleft palate.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Deviated nasal septum that is shifted off to the right side.  
High occlusal plane angle.
Anterior open bite of 6 mm.
Occluding only on the left first molars.
Missing maxillary and mandibular second and third molars.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Permanent tracheostomy.
External nasal deformity with it shifted off to the right side and nasal dorsal protrusion.
Absence of zygomatic arch and glenoid fossa on the right side. 
Asymmetric chin as a result of previous genioplasty.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses.  
	b.	Reconstruct right ramus with cranial bone grafts.
	c.	Bilateral TMJ and right temporal fat grafts.
	d.	Left coronoidotomy.
	e.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 10 			to 12 mm at the incisal edge and down graft it posteriorly with bone plates 			and bone grafting.
	f.	Genioplasty with removal of current  bone plate, recontouring of the 			mandible, and placement of a Medpor implant.
	g.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
	h.	Nasal septoplasty.
	i.	External rhinoplasty.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine and retain occlusion.  
5.	Surgery Stage 2.
	a.	Pharyngeal flap.
	b.	Possible fat grafts to right mandible area. 

We discussed in detail the various complications and problems that could be encountered.  This includes facial nerve damage, inferior alveolar nerve damage (he already has total numbness in the right lower lip and chin area), and decreased sensation in the left side.  We also discussed the scarring, fibrosis, and decreased vascular supply that has likely been created by the distraction osteogenesis attempts and the potential weakness created by those procedures in reference to the bony structures in the mandible.  There will be an increased risk of possible fracture of the ramus and body areas.  There is also an increased risk of infection because of the multiple surgeries and probable decreased vascularity to the tissues and bony structures surrounding the mandible.  We also can get intraoral tears that could provide communication that could expose the prostheses to oral contaminants.  His mother did state that he did have infection problems with the distraction work.  We spent over 2 hours together and I believe the family has a good understanding of the potential risks and complications, the difficulties of the surgeries, and of any potential untoward outcomes.  In addition, they are very much aware that his speech will likely get worse as he already has velopharyngeal incompetency and hypernasal speech and with the advancement of the maxilla this condition will get worse.  He will require a pharyngeal flap at a later time to correct the hypernasal speech problem.  