PAUL MARROQUIN								01/03/2007

Paul is 23 years old and is referred by Dr. Mike Pipper via Dr. Robert Marroquin, his uncle, who is a dentist.  Paul had primary repair on the lip at roughly 6 months of age and then the palate was repaired roughly at a year.  Paul then had a bone graft to the maxillary alveolar cleft at around the age of 10.  These procedures were done by Dr. Ken Sayler.

In frontal view, Paul has repair in the upper left lip.  The vermillion on the left side is slightly short in vertical height by probably about 2 mm compared to the right side.  The cupids bow actually is fairly well formed and shaped.  The scar on the lip looks fairly nice with just a little bit of width to it.  Nasal tip is off to the right side by probably a couple of mm.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the left and the chin is probably about 3 mm to the left.  Maxillary dental midline is 2 mm to the left of facial midline.  Reevaluation of the mandibular dental midline actually is fairly close to the facial midline and the chin is just slightly off to the left side maybe 2 mm.  Nasal tip is off to the right 2 mm.  He has differential heights of the alar domes with the left side being probably about 2 to 3 mm lower than the right side.  The alar base on the left side is wide compared to the right side and the nostril sill is much wider on the left side as compared to the right side by probably 6 mm.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm.  In profile view, Paul has fairly good prominence of the upper lip and lower lip.  Chin may be retruded just slightly.  He has a little bit of a high mandibular plane angle and perhaps may have a moderately high occlusal plane angle as well.  He has about a 90 to 100 degree nasolabial angle.  Chin-neckline may be just slightly short although the chin-neck angle is well defined.  Intraorally, Paul has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has some lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being about almost 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  He has good attached gingiva.  There is some very minor crowding in the lower arch.  In the upper arch he has all of his teeth on the right side but is missing the left lateral incisor but has the rest of the teeth back through the second molars.  He has an implant and crown replacing the maxillary left lateral incisor.  Paul has a slight Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally by about 2 mm.  He has an end-on incisor relationship.  He has a small upper lateral incisor and the upper left central incisor crown may be a little bit smaller than the right side.  He has a crossbite tendency in the bicuspid areas on the right side and on the left side a little tendency towards that along the entire left side.  He has a 0 overbite relationship.  His palate has been repaired.  There is no uvula.  The soft palate appears quite short in length.  Tonsils are relatively normal or small in size.  Intranasally, the septum as best I can see it appears reasonably straight.  The turbinates, however, are quite enlarged.  On the left side particularly, the turbinate is very boggy and appears to almost abut against the nasal septum.  On the right side, the turbinate is quite large but there may be some air passage.  Paul is not aware of having any problems with snoring.  Sometimes he is tired during the day but he is not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  To palpation, the joints function relatively smoothly.  Paul exhibits velopharyngeal incompetency on most all speech sounds.  He has nasal emission on all the speech sounds.  Transverse occlusal plane is actually fairly level except for the left central and lateral which are up a little bit higher than the bicuspid and the right incisors. 

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  He is also missing maxillary left lateral incisor and has an osteointegrated implant with a crown to replace the missing tooth.  He has a 
3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  
PAUL MARROQUIN			01/03/2007				Page 2


Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  He has a significantly deviated nasal septum with it going off towards the left side and he has a spur coming off the bony septum but it impinges into the turbinate.  This is probably causing the airway obstruction particularly on the left side of the nose.  Turbinates are hard to identify but clinically appear significant enlarged. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little flattening on the posterior head but good joint space and articular eminences are moderately steep.  

Left TMJ shows a condyle with similar morphology and good space and moderately inclined articular eminences.  There is good translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a skeletal Class III relationship.  Vertical height of the mandible appears elongated.  Soft palate is extremely short.  He has some AP maxillary deficiency.  Upper incisors appear somewhat over angulated.  There is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Repaired unilateral left cleft lip and palate. 
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Mandibular prognathism.
Maxillary asymmetry with the dental midline shifted 2 mm to the left. 
Maxillary arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being 2 to 3 mm posterior to the right cuspid.
Mandibular arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.
Crowding in the lower arch particularly on the right side. 
End-on incisor relationship.
Class III occlusal relationship by 2 to 3 mm. 
 Tendency towards posterior crossbites.
 Velopharyngeal incompetency.  
 Extremely short soft palate.
 Cleft lip deformity. 
 External nasal deformity. 
 Hypertrophied turbinates. 
 Nasal septal deviation with septal spurring off to the left side.
 Nasal airway obstruction particularly on the left side. 
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip the right maxillary lateral incisor root mesially and cuspid root distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  


PAUL MARROQUIN			01/03/2007				Page 3


Align and level mandibular arch.  Distalize mandibular left cuspid about 1 mm if possible.  Slenderize the posterior on the right side including the mesial of the second molar, mesial and distal aspect of the first molar and both bicuspids as well as the cuspid to improve the arch symmetry.  Consider using Class III elastics on that side during the orthodontics to maximize posterior anchorage so the right mandibular cuspid can be distalized 1 to 2 mm.  Slenderize the lower incisors removing about 1 mm of tooth structure to help compensate for the tooth size discrepancy. 
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and expand.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly slightly with a slight counterclockwise rotation.
Nasal septoplasty.
Partial turbinectomies.
Consider vertical reduction genioplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to build up the crown on the maxillary left lateral incisor implant. 
Surgery stage 2.
Lip revision. 
External rhinoplasty with extensive tip work.
Consider possible pharyngeal flap if speech worsens from surgery stage 1.
