JAMIE MARSHALL 									08/07/2006

Jamie has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her left knee, three fingers, left wrist and toes.  She was diagnosed at the age of four of having rheumatoid arthritis.  She is aware of clenching of her teeth at night.  During the day she tries to avoid doing that.  

Her problems began in about April of 2003 when she was hit in the jaw with a soccer ball.  In 2004 she did receive two different splints and she also had a jaw manipulation done.  She had jaw manipulation done in 2005 when she had her wisdom teeth removed.  She has had no other treatment.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:  Motrin 200 mg and she takes about four tablets a day.

Jamie continues to wear a splint through Dr. Talley.  Jamie used to have headaches that were much worse than they currently are but her current ones are at about a level of 5 in the frontal and posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain which is worse on the right side than the left side at a level of 4 and her average daily pain is at 5, jaw function at 3, diet at 2, disability at 4.  

In frontal view, Jamie has fairly good facial symmetry in middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 5 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline may be just slightly off to the right side about 1 mm.  Chin is off to the left side probably about 2 to 3 mm.  She has 8 mm of lip incompetence.  In profile view she has about 2 to 3 mm of deficiency in maxillary AP projection.  The mandible appears to be about 15 mm AP deficient.  She does have lip incompetence of 10 mm.  Chin-neckline is extremely short though the chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Submental tissues are relatively full.  Intraorally she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a little bit of crowding particularly on the left around the cuspid, first bicuspid area.  The lower arch appears a little bit asymmetric.  In the upper arch slight division II incisor relationship.  She appears to occlude on the second molars.  The first molars on the left side might touch but not sure.  She has an open bite of about 3 mm on the left side and almost 5 mm on the right side.  She is just slightly Class II end-on bilaterally.  Transversely the maxilla is fairly level.  The mandible is tipped at the left possibly being 3 mm lower than the right cuspid.  There is significant low arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being probably 4 mm posterior to the cuspid.  The upper arch appears a little bit more symmetric.  She actually is a little bit better Class I on the right side and a little bit Class II on the left side.  Right mandibular inferior border appears to be about 4 to 5 mm lower than the left inferior border.  Oropharynx appears clear and the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear normal.  Intranasally, turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  The columella appears somewhat wide.  Nostrils appear a little bit constricted.  She gets pain at night that sometimes wakes her up.  She has no sleep apnea or snoring problems that she is aware of.   If she lays on her side, it usually creates a discomfort and may wake her up.  Therefore, she tends to sleep more on her back and she is more comfortable in that position.  

To palpation she has no tenderness over the muscles over the TMJs.  On opening, she has a little bit of a glitch in the right TMJ but not too significant.  Maximal incisal opening is about 42 mm.  
JAMIE MARSHALL				08/07/2006 				Page 2

Excursive movements are about 5 mm in each direction.  She doe have a little bit of a glitch during function in the right joint but the left joint seems to function reasonably smoothly. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:  The patient is missing all four third molars.  Condyles look somewhat arthritic and look similar to what one would expect on ICR.  The left condyle appears to have a little bit more resorption than the right one.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit flattened and seems to have lost a little volume. There may be decreased joint space but very difficult to tell because of the quality of the x-ray.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears somewhat arthritic.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  Decreased joint space.  On opening, there is fairly good translation.  In the open views the right condyle appears quite a bit smaller than the left one.  Articular eminence appears a little bit steeper on the right side than the left side.

Waters view shows that the left sinus is opacified.  Right nasal airway appears to be almost completely blocked.  The left nasal airway appears somewhat open.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Jamie has an anterior open bite and it appears to occlude only on her second molars.  All other teeth appear to be open.  She has a decreased oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue of about 3 mm.  At the soft palate level it is better at about a level of 7 mm.  Appears to have a high occlusal plane angle.  Occlusal plane level particularly in the lower arch appear to be at two different levels.  Clinical photographs show that she has some asymmetry of mandible and shifts off towards the left side.  She has a little bit of vertical maxillary excess.  She has anterior and lateral open bites with the open bite being worse on the right side as compared to the left side.  On the left side it appears that the first and second molars may occlude whereas on the right side only the second molars occlude. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.
Mandibular hypoplasia. 
Maxillary hyperplasia. 
Apertognathia (3 mm on the left, 5 mm on the right.)
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Headaches.
Masticatory dysfunction. 
Occluding only on second molars bilaterally with all other teeth essentially out of occlusion. 
  Mandibular arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 3 to 4 mm anterior to the left  
              cuspid.
  Over-angulation of lower incisors. 
  Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1.5 to 2 mm.  
JAMIE MARSHALL				08/07/2006 				Page 3


  Bilateral hyperplastic turbinates.
  Partial nasal airway obstruction. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Treatment option 1.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Distalize cuspid and posterior teeth on the right side 3 to 4 mm.  May require bone anchor to accomplish this.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1.5 to 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth size discrepancy. 
       Treatment option 2.
Extract mandibular right first or second bicuspid.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch retracting the right cuspid 3 to 4 mm to correct the anteroposterior arch asymmetry.  We will need to lose posterior anchorage of approximately 3 mm.
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward slightly and move it superiorly. 
Partial turbinectomies.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 