OLIVIA MARSHALL									01-09-04

Olivia is 22 years old and referred by Dr. John St. Clair, 5203 79th Street, Ste. H, Lubbock, TX  79424.

Patient History

Olivia is in good health with no major medical problems. The medications that she takes include the following:

Advil
Tylenol
Vitamin C and E
Calcium 
Multivitamins

She takes the Advil and Tylenol for headaches, and she says she does get headaches fairly frequently.

Other joints that bother her at this time include her back, neck, and knees occasionally.

She has no known allergies except CODEINE does upset her stomach some. She is not aware of any problems wearing jewelry. 

She is aware of clenching her teeth at night, and also she does this sometimes during the day. Although she had some problems with headaches in the middle school years, she really became aware of having more intense headaches when she was a freshman in high school. She has had orthodontics three times, the first time from age 13 to 17, the second time age 18 to 20, and the third time age 21 to the present. She had tonsils and adenoids removed as a child, and she has had her third molars removed. In 12/97, she had double-jaw surgery, AP chin augmentation, and turbinectomies by Dr. Tiner in San Antonio. Her chin ended up being too strong, so Dr. Tiner took her back to surgery in 06/98 and redid the genioplasty. She does have some numbness in her lower lip and chin area. Facial nerves function normally. 

Patient Concerns

Her face is asymmetrical with the right side being more prominent than the left side
Lips don’t come together
Headaches 
Chin becomes deformed when she does try to put her lips together
TMJ discomfort
Occasional earaches 
Occasional ringing in the ears particularly when she goes to bed
She does get occasional vertigo
Difficulties breathing through her nose and she usually particularly at night ends up breathing through her mouth
No hearing loss
Bump in the nose

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Olivia has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. In the lower third face, she has some transverse asymmetry. 
Right side of the mandible may be about 6 mm more prominent than the left side. Looking at her straight on, most of the right ear is covered whereas the left one has significantly more exposure. Chin does appear somewhat tapered. There is about 9 mm of lip incompetence. Maxillary dental midline is about 0.5 mm off to the right side as is the mandibular dental midline. Chin is aligned with the maxillary and mandibular midlines. As she shifts her chin a little bit toward the left side, it does improve her symmetry slightly. Left eye may be just slightly elevated compared to the right side by maybe 1 to 2 mm. 

In profile view, she seems to have a little bit of AP maxillary deficiency of maybe 2 to 3 mm. AP position of the chin doesn’t look too bad, although it is a little bit strong compared to the position of the lower lip. Lip incompetence is seen. Chin-neckline appears relatively normal in length, although the chin-neck angle has more of a soft, gentle curve to it. 

Upper lip length is 17 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 3.5 mm. 

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Teeth are fairly well-aligned and leveled. She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. Has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the left side by about 2 mm and the same on the right side, although it may be just slightly greater on the left side compared to the right side. Upper teeth appear to be a little bit overangulated. Lower teeth have been slenderized. With the lower lip relaxed, the distance from the lower lip to the lower incisors measures almost 7 mm. Transversely, the maxilla appears relatively level. 

To palpation, she has moderate tenderness over the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, styloid areas, and mild tenderness over the medial pterygoids and posterior neck area. In the left joint, she has a soft but definite pop at about 20 mm of opening and at 10 mm of closing. The right joint seems to function reasonably smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is 60 mm. Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction. She does hypertranslate particularly in the right joint, and there is a definite visual popping of the condyle back over the articular eminence in closing. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear reasonably clear, although the right one just is a little bit more cloudy than the left. Has three screws in the ramus area on each side. She has a bone plate in the chin area with four screws. Both condyles look reasonably good except there is a little bit of a change on the right side and maybe some evidence of a little bump in the right side. All four third molars are gone, but all the rest of the teeth are present.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head, and the articular eminence looks relatively normal in length and slope. The condyle appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head and what appears to be a little bit of peaking on the condylar head. Appears there may be a fairly balanced joint space for the most part. Articular eminence is a little more shallow on this side than the opposite side but not too significantly. On one view it does appear as though the superior joint space may be somewhat decreased. 

Opening shows excellent translation of both condyles. The right one actually translates to a slightly greater degree than the left side. 
Waters view shows that the sinuses are really clear. Turbinates appear relatively normal in size. The right side of the mandible does appear to be a little bit more prominent than the left side probably 6 to 7 mm. Posterior teeth in both the maxilla and mandible appear to be rotated slightly off toward the right side probably 2 to 3 mm as compared to the left side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows what appears to be perhaps some slight AP maxillary deficiency. Upper incisors are overangulated. Chin appears a little bit prominent. Vertical difference in the heights of the inferior border of the mandible and also at the occlusal surfaces but don’t know if that is due to head position or actually vertical asymmetry. The significant lip incompetence is also noted. Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good except the base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall may be slightly decreased as it only measures about 5 to 6 mm. Occlusal plane might be slightly increased. Condylar heads and necks looks quite long which could go along with a condylar hyperplasia. She did have a bone scan done, but this apparently did not show growth to the extent that it would show up on a bone scan. Actually, the bone scan is showing some hot areas that if condylar hyperplasia were present, it could be bilateral. Significant inferior position of the lower lip relative to the lower incisors is evident as well with a vertical difference of about 5 mm. Oropharynx appears clear. 

Intransally, turbinates appear to be relatively average in size. The septum is deviated severely off toward the right side causing some nasal airway obstruction. 

Basic Diagnoses

Previous double-jaw orthognathic surgery and genioplasty (x 2)
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation and mild arthritis
Maxillary vertical excess and transverse asymmetry
Mandibular prognathism and transverse asymmetry
Class III end-on occlusion (2 to 3 mm)
Maxillary midline shifted to the right approximately 2 to 3 mm
Mandibular dental midline shifted to the right approximately 2 to 3 mm
Chin shifted to the right approximately 5 mm
Nose shifted to the right approximately 2 to 3 mm
Nasal septal deviation off to the right side with right-sided nasal airway obstruction
Right side of the face significantly more full than the left side by approximately 5 to 6 mm
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Possible resorption of maxillary incisor roots
Severe lip incompetence
Severe ptosis of the lower lip

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies

Consider bilateral TMJ injections to rule in or rule out the headaches association with TMJ pathology

Surgery

Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to shift the maxilla 2 to 3 mm to the left, level the transverse occlusal plane, and decrease the AP occlusal plane
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible to the left onto the facial midline
Anterior mandibular horizontal ostectomy
Resuspension of mentalis muscle
Nasal septoplasty
External rhinoplasty to shift the nose 2 to 3 mm to the left

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
