ANNA MARTIN									02-13-04

Anna is 38 years old and referred by Dr. James Person, 4121 N. 22nd Street, McAllen, TX  78504.

Patient History

Anna’s TMJ problems began about six or eight years ago and may be related to some person stress she was undergoing at the time. She developed some clicking and popping in her joints around that time. For the past one-and-a-half years, her pain has increased, her jaw function has decreased, and the clicking and popping have gone away. She previously had orthodontics as a teenage, then she was treated again in 1999 for the TMJ problems. She apparently had some problems wearing her retainers, and she went back into orthodontics in 2003 for three more months to correct some malaligned teeth. She does have a permanent retainer on the bottom, and she has a removable one up above. Anna does state that she can still make her right joint pop but not the left one. She takes Synthroid 0.175 mg (she was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in 1990). For her headache and pain problems, she does take Advil and usually no more than a couple Advil per day. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her are her knees occasionally. With cheap jewelry, for instance rings, her fingers will turn black, and with cheap pierced earrings, her ears will begin to turn black. She is not aware of daytime or nocturnal clenching or bruxism.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Anna has good left-to-right facial symmetry. 

In profile, likewise she has fairly good facial symmetry and balance. Chin-neckline and angle are not well-defined. 

Intraorally, Anna has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Teeth are nicely aligned and leveled. She does have a 3 x 3 retainer on either side. Appears to have good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. 

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. On the right side, she has a partially erupted third molar. She is fairly close to being a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship although just a slight Class II tendency on the left side by about 2 mm and also on the right side by about 2 mm. She might have just a slight tooth-size discrepancy. That is why she is a little bit Class II end-on in the cuspid area. Transversely, occlusal plane is fairly level. 

Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Midlines are all coincidental on the facial midline. Maximal incisal opening is 33 mm, but she can open about 29 without too much discomfort. Right excursive movements are 5 mm. Left excursive movements are 11 mm. To palpation, she has mild tenderness over the masseter muscles, left posterior neck, and mild to moderate discomfort to palpation over the TMJs. Anna does have a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of over 2 mm. There is just a slight overangulation of the lower anterior teeth. 

Anna’s pain is usually worse in the evenings, and she usually feels best in the morning when she wakes up, which means she probably is not clenching or grinding at night. On re-evaluation of the profile, it shows that there is some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm and AP mandibular deficiency or probably 8 mm or so. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the patient is missing the mandibular third molars. Maxillary third molars are still present. All of the rest of the teeth are present. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Nasal airway appears clear on the right side, but on the left side there may be some obstruction. Left condyle appears a little bit more arthritic than the right condyle. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit smaller anteroposteriorly than the size of the fossa. Some flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of sclerosis present. Decreased vertical joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep and just moderate in length.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit better morphology than the opposite side. A little anterior beaking developing. A little flattening present on the anterior head. Decreased vertical and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep and of moderate length. Disc could be in a vertical orientation in this joint.

On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints with it being a little bit greater on the left side as compared to the right side. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are all clear. She has virtually no frontal sinuses. Turbinates appear a little bit enlarged on the right side but relatively normal on the left side. May have a reasonable airway. Midlines and facial symmetry appear reasonably good.

Cephalometric evaluation demonstrates a good skeletal Class I and occlusal Class I interrelationships. Occlusal plane looks relatively normal. Oropharyngeal airway and nasopharyngeal airway look good.

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe deformation and nonsalvageable
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation but with reduction
AP maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2+ mm
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Impacted maxillary third molars x 2
Wide columella
Constricture of the intranasal luminal valves
Severe anterior nasal airway obstruction

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing
CT scan of TMJs, maxilla, and mandible using the TMJ Concepts protocol

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomy and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)
Surgical removal of impacted maxillary third molars x 2
Bilateral nasal reconstruction to enlarge nares and decrease size of the luminal valves to improve functional nasal airway

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
