JENNIFER MARTIN									07-01-02

Jennifer is 31 years old and referred by Dr. Bill Hang.

Patient History

She has had previous surgery on her sinuses in 1996 and previous C-section in 1992. She does have a history of asthma in the past but has had no significant problems in the last five to six years. She does have some anemia problems that she feels are diet-related. She takes Celexa 20 mg. She has had a previous reaction to PENICILLIN.

Jennifer was involved in a motor vehicle accident on March 28, 2002. A car cut in front of her, and she hit the car, and her airbag activated and struck her in the chin area. All her teeth were knocked loose, and she developed joint pain and other symptoms.

Patient Concerns

Basic concerns or problems that Jennifer has include the following:

TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain down to the head, neck, and shoulder area.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Facial asymmetry.
Progressive worsening of the facial asymmetry.
Mouth breather. 
Difficulties breathing through her nose.
Snoring problems.
Chronic tiredness.
Sleep disorder.
Daytime somnolence.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Jennifer has fairly good balance between the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 17 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 6 mm. Maxillary dental midline at the incisor tip is shifted to the left probably about 1.5 mm. Mandibular dental midline is close to being on the facial midline. Nasal tip may be just slightly to the right side also about a millimeter. Chin is about 5 to 6 mm to the right. Left side of the inferior border of the mandible was probably a good 6 mm lower than the right side.

In profile view, Jennifer probably has about 3 or 4 mm of AP maxillary deficiency. She is probably about 12 to 15 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is a little bit short, and there is some fullness in the submental area. 

She has had previous orthodontic treatment at the age of about 11 to 13 and had all four first bicuspids extracted. She has some mild crowding, lower anterior arch of probably about 4 or 5 mm. She has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship on the right side and on the left side as well. She has an anterior overbite of probably about 3 to 4 mm. She also has had her wisdom teeth removed. She has a cant in her occlusion with the left side being probably about 2 mm lower than the right side in the cuspid area. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is relatively small in shape and size. Faucial pillars appear to be anteriorly positioned. 

Jennifer has had previous sinus surgery and apparently had 30 some polyps removed from her sinuses and since having that done has eliminated her bronchitis and a lot of the respiratory symptoms she had before. It hasn’t improved her nasal airway breathing abilities but has helped these other factors. Intranasally, she does have some extremely large turbinates. She has constricture of her luminal valves. Using the scope to open up and expand the luminal valves significantly improved her abilities to breathe through her nose. She has had a previous rhinoplasty, and it has left some deformed cartilage in the tip of her nose. She also has a dorsal hump remaining and perhaps a little excess cartilage removed just below the nasal bone structures. The lateral cartilages are a little bit different in size and shape on the left side as compared to the right side. 

To palpation, she has moderate tenderness over the TMJs with the right being a little bit worse and on the styloid areas with milder discomfort to palpation over the masseters, SCMs, posterior neck, and shoulder areas. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is close to 45 mm but only about 24 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive movement to the right about 5 mm and to the left about 6 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four first bicuspids and all four third molars. Sinuses appear equally opacified with maybe the left side being a little bit worse than the right side. TMJs look reasonably good. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Increased anterior joint space. Probably anteriorly displaced disc but in a pre-click position.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology with some sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There appears to be moderately decreased posterior joint space and slightly increased anterior joint space. On opening, there is moderately good translation of both joints with the left joint translating a little bit more than the right joint.

Waters view shows the turbinates are enlarged although there is a little bit of an airway on the right side. Sinuses appear about equally opacified. Cant in the occlusion and mandibular inferior border is seen. Septum may be deviated. 

Cephalometrically, she has a retruded maxilla and mandible and anterior vertical maxillary excess. There is a slight Class II occlusal tendency. Oropharyngeal airway from soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 7 mm, and from the base of tongue the posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 7 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

Right TMJ osteochondroma and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Left TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary asymmetry.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Transverse mandibular asymmetry.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 or 3 mm lower than the right side.
Crowding, lower anterior arch.
Slight Class II occlusal relationship by approximately 2 mm.
Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars.
Bilateral TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Constricture of the luminal valves.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Daytime somnolence.
Rule out sleep apnea problems.

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to help compensate for a mild tooth-size discrepancy and also to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward. Also, can strip lower first bicuspids bilaterally since they are larger than the upper bicuspids, removing up to a millimeter of tooth structure from each. This should help keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward.

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward and transversely level it.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward, move the anterior aspect superiorly, and correct any transverse problems that may be present as well as correct the transverse asymmetry.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Reconstruction of bilateral luminal valves with palatal tissue grafts.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion