MELANIE MARTIN									10/24/2007

Melanie is 31 years old and is referred by Dr. William Hang.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Headaches.
Neck, head and jaw pain.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Sleep apnea.
Snoring.
Difficulty breathing through her nose. 
Daytime somnolence.
Difficulty sleeping at night.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Loestrin 15/30 one tablet daily.
Protonix 6 mg daily.
Topamax 50 mg one tablet t.i.d. 
Requip 2 mg q.h.s. for restless leg syndrome.

Melanie has previously been diagnosed with the following problems:
TMJ.
Sleep apnea.
Headaches.
Restless leg syndrome.

Melanie's problems began when she was about 5 years old with headaches.  By age 11, she was aware of having jaw problems.  Etiology of these factors is unknown.  She began orthodontics at about the age of 11 and maintained in braces until she was 19 years old.  She had splint therapy at age 11 without improvement.  She also had splint therapy in 2005 and one other time during the years but none of the splints helped her.  She had physical therapy in 2005 with no help.  

In April of 1994, she had upper jaw surgery and she apparently had an open bite and was treated in April of 1994 with maxillary osteotomies to close the open bite.  The bite apparently changed and shifted after the surgery and in May of 1995, lower jaw surgery was done.  The surgeon was Dr. Steven Nahigian.  

She gets occasional earaches, occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo.  The other joints that bother her includes her wrists, hands, fingers, feet, hips, ankles and neck.  She has been diagnosed with restless leg syndrome, sleep apnea and headaches.

Melanie rates her daily headaches at a level of 7 that occur in the frontal, temporal and posterior head area.  She rates her average TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 5, diet at 4 and disability at 6.  


MELANIE MARTIN				10/24/2007				Page 2

She did have a sleep study that showed she had mild obstructive sleep apnea.  She does fall asleep at meetings and has trouble staying awake at work.  These episodes are somewhat cyclic.  

In frontal view, Melanie has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left side and the chin is also about 1 to 2 mm off to the left side.  In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably 3 to 4 mm.  The maxilla appears to be at least 6 mm AP deficient at the incisal edges.  The chin appears to be retruded by at least 15 mm.  Intraorally, Melanie has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and leveled.  A little bit of gingival retraction at the cervical margins of the anterior teeth.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She is very close to having a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side but on the left side she is Class II end-on by probably about 4 mm.  She has about 1 mm vertical overbite relationship.  She has a posterior crossbite on the left side.  She has lower arch asymmetry of the left cuspid being about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  Upper arch appears relatively symmetric.  Oropharyngeal areas look normal and healthy.  There appears to be good distance in the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  The septum appears relatively straight.  The turbinates could be larger posteriorly which could account for some of her nasal airway blockage.  Otherwise, the nasal airway looks reasonably good.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.  To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the TMJ, styloid areas, and moderate pain over the shoulders, posterior neck, masseters and milder pain over the temporalis, medial pterygoids and SCMs.  Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm but 37 mm without discomfort.  Excursive movement to the right 10 mm, to the left 8 mm.  She has some fine crepitus type noises that she hears bilaterally upon jaw function.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has implants to replace the maxillary lateral incisors and mandibular left second bicuspid.  She has three screws in each ramus of the mandible from previous mandibular ramus osteotomies.  She has four bone plates in the maxilla with four screws in each plate.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The condyles appear a little bit arthritic. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The septum appears reasonably straight although there could be a septal osteophyte going off each side perhaps.  Turbinates appears moderate in size.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that there is a significantly decreased joint space.  There is anterior beaking and arthritic changes in the condyle.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow. 





MELANIE MARTIN				10/24/2007				Page 3

Left TMJ tomogram shows some significant sclerosis on the anterior head of the condyle and significant anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space appears to be decreased superiorly as well as anteriorly.  There appears to be pseudocyst in the head of the condyle.  On opening, there is actually fairly good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Melanie has some AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency and a skeletal Class II jaw relationship with a high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway measurements are about 4 mm at the base of the tongue and 4 mm at the soft palate level.  The tongue fills a fairly good portion of the oral cavity.  There is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.8 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with significant deformation and nonreducing.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Slight anterior vertical maxillary excess.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Left-sided posterior crossbite. 
Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.8 mm. 
 Dental implants replacing the maxillary lateral incisors bilaterally and the mandibular
       left second bicuspid.
 High occlusal plane angle.
 Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 Sleep apnea.
 Restless leg syndrome.
 Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Deviated septum and septal spurs causing nasal airway obstruction.
 TMJ pain.
 Headaches.
 Myofascial pain.
 Multiple joint involvement. 
 Lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 




MELANIE MARTIN				10/24/2007				Page 4

Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2.5 mm of combined tooth structure from the anterior 6 teeth to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.  Try to distalize the right side 1 mm if possible to correct the lower arch asymmetry. 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, decrease the occlusal plane and correct transverse discrepancy. 
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the chin about 4 mm.
Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
Nasoseptoplasty. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to buildup the maxillary lateral incisors if necessary to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.

