MEREDITH MARTIN								07/19/2006

This is a 23-year-old female referred by Peter Crump, DDS, 24 S. Gore, Webster Groves, Missouri 63119.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
TMJ problems. 
Damaged teeth caused by jaw and jaw joint problems.
Headaches. 
TMJ pain. 
Feeling of significant tension in the jaws.
Clenching and grinding.
Popping in the right jaw joint. 

Previous treatments Meredith has had includes orthodontic treatment from the age of 11 years to 16 years by Dr. Robert Christopher in Chicago, IL.  She has had a splint since March of 2006.  She had two wisdom teeth extracted in August of 1999. 

She noted that her teeth started to shift about the age of 19 after 9 years of orthodontic treatment.  It made her smile crooked and her bottom teeth have become crowded.  Meredith has a slight Class II relationship with very close to being a Class I molar.  She has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She probably hits prematurely on the left side and perhaps posterior.  In frontal view, she has significant vertical asymmetry on the left side and there must be probably an estimation of about 4 to 5 mm of vertical discrepancy.  Maxillary midline may be a little bit off to the left 1 to 2 mm as does the mandibular dental midline.  The chin is probably 5 to 6 mm off towards the left side.  The left side of the face is relatively short compared to the right side.  In profile, she has significant AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency.  Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale.  Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle very poorly defined.  MRI shows that she has bilateral TMJ displaced articular disc with the right one reducing but the left is reported being reduced in the open view.  The radiologist missed the displaced disc in the right TMJ.  However, Meredith is only aware of popping noises in the right TMJ.

IMPRESSION: 
Left TMJ probable idiopathic condylar resorption and articular disc dislocation. 
Right TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction. 
AP maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
High occlusal plane angle.
Class II end-on cuspid relationship.
AP microgenia.
Probable premature contact on the left side of the jaws.
TMJ pain headaches.
  Myofascial pain.
  Crowding of lower anterior arch.
  Over angulation of lower incisors. 
MEREDITH MARTIN			07/19/2006				Page 2


  Probable tooth size discrepancy of probably about 3 mm. 
  Significant transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being probably 4 to 5 
        mm higher than the right side. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip the lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies if necessary.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 3 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward and to improve stability in the lower arch alignment. 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Mandibular advancement of approximately 20 mm.
Maxillary osteotomy to transversely level and decrease the occlusal plane angle. 
Augmentation genioplasty. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 