JENNIFER LOGGINS								09/10/2009

Jennifer is 23 years old and referred by Dr. Rob Lewis.  Jennifer began having problems with her jaw joints at about the age of 17 shortly after she completed her orthodontic treatment.  She had orthodontics from about the age of 15 to 17.  After developing her joint problems, she was put into splints to try to control her clenching and grinding and her TMJ problems.  She has only worn the splints at night.  The splints do help her.  She has been in splint therapy for about 4 years.  In 2007, she had bilateral arthrocenteses performed by Dr. Lewis.  Jennifer has noted her lower jaw has slowly become more retrusive and her bite continues to shift and change.  

She gets headaches about a level of 3 on a weekly basis mainly in the temporal area.  Average daily TMJ pain is 2 and facial pain at a level of 5.  She rates her jaw function at 0, diet at 3, disability at 3.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime, but not during the day.  The only medication she takes is Synthroid.  She takes an occasional ibuprofen for her headaches.  She has no problems with snoring, daytime somnolence, nor sleep apnea. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, she has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is probably about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline may be 1 mm to the left as is the chin.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded by 3-4 mm and the chin is retruded by about 15 mm.  Chin neckline is short, although chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  She does have a head postured forward neck position.  Jennifer has an anterior open bite of about 3 mm.  She has a non-Class II on the right side in the cuspid area of about 3 mm and on the left side by probably 4 mm.  Transversely, the maxilla is fairly flat and level. Oropharyngeal tissues, as best as I could see them which was difficult, appear relatively healthy.  Uvula may be a little bit elongated as is the soft palpate and the fascial pillars may be slightly constricted.  I could not see the tonsils.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderate in size, but Jennifer does not complain of difficulties breathing through her nose.  To palpation, she has some moderate tenderness over the shoulders, but mild tenderness over the left posterior neck, left styloid, left masseter, left temporalis.  Maximal incisal opening is 42 mm, but opening without discomfort 20 mm.  Excursion movement to the right is 7 mm, to the left 5 mm. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but the rest of the teeth are all present.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch.  Turbinates appear quite large.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Joints look arthritic.  
Axial view shows that the turbinates are fairly large particularly on the right side.  Sinuses are clear.  
In the coronal view, the sinuses are clear.  The right inferior turbinate in particular is extremely large.  
Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show there has been significant condylar resorption and the condyle is quite arthritic.  There is been significant loss of condylar volume.  There is anterior beaking.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle has erosions and osteophytes on it as well as a pseudocyst in the posterior aspect of the condylar head. 
Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has undergone significant resorption and actually the condylar volume itself appears smaller on this side than the opposite side.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is fairly good joint space around the joint, however, the condyle appears quite spindly.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost a lot of volume.  It is somewhat narrow mediolaterally.  There is significantly decreased joint space particularly towards the medial side. 
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite small in size, but a little bit smaller than the opposite side.  There is significant loss of condylar volume.  
Lateral cephalogram shows that Jennifer has a retruded maxilla and significantly retruded mandible.  She has a high occlusal plane angle.  She has a significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of only about 3 mm at the base of the tongue and 4 mm at the soft palate level.  The oropharyngeal airway is significantly reduced.  

Basic diagnoses for Jennifer is as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis with significant condylar resorption, displaced discs that are nonsalvageable (compatible with AICR).  
Mandibular AP hypoplasia. 
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia. 
Anterior open bite of about 3 mm. 
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Occluding only on the mandibular left second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal dimension is 11 mm). 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
History of clenching and bruxism. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Be sure lateral incisor roots are tipped mesially and cuspid roots are tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary to maximize the surgical outcome. 
Align and level mandibular arch.    
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly.  
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). 
Bilateral coronoidotomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I gave her a prescription for Klonopin 1-mg tablets, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet 1 hour prior to bedtime, refill x5.  