NINA MALONE									05/12/2009

Nina is 47 years old.  Referred by Dr. Tim Mickiewitz, 3401 Folsom Blvd., Suite A, Sacramento, CA 95816. 

Nina has had approximately 29 previous surgeries.  Her TMJ problems began when she was about 11 years old in 1972 when she was hit in the right temple and jaw area with a baseball from a foul ball as she was sitting on the sidelines.  Her first jaw surgery was on the left joint in about 1981.  Subsequently, and this does not include all of her surgeries, she had an additional left TMJ surgery in 1982 with a Silastic implant.  In 05/1983, she had bilateral condylectomies, 8/1984 she had Vitek-Kent total joint prostheses.  In 11/1986 the Vitek implants were removed and rib grafts were placed with debridement and a coronoidectomy.  In 08/1990, she has bilateral gap arthroplasties with implants placed to treat ankylosis.  In 08/1996 through 10/1996, the grafts were removed, the Vitek implants removed, and the joint reconstructed with custom-made Christensen total joint prostheses.  This does not include all of the surgeries that she had on her joints, but the major ones at least.  In addition, in 1990, she had a right ulnar nerve transposition, in 2002 gastric bypass, in 2002 cholecystectomy, and in 2008 right knee arthroplasty. 

Nina takes the following medications:

Lyrica 100 mg b.i.d. 
Topamax 25 mg daily.
Tylenol p.r.n. 
Iron injections monthly.
B12 injections monthly.

Nina has additional joint problems including shoulders, right knee, lower back, and fingers.  She was involved in an MVA in January 2005 where she sustained injury to her back and the knees and shoulders were injured at that time as well as probably additional trauma to the jaw joints. Primary concerns that Nina has at this time include the following:

Limited jaw function. 
Significant pain.
Difficulty getting dental treatment because of the significantly decreased jaw opening. 
She is concerned as her functionability in the future and with the decreasing jaw function she is experiencing probably this is a significant concern. 
Neck pain. 
Stuffy ears. 
Headaches that are worsening. 

Nina rates her headaches at a level of 6 in the temporal areas and her headaches are constant.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 7, diet at 5, and disability at 5.  The right frontal branch of the facial nerve has been severely injured and does not function well.  She has total numbness in the lower left lip and chin area.  She gets earaches on the right side frequently, tinnitus occasional, and vertigo of moderate occurrence.  Other joints that bother her include her shoulders, right knee, lower back, and fingers.  
CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Nina has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 1 mm on the left, 2 mm on the right.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental may be just slightly to the left and chin is probably about 3 mm to the left.  Nina has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being elevated 2 mm higher than the right side.  In profile, the maxilla may be retruded 2-3 mm and the chin appears to be retruded by probably about 8 mm.  Nina does have a Silastic chin implant that was placed by a plastic surgeon because her chin was significantly receded.  The chin implant was done within the last 2 to 3 years.  Nina has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth except for the right first molar.  She is very close to being a Class I cuspid bilaterally.  She has a slight anterior open bite of about 1 mm.  She did have her wisdom teeth removed when she was about 15.  Intraorally, the uvula is moderately elongated, but the soft palate looked normal and I could not really evaluate the fascial pillars very well because of the limited opening.  I cannot evaluate the presence or absence of the tonsils.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear to be relatively normal in size and are actually the right one looks better than it did on x-ray.  The nasal septal spur I believe is at the base of the septum and does not appear to interfere too significantly with the airway as it appears that would on the x-rays.  Nina does identify increased difficulties breathing through the nose on the right side and sometimes it can be a fairly significant obstruction.  The right turbinate may be mild to moderately enlarged.  There is definitely a septal spur that appears to be at the base of the septum.  To palpation, Nina has high moderate to low severe pain over the masseters, medial pterygoids, TMJs, retromandibular area, and shoulders.  She has moderate pain over the temporalis, SCMs, and posterior neck areas.  Maximal incisal opening is 20 mm.  She could open to about 15 mm without significant pain.  She has no excursion movements.  Nina states that she has frequent hoarseness and sore throats.  She has difficulties swallowing at times as well which could go along with the significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.  

Basic diagnoses for Nina is as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ failed Christensen total joint prostheses. 
Heterotopic bone formation around bilateral TMJ failed Christensen prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ foreign body giant cell reaction secondary to previous Proplast Teflon devices, Silastic implants, and failed Christensen total joint prostheses. 
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular status post hypoplasia.
Transverse cant in the maxilla and mandible in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2-3 mm higher than the right side. 
Slight anterior open bite.
Missing maxillary right first molar and all 4 third molars. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of approximately 4 mm at the soft palate level and 6 mm at the base of the tongue. 
Sleep apnea symptoms including daytime somnolence, recurrent sore throats, recurrent hoarseness, and difficulties swallowing. 
Hypertrophied right nasal inferior turbinate. 
Large septal spur into the right side of the nose causing airway obstruction. 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  The orthodontist can use bonded brackets on all the teeth.  The molars do not need to be banded. 
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. 
Bilateral removal of failed Christensen total joint prostheses.
Extensive debridement of heterotopic bone and foreign body giant cell reactive tissue. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and level the transverse occlusal cant. 
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin. 
Removal of previously placed Silastic chin implant. 
Nasal septoplasty. 
Right inferior turbinectomy.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Consider dental implant and crown to replace the missing maxillary right first molar.  
