PATTY PETERS MANEKE								09/22/2008

Patty is 51 years old.  Her TMJ problems began when she was about 20 years of age when her left jaw joint locked.  It has not locked since then.  It has clicked and popped on the left side since then until about a year ago and then it stopped clicking and popping.  The right side started clicking and popping about 2 months ago.  She has been in splint therapy for at the last past 20 years.  She has seen Dr. Duane Keller for the past 1 ½ years.  He has made splints for her and she cannot chew without the splints in place without having severe pain.  She has had previous biofeedback treatments in 2007 and 2008 and some physical treatments in 2008.  

She currently takes the following medications:

Desipramine 100 mg q.d. (antidepressant).
Geodon 80 mg q.d. (mood stabilizer).
Ambien 10 mg q.h.s.
Lorazepam 1 mg q.d. 
Concerta 54 mg q.d.

She gets headaches about two times per month, but at a level of 3 and predominantly in the frontal and temporal areas.  Her average TMJ pain is at 7, continuous at a level of 5, and when she eats, it elevates to a level of 9.  Her average daily pain is 6, jaw function 8, diet at 7, disability at 6.  She gets no earaches, has tinnitus in the right ear secondary to previous ear injury, but no vertigo.  She has total hearing loss in the right ear since about 1985.  No other joints bother her.  She does have bipolar disorder as well as periodontal disease.  She is very much aware of clenching and bruxism and has done this all of her life and does it at nighttime as well as during the day.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Patty good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face, but in the lower third face, she has some significant asymmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 10 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  In centric relation, she actually has fairly good facial symmetry.  She tends to posture her mandible off to the right side probably 2 to 3 mm.  She states it feels more comfortable in that position.  In profile, Patty has fairly good facial balance.  She actually will posture her mandible off to the right side as much as 6 mm or so as she is more comfortable in that position.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth on the left side back through the second molars.  On the right side, she appears to be missing the first and second molars.  In upper arch, she appears to have all of her teeth back through the second molars.  In centric relation, she is pretty much Class I cuspid relationship.  When she feels more comfortable, she shifts the mandible to the right and develops lower midline shift of about 6 mm, develops a buccal cross bite on the left side, and a cross bite on the right side.  She becomes Class II end-on cuspid on the right side and a little bit Class III on the left side.  She has about a 3 mm vertical over bite in centric relation.  Maximal incisal opening is about 27 mm and she can open about 14 mm without significant pain.  Excursion movement to the right is 9 mm and to the left 5 mm.  To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the TMJs, moderate pain over the masseters, medial pterygoids, styloid areas, and mild tenderness over the temporalis, SCMs, posterior neck and shoulder area.  On opening on the left side, she has some glitches.  On the right side, she has a palpable pop at about 5 or 10 mm of opening and closing at probably 5 mm.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of probably all four third molars.  There is probably a second molar present on the right side with missing first molar, but it appears to be an enlarged space.  She has had a root canal on the mandibular left first molar.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  
Waters view shows that she does have some septal deviation in the bony septum.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  Airway appears quite narrow.  Left sinus appears a little bit cloudy compared to the right maxillary sinus.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows that there appears to be some decreased joint space superiorly and posteriorly.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows an increased joint space, but this may be due to her natural posturing of her mandible off towards to the right side to aid in comfort.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is restricted translation of both joints.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class I relationship and Class I occlusal relationship.  She has a decreased oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate of about 3 to 4 mm, whereas at the base of the tongue it appears to be closer to about 10 mm.  The soft palate appears somewhat elongated as does the uvula.  

Basic diagnoses for Patty would be as follows:    

Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated without reduction and significant degenerative changes.. 
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.  
Mandibular hyperplasia.  
TMJ pain. 
Myofascial pain. 
Muscle dystonia, shifting the mandible off towards the right side.  
Missing mandibular right first molar.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.    
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies.  
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to replace the missing mandibular right first molar. 

