CAMILLE MARTINELLI								10-23-02

Camille is 56 years old. 

Patient History

Camille is in good health with no major medical problems. Camille had orthodontics and then had orthognathic surgery by Dr. Steve Schendel on February 11, 2002. 

Patient Concerns

Primary concern that Camille has at this time is that she is not happy with the aesthetic results. She has the following basic concerns:
She always has had facial asymmetry with the right side being slightly larger than the left side of the face.
She doesn’t show much upper teeth.
The chin looks significant different than before surgery.
She has what appears to be an infection with an external developing fistula on the right side of her face.
Increased fullness of the soft tissues towards the front of the face.
Chin that appears elongated and slightly more retruded compared to her lower lip.
Lower jaw appears more angular now than it did beforehand.
Feeling of having a more hard looking face than before the surgery.

Her primary concerns are as follows:
Lack of fullness over the lower jaw area in the back.
Fullness in the front part of the face (jowl area).
Slight facial asymmetry with more fullness on the right side than the left side.
Deficient chin projection.
Excessive skin and soft tissues in the submandibular area and neck area.
Lower lip is not as retruded as it was before.
Labiomental fold not as prominent as it was before surgery.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Camille has a little bit increased fullness in the right side of the face. Has increased fullness anteriorly in the jowl area as compared to some previous photos that she brought along for me to evaluate. She has a large erythematous, swollen area at the inferior border of the mandible at about the level of the first molar area. It appears that it is about ready to burst and drain. Upper lip length is 24 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 0. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline. 

In profile view, she has good facial balance in an anteroposterior dimension. Chin-neckline is fairly well defined. 

Intraorally, Camille is missing the mandibular right first molar replaced by a pontic and has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. She is still in orthodontic appliances. Has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. Teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and leveled. In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. She essentially has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship and has about a millimeter overbite relationship. 

TMJs function smoothly, and she has no TMJ symptoms including no headache problems either.

Basic Diagnoses

Infection, right mandibular body area, secondary to a loose, displaced bone screw.
Slight AP maxillary deficiency.
Slight AP mandibular deficiency.
Relative AP microgenia.
Class I occlusion.
Fullness in the jowl area bilaterally.

Recommended Treatment

The treatment options for Camille are as follows:

Option 1
Surgery, Stage 1
AP augmentation of the chin.

Surgery, Stage 2
Rhytidectomy (facelift).

Option 2
Surgery, Stage 1
Set the mandible posteriorly creating a 2-mm overjet relationship.
AP augmentation genioplasty.

Surgery, Stage 2
Rhytidectomy.

Option 3
Surgery, Stage 1
Maxillary advancement creating a 2-mm overjet relationship.
AP augmentation genioplasty.

Surgery, Stage 2
Rhytidectomy.
Option 4
Surgery, Stage 1
Maxillary advancement of 3 to 4 mm.
Mandibular advancement of 3 to 4 mm.
AP augmentation genioplasty of 4 mm.

Surgery, Stage 2
Possible rhytidectomy if necessary to reduce prominence of the jowls and further improve chin-neckline.

Discussed with her in detail the various options that she has. Also discussed the risks and complications. These were discussed in detail, and she fully understands them. Also discussed with her at length that there will be an aesthetic change with the proposed treatment that she has selected, which is option #4. Discussed with her that her family and close friends may notice the aesthetic change, and if though it is for the better, they may react negatively towards it since they are used to seeing her with a different facial shape and morphology. Discussed that they may act negatively and feel that she looks worse than before her original surgery because of their being used to seeing her look a certain way. She seems to understand and appreciated this information. She kept wanting me to specify what operation she should have. I reviewed several times the various options. Relative to overall facial balance and aesthetics, option 4 would work the best. Option 1 would be the simplest for her and would get also an improved aesthetic result. She has elected to do option 4. Option 2 and 3 also would have aesthetic benefits with option 3 being better than option 2. 

In addition, we talked about her significant facial asymmetry. The nasal tip is deviated off to the right side probably a good 4 to 5 mm. The upper lip from subnasale to upper lip supralabrale actually angles back towards the left side. The maxillary dental midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin midline all pretty much align with each other but are lined up to the nose, which is asymmetric with the facial midline. She says she is fine with this. Did discuss with her that we could correct the midlines and shift the nose to the left, but she would prefer to keep her symmetry basically the way it is. She does understand that the right side of her face is more full than the left side. Based on her new dental models, we may want to do multiple piece maxilla to correct any crossbite factors that may be present. She appears ready for surgery tomorrow. History and physical was performed and consent form reviewed and signed. I answered all additional questions that she had. She is ready for surgery tomorrow.

I spent probably 3-1/2 hours in consultations with her today, and Dr. Eber Stevao spent at least another 30 to 45 minutes with her as well.