BRENDA MARTINEZ-TAMEZ						08/16/2011
BIRTH DATE:  08/17/1998

Brenda will be 13 tomorrow.  She is not sure when her jaw problems began.  She began her first phase of orthodontics in February 2007 and finished in September 2008 primarily related to arch expansion.  From her initial photographs, her mandible has gotten considerably more retruded during the last few years.  She was treated orthodontically by Dr. Maryam Mojdehi-Barnes.  Brenda is not sure when her problems began or the etiology.  She did go see Dr. Jim Bates who told her she would have to wait until she is 17 or 18 years of age before surgery could be done.  She had just gotten braces about 4 weeks earlier and he told the family to have the braces removed so Dr. Mojdehi-Barnes removed the braces.  The family wanted to find something to be done and so they found Dr. George Adams and Dr. Adams referred Brenda here for consultation.

Brenda has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain and rates her average daily pain at about a level of 1.  She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 0.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  The only other joint that bothers her is her right shoulder and she has some problems with her right Achilles tendon.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  She does not snore and does not report any problems with sleep apnea.  She is predominantly a mouth breather at nighttime and also quite a bit during the day.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Brenda has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much aligned with each other.  She has a lip incompetence of 8 mm.  In profile, she has a head postured forward neck position.  The maxilla is retruded probably 3 to 4 mm.  Chin is retruded 20+ mm.  Chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, she is missing second bicuspids, but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has fairly adequate attached gingiva.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she is missing probably second bicuspids as well.  She has a Class II cuspid-molar relationship being probably 5 mm Class II.  She has about a 1 mm vertical overbite relationship.  She has just a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being maybe about 1 mm higher than the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy.  There may be some slight constricture of the fascial pillars.  Intranasally, turbinates appear moderately enlarged and appear somewhat inflamed.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  She probably has a moderate amount of nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, she has a definite pop in the right side probably at 15 to 20 mm of opening and about 10 mm of closing.  On the left side, she has a softer click and pop that may occur with just slightly wider opening.  The maximal incisal opening is 58 mm and excursion movement to the right is 9 mm and to the left 10 mm.  As she opens her jaw, she has to manipulate her jaws to get them open.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  All four second bicuspids have been removed.  Turbinates appear quite large particularly on the right side.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  The condyles appear small and degenerated.  

Coronal view shows that the septum has just a slight deviation off to the left side in the bony area.  Turbinates are quite large and appear to obliterate most of the functional airway.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.

Axial view shows that the septum appears reasonably straight.  Turbinates are fairly large and appear to obliterate a good part of the functional nasal airway with a slight greater decrease of airway on the right side as compared to the left side.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite small in size, but it has lost quite a bit of volume vertically and also anteroposteriorly.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  There is anterior beaking present on the condyle and decreased superior and posterior joint space.

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that is quite small in size, but it has lost quite a bit of volume vertically and also anteroposteriorly.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  There is anterior beaking present on the condyle and decreased superior and posterior joint space.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost vertical volume and is somewhat narrow mediolaterally.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with a downward curvature of only about 2 mm.  There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost vertical volume and is somewhat narrow mediolaterally.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with a downward curvature of only about 2 mm.  There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla is retruded some and the posterior aspect of the maxilla is severely vertically hypoplastic.  The mandible is significantly retruded anteroposteriorly and there is about a 4 to 5 mm overjet relationship.  She appears to occlude predominantly on her second molars.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 7 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 8 mm.  Her lips are forced together in this radiograph unfortunately.  

Basic diagnoses for Brenda would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ condylar resorption secondary to AICR versus connective tissue autoimmune disease.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Significant condylar resorption resulting in a very short vertical length of mandibular rami.
High occlusal plane angle of 29 degrees (normal 8 degrees).
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Impacted third molars x4.
Missing all four second bicuspids previously extracted for orthodontic reasons.
Hypertrophied turbinates creating nasal airway obstruction.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.

Treatment recommendations would be as follows:

1.	Obtain a quality MRI of the jaws and jaw joints.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.  
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 			removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.
3.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints if total joint prostheses are recommended based on 	the MRI findings.
4.	Surgery.  
	a.	Bilateral TMJ and mandibular reconstruction by one of the following 			methods:
		(1)	Bilateral disc repositioning with Mitek anchors and mandibular 				ramus sagittal split osteotomies.
		(2)	Bilateral total joint prostheses.  
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a 					counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	d.	Removal of impacted third molars x4.
	e.	Augmentation genioplasty with Medpor implant.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
