LUIS MARTINEZ-TAMEZ							11/23/2011

Luis is 15 years old, birth date 02/07/1996.  Luis has a previous history of meningitis back in 2007 for which he was hospitalized.  He apparently had no sequelae related to that.  He was under orthodontic treatment from April 2008 to April 2010 from the age of 10 to 12 years old.  Approximately 2 months after the ortho was completed, he began developing headaches in approximately June 2010 of unknown etiology.  Since that time, there has been a lot of direction placed towards his sinuses and nasal airway.  In February 2011, he had sinus surgery performed by Dr. Sam Anthony.  On September 30, 2011, he had the following procedures performed:

Sinus probable exploration and debridement.  
Bilateral tonsillectomies.
Partial nasal inferior and middle turbotomies.
Septoplasty, all performed by Dr. Timothy Trone.

Primary concern Luis has are chronic headaches.  Luis wakes up with the headaches in the morning when they are worse and they usually run about a level of 5 but can get to a level of 7.  The headaches persist during the school day and then afterwards when he gets a chance to get home and relax, they appear to get somewhat better towards the evening.  He rates his TMJ average daily pain at 5, jaw pain around the head and neck area at 5, jaw function at 2, diet at 0, and disability at 1.  He takes the following medications:

Advil occasionally for headaches.  
Singulair as needed.
Allergy shots approximately every 2 weeks.

He does get earaches bilaterally of a moderate level.  He gets occasional tinnitus, frequent vertigo, but no hearing loss.  The only other joints that really bother him are his hips.  He is aware of clenching his teeth at nighttime and also sometimes during the day.

In frontal view, Luis is a good looking young man.  Upper lip length is about 26 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all fairly well aligned with each other.  The nasal tip is just slightly towards the right side about 2 mm.  In profile view, he has good balance with his upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  Chin is somewhat AP deficient by probably 10 mm or so.  Intraorally, Luis has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars in position.  There is some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  He appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship with probably about a 1.5 mm vertical overbite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Uvula may be just slightly elongated.  Tonsils are absent.  Intranasally, his septum appears to be just slight off to the right side.  The turbinates at least in front appear to be a more normal size, but could not see all the way to the back.  To palpation, he has some moderate tenderness over his shoulders and milder tenderness over the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, retromandibular area, SCMs and posterior neck.  The maximal incisal opening is 60 mm, opening without discomfort 55 mm.  The excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The lower sockets are still somewhat visible.  All the rest of the teeth are present.  He has a little bit of anterior beaking appearance on the condyles.  The articular eminences look moderate in steepness.  The turbinates appear somewhat enlarged.  

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are still quite large.  Anteriorly, they are smaller in size as compared to posterior where they still appear to fill a good part of the airway.  There is some thickening of the sinus mucosa on the left side where practically all the walls are thickened throughout.  On the right side, there is some minor thickening, but not nearly as significant as the left side. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good morphology.  The joint space looks fairly well balanced. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination to it.

Right TMJ joint space looks fairly well balanced.  The condyle has a fairly good morphology.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The joint space looks good.  The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with a downward curvature of only 1 to 2 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good morphology and has good joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly only about 2 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he does have some AP microgenia, but otherwise has a good skeletal Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  The oropharyngeal airway measures almost 10 mm.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Nocturnal clenching and bruxism.
Hypertrophied inferior turbinates at the posterior aspect of the nose.
Partial nasal airway obstruction.
Temporalis, masseter muscles myositis.
Headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Medications:  
	a.	Klonopin 0.5 mg tablets, dispense 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s.   May need to 			increase to reach therapeutic dosage.  
	b.	Consider steroids given the patient by Dr. Trone, the ENT specialist, but 			begin only a few days after initiation of the Klonopin.  
2.	Consider bilateral partial turbinectomies at the posterior aspect of the inferior 	turbinates if nasal airway  blockage persists.
3.	Family to notify me within 1 week as to the progress of Luis.  