MARK MARYNICK									06-10-04

Mark is 21 years old and a junior at Harvard referred by Dr. Moody Alexander.

Patient History

Mark in the past has had problems with anterior compartmental syndrome and has had surgery on his left leg. He also has had some right thumb reconstruction on his right hand. He also had a deviated septum that was operated on as well. He has been also diagnosed as having panhypopituitarism. He takes human growth hormone and thyroid 0.185 mg. In addition, he takes cortisone 15 mg in the morning and 5 mg in the evening. Apparently he has had some reactions to certain anesthetics. 

Mark doesn’t have any problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. The only other joint that he has some concerns with is his back. He is not aware of clenching and bruxing. He does wear retainers. He has had orthodontics x 3 in seventh grade and then again in the eighth grade and then in the tenth grade. Has no significant problems with headaches, no TMJ pain, and no pain around the head and neck area. He rates his jaw function at 2, diet and disability at 0. 

Patient Concerns

Front teeth only touch
Posterior teeth are completely out of occlusion
Pain and discomfort in the teeth if there is any excessive stress to them

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Mark has fairly good fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about -1 to 2. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about a millimeter off toward the right side. Chin is probably 3 mm off to the right side.

In profile view, he has fairly good balance between the maxilla, mandible, and chin area. Chin-neckline appears fairly good in length and fairly good development of the chin-neck angle.

Intraorally, he has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth appear reasonably well aligned and leveled. Lower anterior teeth have been slenderized. Has good attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. May have a little bit of a Class III cuspid tendency bilaterally being a little bit worse on the left side than the right side. Has an anterior crossbite and a tendency toward a crossbite on the right side. Seems to hit predominantly on his incisors and maybe his cuspids with the posterior teeth just being a little bit out of occlusion particularly on the right side. On the left side, there may be a few more teeth touching but difficult to tell. Oropharyngeal airway looks good. He gives no history of snoring.

Intranasally, at least anteriorly the septum appears a little bit deviated off toward the right side. Right turbinate appears fairly large, and the nasal airway is significantly more constricted on the right side as compared to the left side at least in the anterior portion. 

Incisal opening is 60 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 9 mm and to the left 10 mm. To palpation, there is no tenderness around the head and neck area. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly. Transversely, there is a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 1.5 mm higher than the left side. 
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear reasonably clear. Difficult to evaluate the nasal airway. Four third molars are absent, but all the rest of the teeth are present. Condyles look relatively large. No significant pathology noted.

Waters view shows the sinuses are clear. Frontal sinuses are good size. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged with the right side being larger than the left side, the airway appearing a little bit more compromised on the right side as compared to the left side. Septum appears somewhat wide indicative of probably some deviation still remaining.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good architecture. Pretty good joint space around in the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There is no really significant pathology associated with this joint. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has good morphology as does the fossa with moderate steepness of the articular eminence. Good joint space is present. 

On opening, there is good translation of the condyles. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows some slight vertical asymmetry. Oropharyngeal airway appears somewhat constricted with an AP airway dimension of only about 5 mm at the base of the soft palate and no more than 5.5 at the base of the tongue. 

Basic Diagnoses

Deviate prognathism 
AP maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary deficiency
Slight vertical maxillary deficiency
Class III end-on occlusion
Anterior crossbites
Tendency toward posterior crossbite on the right side
Mandibular dental midline shifted to the right a mm and chin shifted about 3 mm to the right 
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1.5 mm higher than the left side
Hypertrophied turbinates with the right side being larger than  the left side
Occludes on the anterior teeth, and the posterior teeth are for the most part out of occlusion
Significant nasal airway obstruction
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm (normal range 11 mm)

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. This will be particularly important on the left side where there is significantly decreased distance between the lateral incisor root and the cuspid root
Align and level mandibular arch 
Surgery
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back on the facial midline, transversely level, and advance it
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and expand
Partial inferior turbinectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
