FRANCESCO MARZANO								10-15-04

Francesco is 18 years old and referred by Dr. Servando Espinoza, 6a Avenida “A”, 13-63, Zona 9, Guatemala City, Guatemala.

Patient Concerns

His teeth and jaws do not line up and fit together well. 

Patient History

Francesco does take Allegra D but no other medications. 

As best as Francesco can recall, his jaw problems and jaw malalignment began at about the age of 15 to 16. He is currently in orthodontics and has had his braces on for only one month. He had previous orthodontics at the age of 14 to 15, and at that time his teeth fit together very well at the completion of the first orthodontic management. His bite is getting progressively worse. He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joints bother him. He is not aware of any allergies of any kind. No history of clenching and bruxism. He sometimes will wake up with his jaw joints hurting at about a level of 2. 

Francesco rates his TMJ pain and discomfort at a level of 2, and it is there at times when he wakes up. On an average day he rates his discomfort and pain around the head and neck area at 4, jaw function at 5, diet at 4, and disability at 3. He doesn’t report any difficulties with headaches. Incisal opening is 64 mm and excursive movement to the right side, which was hard to produce, was somewhere around 6 to 7 mm and to the left side about 4 mm. 

Francesco had his nose broken in 1999, and this may have had some affect perhaps on the maxillary growth.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Francesco has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Nasal tip is deviated about 2 mm off to the right side. Mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Appears to be a transverse cant in the mandibular occlusion. Chin may be off to the left side 2 mm. 

In profile view, Francesco appears to have some AP maxillary deficiency of maybe around 4 to 5 mm. Chin-neckline looks relatively normal in length, and chin-neck angle is well-defined. Chin appears to have fairly good AP balance.

Intraorally, Francesco has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. He has had his third molars removed. Anterior six teeth appear to be elevated above the posterior teeth. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship and is probably 6 mm Class III. He has a slight anterior open bite but has about a 2 to 3-mm right side open bite. There is a slight transverse cant in the maxillary arch, being 1 mm lower than the left side. In the mandibular left arch, he has at least a 3-mm inferior position of the teeth on the right side as compared to the left side. He occludes only on the left side, and the teeth that appear to occlude are the 1st and 2nd molars, and the rest of his teeth are essentially out of occlusion. On the right side, none of his teeth touch. He has a right posterior cross bite tendency and an anterior crossbite as compared to the left side. Inferior border of the mandible on the right side is about 3 to 4 mm lower than the left side. Some lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being about a millimeter posterior to the right cuspid. In the upper arch, the left cuspid may be just slightly posterior to the right cuspid. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula, soft palate, and faucial pillars all appear relatively normal. Tonsils are present but  relatively normal in size. 

Intranasally, the turbinates are moderate in size. The septum is quite tortuous and anteriorly is off to the right side, in the mid part of the septum it is significantly deviated off toward the left side, and then posteriorly it is deviated again off to the right side. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that both condylar heads and necks appear elongated with the right side appearing much larger than the left side. All four third molars are missing, but the rest of the teeth are present. Difficult to evaluate the sinuses. Septum appears to have significant deviations in it. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are all clear. Appears to be a significant deviation of the nasal septum in the bony part and in the  cartilage particularly being deviated off toward the left side. Turbinates appear moderate in size with the left one being much larger than the right one. Some slight vertical asymmetry is seen with the inferior border of the mandible on the right side being a little bit lower than the left side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle head and neck that appear elongated. May be slightly decrease joint space superiorly. Condyle tends to curve forward a moderate amount. Fossa has a moderate inclination of the articular eminence. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly normal architecture. Joint space appears a little bit larger on this size superiorly and posteriorly as compared to the opposite side. Condylar head and neck are somewhat elongated but not quite as long as the opposite side. The right side may be 4 or 5 mm longer in length than the left side.

Open views show excellent translation of both condyles, and, in fact, probably hyperfunction. The amount of clinical translation is less evident  in maximum IO.  With his clinical excursive movements, there was probably some limitation in voluntary translation movement. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he appears to have an increased occlusal plane angulation. Has a Class III skeletal relationship and a Class III occlusion. Appears that there is a cant in the occlusion with two different occlusal plane levels. Oropharyngeal airway has good dimensions. 

Tooth-size analysis reveals a Bolton’s difference of approximately 2 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ condylar hyperplasia with the right side worse than the left side
Right TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction
Mandibular deviate prognathism
AP maxillary deficiency
Class III occlusion being slightly worse on the right side than the left side
Anterior and right-sided open bite
Occluding only on the left first and second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion 
Accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbite with the crossbite being significantly worse on the right side
Moderately high occlusal plane angulation
Deviated nasal septum
Partial nasal airway obstruction
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side of the mandible 3 mm lower than the left side and the right side of the maxilla 1 to 2 mm lower than the left side
Masticatory dysfunction

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Continue to align and level mandibular arch

Monitor facial growth and development to confirm the presence of condylar hyperplasia\

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back on the facial midline and level it transversely
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance approximately 5 mm and maximize interocclusal relationship
Nasal septoplasty

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
