MADELYNE MARZ									01-20-03

Madelyn is 13 years, 1 month old and was referred by Dr. Mark Ozier.

Patient History

She has had a tonsillectomy. Otherwise, Madelyne is in good health with no major medical problems. Dr. Presley Mock did the tonsillectomy.

Madelyn is not sure when her problem began. She thinks back that maybe around third grade she noticed that she had a little bit of a bite problem. Dr. Ozier was the first to formally recognize the problem when Madelyn was in the fifth grade at the age of 10. She has been under orthodontic treatment for approximately three years now including the use of headgear. She takes no medications, has no headaches, no tinnitus, and no vertigo. She has no headache problems, no TMJ pain, and no pain around the head and neck area. Rates her jaw function at 0, diet at 3, and disability at 0. Relative to her jaw function, she says she is unaware of her jaws working any other way except the way they do now, and, therefore, feels that they are normal for her. She does wear anterior vertical elastics probably in an attempt to try to close the anterior open bite. 

Clinical Examination

Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 4.5 mm. Maxillary midline may be about a millimeter off to the right side. Mandibular dental midline maybe just slightly off to the right side as well. Chin is probably fairly close to being on the facial midline.

In profile view, Madelyne has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe 2 to 3 mm. Chin appears to be about 15 to 18 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is shortened. Submental area is full in her centric relation. She does tend to posture her lower jaw forward. 

She has a full Class II malocclusion and an overjet of probably about 7 to 8 mm. Right side might be about a millimeter lower than the left side. She has all of her lower teeth erupted in back to the first molars, but the second molars are erupted. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars erupted. Oropharynx appears clear, although it was difficult to evaluate it. Uvula is moderate in size. 

Intranasally, she has enlarged turbinates on both sides that almost touch against the septum. She also has a wide columella base which causes some significant nostril constricture. Opening up the nostrils, however, did not improve her airway significantly most likely due to the obstruction caused by the enlarged turbinates. 

She has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. TMJs actually seem to function relatively smoothly.

Incisal opening is 40 mm. Excursive movements are about 5 mm in each direction. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly. 

She does have an aunt who has psoriasis problems. She has another aunt on her father’s side who had apparently a retruded jaw also, but that aunt is now deceased from heart problems associated with scarlet fever that created the problem for her.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the mandibular second molars are unerupted. A little bit of a cystic formation around the left second molar. Maxillary second molar is erupted in. She has developing unerupted maxillary third molars bilaterally and a right mandibular third molar that is most of the way up the ramus of the mandible. I do not see a third molar on the left side. Turbinates looks quite large. Difficult to evaluate the sinuses, but they look fairly clear. There is virtually total absence of the condyles with the right side being worse than the left side. There is just evidence of a severe condylar resorption present.

Right TMJ tomogram shows almost complete resorption of the condyles, and the condyles are functioning underneath the articular eminence and postured forward the fossa by approximately 5 to 6 mm. Vertical height of the posterior body of the mandible is extremely short. The articular eminence is extremely flat and relatively nonexistent.

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows almost complete absence of the condyle with resorption down almost to the level of the sigmoid notch. The condyle is postured about 9 to 10 mm anterior to the posterior wall of the fossa. The articular eminence is extremely flat and essentially nonexistent.

Open views show moderate translation of the condyles where the condyles come out actually beyond the articular eminences, but compared to the starting position, it is just a moderate amount of translation.

Cephalometrically, she is not in her complete retruded position. Oropharyngeal airway is about 4 mm at the base of the tongue and perhaps 6 mm at the soft palate level. She has a really high occlusal plane angulation. There is a tooth-size discrepancy of approximately 2.5 mm.

Madelyne doesn’t have any joint problems, although there is a history of a lot of neck problems on the mother’s side of the family. In second grade, she ran a high temperature for about a week. It apparently created a mark on one of her developing lower permanent teeth.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe resorptive arthritis 
Severe mandibular hypoplasia
Severe posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia
Slight AP maxillary hypoplasia
Full Class II occlusion 
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway of 4 mm (normal 11 mm)
High occlusal plane angulation of 25 degrees (normal 8 degrees)
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm
Hypertrophied turbinates
Wide columella base creating narrow nostrils
Significant nasal airway obstruction
Impacted maxillary third molars bilaterally and mandibular right third molar
Unerupted mandibular second molars bilaterally 

Recommended Treatment

MRI of bilateral TMJs to help with diagnosis 

Presurgical orthodontics
Discontinue interarch elastics
Continue to align and level maxillary arch
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and close the spacing to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy 

CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward slightly but significantly downgraft it posteriorly to decrease the occlusal plane angle
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)
Bilateral partial turbinectomies
Reconstruct columella base
Surgical removal of maxillary impacted third molars

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion