SHELLY MATHIS								10/28/2011

Shelly is 63 years old (birth date 10/30/1947).  She was referred by Dr. Jeff Buske, Granbury, TX  

Primary concerns that Shelly has include the following:

Jaw tension.
A dull pain around the jaws and temple areas.
Difficulties chewing that began when she was about 50 years in 1998, she believes it was likely related to her chronic bruxing.  

She has been wearing splints for the past 9 years since about 2002.  She currently wears 2 splints, one in the upper and one in the lower, and wears those most of the time and this seems to improve her symptoms somewhat.  She gets headaches at about of level of 3 in the temporal area bilaterally.  She rates her TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 6, diet at 4, disability at 2.  She has no trouble with earaches, but has constant tinnitus, no vertigo but some hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her left knee.  She does have degenerative changes in her neck and lower back, but currently they are relatively asymptomatic.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and sometimes during the day.  Medications she takes include:

Estradiol.
Prometrium.
Vitamin D-3.
Calcium.

CLINICAL EVALUATION.  In frontal view, Shelly has good facial symmetry and balance.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is probably about -2.  The maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Shelly has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Shelly has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has adequate attached gingiva but a little bit thin around the left central incisor.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 1 mm.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles, but no other pain.  To palpation, the condylar heads extend beyond the lateral rim of the fossa.  On opening, she has significant crepitation in both joints.  The maximal incisal opening is 45 mm, opening without pain is 30 mm.  The excursion movements to the right is 9 mm and to the left 4 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  On her tongue, she does have some crenations.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molar.  She has a root canal on mandibular right first molar.  Sinuses look clear.  Turbinates appear normal in size and septum appears reasonably straight.  Both joints appear arthritic with flattening on the heads of the condyle.   

Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight.  Left turbinate is somewhat enlarged, but the right one is a normal size.  Sinuses are clear.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is fairly straight.  Left turbinate has a moderate enlargement, but the right turbinate is relatively normal.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has severe arthritic changes.  There is significant anterior beaking of the condyle and what appears almost a free bony body into the condyle.  The fossa is somewhat thickened in vertical height, but the articular eminence is essentially absent.  There is a slight forward lipping of the articular eminence in one view.  The joint space is extremely narrow with probable bone-on-bone contact.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic with some anterior beaking.  There is bone-on-bone contact and one area towards the lateral aspect where there is a divot in the condyle.  There is decreased vertical joint space and evidence of bone-on-bone contact.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is broad mediolaterally and extends almost beyond the lateral rim of the fossa.  The condylar head extends beyond the rim of the fossa.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly only about 1 mm.  there appears to be bone-on-bone contact throughout the joint.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant bony changes.  There is a lateral growth extension of the condylar head as well as a lateral extension of the lateral rim of the fossa.  There appears to be bone-on-bone contact.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a skeletal and occlusal Class I relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway appears adequate.  

Basic diagnoses for Shelly would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis. 
Bilateral TMJ pain.  
Headaches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Evaluation at Environmental Center to rule out metal hypersensitivities.  
2.	Medications:  Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s.  
3.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
4.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).	
5.	Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars. 