MARY MATTHEWS-FADEL								03-24-04

Mary is 48 years old and referred by Dr. George Adams. 

Patient History

She has had some previous bladder surgery and some breast implants. She is in excellent health with no major medical problems. The only medication she takes is birth control pills.

Mary is not aware of her jaws clicking and popping now or in the past. No problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. She has almost continuous headaches at about a level of 3 in the frontal no acute distress temporal area. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, overall daily pain at about 3, jaw function at 7, diet at 4, and disability at 1. She says her jaws get extremely tired and sore if she has to have any dental work done. If she talks a lot, they also can get tired and sore. Also, chewing can cause the same. 

Mary has no known allergies except she is sensitive to leather, particularly watch bands and shoes. She has no problems wearing jewelry that she is aware of. Cheaper earrings sometimes will cause a slight discoloration around the ear holes but cause no other symptoms for her. Mary feels that her jaw problems that she now encounters, except for the profile factors, began in probably the last six to eight years since about the age of 40 on. She has previously seen Dr. Miro Pavelka, who did a workup on her about six years ago, but that never came to fruition. 

Mary was involved in a motor vehicle accident when she was 18. She sustained a cervical injury and was in traction for several days after that. 

Patient Concerns

Headaches 
Jaw joint pain
Jaw soreness
Snoring
Frequent arousals at night
Daytime tiredness
Predominantly mouth breathing
Does not sleep well
Doesn’t like her profile
Jaw clenching

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Mary has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry in the jaw structures. Nose may be a little bit asymmetric. Upper lip length is 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary dental midline, mandibular dental midline, and chin are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline. 

In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Maxilla might be just slightly AP deficient. She has a little bit of a nasal dorsal hump. Slight obtuse nasolabial angle. Upper lip supralabrale is almost vertically beneath subnasale. Therefore, maxilla might be 2 to 3 mm AP deficient. Chin is probably retruded about 20 to 25 mm. Chin-neckline is extremely short at probably 15 mm. She has no defined chin-neckline or chin-neck angle. She does have a head postured forward neck position. As Mary postures her mandible forward as far as it will go, and if the chin is built out even more, it does significantly improved her facial balance.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth through the second molars. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class II end-on occlusion of about 2 mm. Just a slight cant in the occlusion with the left cuspid 1 mm lower than the right. Oropharynx appears healthy. She had her tonsils removed when she was 17. She has a hyperplastic uvula. Soft palate may be a little bit long. Faucial pillars may insert a little bit toward the posterior pharyngeal area. 

Intranasally, she has some hypertrophy of the turbinates. Septum is deviated off toward the left side. Using the nasal speculum on the left side increased her abilities to breathe through her nose, making a significant difference for her. Opening up the right side of the nose did not help nearly as much as the left side. Nasal septal deviation is probably responsible for that difference. 

Maximal incisal opening is 48 mm. Excursive movement is 8 mm in each direction. Her joints seem to function relatively smoothly, and Mary is unaware of any noses in the joints at this time. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Septum appears a little bit wide, particularly on the left side more so than the right side. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged. Missing all four third molars and has crowns on the mandibular left first and second molar, right second molar, maxillary left first molar and right first molar. Condyles appear a little bit flattened anteriorly with a little bit of anterior beaking present.

Right TMJ tomogram shows some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle with a little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle might be a little bit posteriorly positioned in the fossa but difficult to tell. 

Left TMJ shows a condyle that appears to be fairly well centered in the fossa. A little bit of anterior beaking appears to be present and a little bit of flattening on the anterior head. May be a little of sclerosis on the anterior head as well. 

On opening, there is excellent translation of the condyles anterior to the articular eminence. The anterior beaking can be seen, and flattening is better appreciated. There is a little  bit of sclerosis on the anterior edge on both condyles.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. Septum in the bony aspect appears to be tipped off to the right side. Clinically it is off to the left side anteriorly in the cartilage portion. Turbinates appear to be of fairly significant size particularly on the left side.

Cephalometric, Mary has a skeletal Class II relation and Class II end-on occlusal relationship. She may be postured forward slightly, and this may radiograph may not have been in centric relation. Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted with the soft palate area being probably about 4 to 5 mm. Base of the tongue appears to be more toward the normal measuring of 10 mm. She has AP microgenia. Perhaps a slightly increased occlusal plane angle.
Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
AP microgenia
Class II end-on occlusion 
High occlusal plane angle
Overangulation of lower incisors
Moderate crowding, lower anterior arch
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Myofascial pain
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Hypertrophied turbinates
Deviated nasal septum
Nasal airway obstruction
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and possible articular disc dislocation NEED TO COMPARE TO MRI

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJ
Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward and to help correct for the slight tooth-size discrepancy created by the lower incisors being overangulated

Surgery
TMJ surgery if indicated from MRI (EVALUATE MRI TO DETERMINE TMJ PROCEDURES)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, downgraft it posteriorly, and correct any transverse problems that may be present
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Augmentation genioplasty with HTR

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Restorative dentistry as necessary to replace some crowns and any other required dental services

