LAURA MATUSZEWSKI							03-19-03

Laura is 36 years old and referred by Dr. Michael Steffen, 1601 S. Blvd., Edmond, OK  73013

Patient History

Laura is in good health with no major medical problems. She has some “slight” asthma, and she has a Serevent inhaler when that problem arises. She also takes “LeEstron” and Zoloft 100 mg q.d. 

Laura’s problems began probably sometime back during her teenage years of unknown etiology. However, she has had some traumatic episodes such as in September of 1985 her car went off a bridge and flipped over onto the roof, and she hurt her neck and perhaps her jaw, but she is not aware of any significant jaw injury. In 1986, she had an mandibular left third molar removed, and it was extremely difficult, and it took the dentist a long time to remove it. In 1990, she had the remaining three third molars removed, and these were also extremely difficult for the dentist to remove, and it took him about three hours to accomplish it. 

Since October of last year, her TMJ symptoms have gotten significant worse. They bothered her some before but nothing compared to the current situation. She does get earaches, occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo and no hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She has common types of allergies such as molds, dust, etc. She cannot wear cheap jewelry. She is very much aware of having a history of nocturnal clenching and bruxism. 

Laura gets headaches about two times per week, and it is predominantly in the frontal area, and she describes them as sinus headaches. They seem to occur in the intraorbital area and beneath the eye sockets and penetrate back through the head and come out through the top lateral aspect of the cranium. She does not feel that she gets headaches in the temporal area per se. She rates these headaches at about a level of 5 in the frontal area, and she sometimes will get headaches in the back of the head, and she rates these at about a level of 6 when they occur, but they only occur about once or twice a month. He headaches can escalate up to a level of 7.

Patient Concerns

Basic concerns that Laura has include the following:

Pain in the jaw
Pain the jaw joints
Ears burn and hurt
Can’t get a comfortable bite relationship during the day and particularly at night when she tries to sleep
Difficulty sleeping at night due to current problems
Headaches 
Neck pain
Decreased incisal opening
Jaw joint pain with the left side being worse than the right side
Teeth don’t line up
Bite and jaws appear to be continually changing
Feeling that the lower jaw is shifting toward the right side
Facial asymmetry with it being progressive at least for the past five years and has gotten more asymmetric at a progressive pace during the past year
When she bites, only her left teeth touch, and the right teeth are apart

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Laura has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face but does have some asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted maybe just a millimeter to the right. Chin is shifted perhaps 1 or 2 mm to the left. The left mandibular angle area is probably 8 to 10 mm higher than the right same area. 

In profile view, she has a slightly obtuse nasolabial angle. Perhaps some slight AP maxillary deficiency of a couple of millimeters. Chin appears to be about 8 to 10 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is probably about 42 mm in length which is somewhat short. Chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. She has a crown on her mandibular right first molar. Teeth appear fairly well aligned and leveled, although she has never had any orthodontics.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Teeth also look nicely aligned and leveled. She basically has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship bilaterally, although the teeth on the right side appear to be apart just a little bit. She has a transverse arch asymmetry with the left side being approximately 3 mm higher than the left side. With the lower arch, it is probably closer to 4 mm of vertical difference. Oropharynx is clear, and she has no tonsils, as they have been previously removed. 

Left side of the nose has an excellent airway. Right side appears to be a little bit blocked up, and there is some mucus present in that side of the nose. Septum may be deviated a little bit off toward the right side, and the right turbinate may be slightly enlarged at this point compared to the left side.

To palpation, she had no tenderness in any way except some very mild tenderness over the TMJ areas with the right side being a little bit worse than the left side. Maximal incisal opening was 45 mm; opening without significant pain was 35 mm. Excursive movement to the right was 11 mm and to the left 10 mm. As she does go into excursive movements, she is aware of “crunchy” noises in her joints. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and a crown on the mandibular right first molar. Sinuses appear clear. Left TMJ looks relatively normal. Right TMJ appears enlarged and may be compatible with an osteochondroma. Appears to be an area of bulging out from the anterior aspect of the condyle, and it appears that the surface of the condyle may have some irregularity in it.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Right turbinate may be a little bit enlarged. Septum appears a little bit deviated. Left airway looks good. Frontal sinuses are quite large but appear well-aerated.

Right TMJ tomograms show a condyle that has a hockey stick shape to it. Appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa with an increased anterior joint space and decreased posterior joint space as well as superior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. A little bit of sclerosis on the superior head of the condyle. This x-ray looks a little bit more normal as compared to the Panorex relative to the shape of the condyle. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also has a hockey stick shape to it and some sclerosis on the anterior head. Significantly decreased posterior and superior joint space with increased anterior joint space with maybe an osteophytic projection anteriorly. Articular eminence looks moderately steep. 

On opening, there is moderate translation of both condyles, but neither condyle comes out beyond the articular eminence. 

Cephalometrically, she may have a slight Class II skeletal relationship and a high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway actually looks fairly good. Occlusal plane looks steep. Vertical difference in the occlusal plane levels with the left side in the second molar area being 6 mm higher than the right side. At the inferior border, the left inferior border is almost 10 to 12 mm higher than the right side.

Basic Diagnoses

Right mandibular osteochondroma with articular disc dislocation, nonreducing, and with probable perforations
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and perforations
AP mandibular deficiency and severe asymmetry
Maxillary hypoplasia and severe asymmetry
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Right-sided open bite
Significant transverse cant in the occlusion plane with the right side being 4 mm lower than the left side

Recommended Treatment

CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Presurgical orthodontics
Apply appliances to the maxillary arch
Apply appliances to the mandibular arch

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, meniscectomies, debridement, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft is posteriorly
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
