DEBORAH MAXWELL								12/06/2010

Debbie is 59 years old, birth date 11/21/1951.  Her TMJ problems begin in 1982 when she was doing CPR on a patient and felt the disc go out of her right joint.  Her situation and pain got worse.  She had orthodontics from 1983 to 1985 for the TMJ issues.  She was initially treated by Dr. David Keith at Mass General Hospital in 1986 with a right condylectomy.  In 1987, she was continuing to have problems so she saw Dr. Jack Kent who did a right and left TMJ arthroplasties.  In 1988, she had another right TMJ arthroplasty.  In 1990, she had a LeForte I osteotomy and a cartilage graft to the right TMJ and irrigation of the left TMJ.  In 1992, she had a right TMJ debridement.  She did fairly well for some time and then was involved in a motor vehicle accident in April 2009 sustaining injury to her TMJs.  In May 2009, she was placed in a splint without any positive outcome.  She had physical therapy in 2009 as well.  In 2010, a splint was made again by Dr. Roger Vitter and she wore this for about 6 weeks, but this made her joint pain worse and so she was told to discontinue it.

Deborah has continuous headaches at about a level of 8 in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area.  About every 2 to 3 weeks, she gets a severe headache that causes nausea, vomiting, dry heaves, and she has to go to bed, turn off all the lights, etc., to attempt to get rid of it.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 9, diet at 8, disability at 9.  She gets frequent earaches, a moderate occurrence of tinnitus but no vertigo.  She has occasional hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her right thumb and possibly her neck.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  She takes the following medications:

Synthroid/levothyroid.
Estradiol.
Fen_____ for high cholesterol.
Ultram ER 1 tablet per day.
Voltaren cream for topical application.

Debbie is not aware of having any problems with snoring, but has moderate daytime somnolence.  She is unaware of sleep apnea and is predominantly a nasal breather.  

In frontal view, Debbie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm on the left and 2 mm on the right.  The maxillary midline and chin are pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted about 3 mm to the left.  She does have some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 mm and chin is retruded probably 6 to 8 mm.  Intraorally, Debbie has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars except she is missing the left first molar with the second molar drifted forward.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship on the right side and  a Class II cuspid-molar relationship on the left side.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  

Primary concerns for Debbie include the following:

Headaches.  
Facial swelling worse on the right side than the left side. 
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Earaches with ear drum closing.
Migraines, aura, and vomiting.

Maximal incisal opening is 26 mm, opening without severe pain 19 mm.  Excursion movement to the right is 4 mm, to the left 2 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and absent mandibular left first molar with the second molar drifted forward to the first molar position.  She has a root canal in the maxillary right second bicuspid.  She has three bone plates in the maxilla.  She appears to have significant arthritic changes particularly in the right joint.  

Coronal view shows that she has a slight deviated septum and a slight spur off to the right side.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  Sinuses are clear.

Axial view shows that she has moderate sized turbinates, but the sinuses appear clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some anterior beaking.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  There is some decreased vertical joint space and little bit of sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows advanced arthritic changes affecting both the condyle and the fossa.  The articular eminence is extremely flat.  There is exophytic bone extruding down from the fossa.  It appears that there is essentially bone-on-bone contact likely in the TMJ area.  

Coronal view shows that there is decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  The condyle extends slightly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows advanced arthritic changes in the fossa and on the condyle.  There is an exophytic downward growth out of the fossa that appears to occlude onto the medial aspect of the condyle.  There are erosions on the head of the condyle and in the fossa.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is some retrusion of the maxilla and mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue measures about 6 or 7 mm and at the soft palate level about 5 mm.  

Debbie does state that she has difficulties swallowing which could be related to decreased oropharyngeal airway that she has of about 4 to 5 mm at the soft palate level and about 5 to 6 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnoses for Debbie would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis, being significantly worse on the right side. 
Mandibular hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia. 
Severe TMJ pain. 
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Class I occlusion on the right side, Class II occlusion on the left side.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints. 
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts 			total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Bilateral maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction with bone plates and bone grafting.
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
	e.	Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.
	f.	Removal of arch bars.



