KASEY MAYBERRY							03/14/2011

Kasey is 21 years old, birth date 11/23/1989.  She is a junior at the University of Oklahoma and she is a cheerleader.  Referred by Nancy Harlan, 4112 Hanover Street, Dallas, TX.  Kasey’s TMJ problems began when she was 20 years old when she was coming down off of a stunt and got hit in the jaw during cheerleading.  This created quite a bit of pain for her.  She did not receive any treatment, but iced her jaws down for about 2 weeks and then things felt better.  Then in January 2011, she was coming back from New York on an airplane and yawned and heard cracking noises in her joints and then after that it hurt for her to yawn or open her mouth wide.  She now has a constant hurting in her jaw predominantly on the left side and she points more to the masseter muscle area.  She did see Dr. Bob Talley in Norman and he made a splint for Kasey which she wore for about 2 or 3 days and it made her pain worse so she discontinued it.  The only other treatment she has had to date is she had her wisdom teeth removed at the age of 11.  She has never required orthodontic treatment.  

Kasey rates her headaches at a level of 8 on the left side in the frontal, temporal, and top of the head area.  On the right side, it is closer to a 4 in the frontal, temporal and top of the head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 6, diet at 4, disability at 6.  She takes ibuprofen but that is the only medication that she currently is on.  She gets earaches predominantly in the left side, no tinnitus, but occasional vertigo.  She has no other joints that bother her and she is not aware of any allergies.  She has no difficulties wearing cheap jewelry.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day.  

On frontal view, Kasey has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 17 mm.  Upper tooth lip tooth relationship is about 4 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, she has reasonable facial balance, although the maxilla and mandible may be moderately retruded perhaps 2 or 3 mm at the maxilla and probably 6 or 8 at the chin area.  The chin neckline is reasonably well-formed, although the angle has a soft contour to it.  Intraorally, Kasey has all of her teeth in both arches back through the second molars.  She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship and an anterior deep bite of about 3 to 4 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  To palpation, she has low severe pain in the left TMJ, high moderate left masseter, right TMJ, right styloid area and mild tenderness in the right masseter.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  The maximal incisal opening is 47 mm, opening without discomfort 23 mm.  Excursion movements to the right is 7 mm, to the left 8 mm.  

RADIOGRAPH EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The septum looks straight.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum does have a spur shifted off towards the right side above the inferior turbinates, but below the middle turbinates.  In the right side, the right turbinate is hypertrophic and appears to block most of the functional airway on the right side.  The left turbinate is more normal in size.  She has more difficulties breathing through the right side of her nose than the left side of her nose.  Kasey has no history of snoring, but does have severe daytime somnolence.  She is not aware of having sleep apnea and has a mild sleep disorder and some mouth breathing at nighttime and daytime.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good morphology.  There appears to be good joint space present.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  The joint space is well-balanced.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with reasonably good morphology.  There is good joint space.  I suspect the disc is in position on that side.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow. 

Left TMJ coronal view shows that the condyle has fairly good morphology.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly quite significantly and there is decreased lateral joint space.  The articular eminence is likely medially displaced to a certain extent.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 5 to 6 mm.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has retruded maxilla and mandible along with some AP microgenia.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 8 mm to the soft palate and about 6 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Trauma to mandible 1 year ago.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc with partial medial displacement being worse on the left side than the right side. 
Myofascial pain being predominantly in the masseters and temporalis muscles, but being worse in the left masseter muscle.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Medication:  Klonopin 1 mg tablet, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x3.
2.	If medication does not resolve problem consider surgery.
	a.	TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair.
	b.	Sagittal split osteotomy to the mandible to maintain occlusion. 
3.	Consider hyaluronic injection into masseter muscles.  

Kasey is to contact me in 1 week to let me know if the Klonopin has made an improvement for her.  She has tried splint therapy and this made her pain significantly worse probably because it stimulated increased clenching and bruxism. 