HENRY MAYERS									03/31/2010

Henry is 58 years old and referred by Dr. Steven Taylor, Ste 107, 5510 Abrams Road, Dallas, TX 75214-2099.  Henry has had some difficult times over the years, particularly joint problems.  He has had shoulders reconstructed and elbows that have been scoped.  He has had arthrotomies on the right wrist.  He has had reconstruction of the right hip.  Both knees have been scoped and he has had two back surgeries.  His most recent surgery was in April on his top part of his left lung.  It did not go well.  Henry does have:

COPD.
Emphysema.
MAC.
Aspergillus.  

Since he had a partial lungectomy, he has had much less stamina and strength.  He has had a sleep study by Dr. Joy Shotwell and she did send him on a CPAP machine with him.  He has not used the machine yet.  He takes about 15 medications which he has listed for us in the records that he brought.  He rates his headaches at a level of 4 in the left frontal and temporal area and behind his eye.  He rates his left TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 8, diet at 5, disability at 9.  He is aware of clenching his teeth at nighttime and also during the day.  He has some numbness in the left temple area and his left cheek area is a little hypersensitive perhaps.

In frontal view, Henry does have good facial symmetry and balance.  Henry has some slight AP deficiency in the maxilla and in the mandible.  He is probably about 3 mm AP deficient in the maxilla and 8 mm AP deficient in the mandible.  Henry has all of his lower teeth except he is missing the mandibular left second bicuspid and second molar and he is missing mandibular right third molar.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth except for the maxillary right third molar.  He is basically fairly close to being Class I on the right side and slightly Class II on the right side.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted to the right about 2 mm.  He has a cross bite with the right cuspid.  Actually, he is Class II on both sides.  He has got about a 2 mm anterior deep bite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the left side.  Turbinates appear moderate in size, but the left side airway appears to be fairly well blocked.  The right side at least anteriorly appears to be reasonably open.  To palpation, he has high moderate pain over the left temporalis, left SCM, left posterior neck, left medial pterygoid and milder tenderness over the left TMJ and retromandibular area.  No pain to palpation on the right side.  Maximal incisal opening is 40 mm, opening without significant pain 30 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 6 mm, to the left 9 mm.  On opening, he does have almost audible crepitation in the left TMJ area.  The right joint seems to function relatively smoothly.
Basic diagnoses for Henry would be as follows:

Left TMJ severe arthritis.
Left TMJ pain. 
Left sided headaches. 
Left sided myofascial pain. 
Left sided earaches.
Left sided tinnitus.
Left sided vertigo.
COPD, emphysema, MAC, aspergillus.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints. 
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Left TMJ condylectomy, debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts 			total joint prostheses.
	b.	Left TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).
	c.	Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.


