JENNIE MAY										01-09-04

Jenny is 38 years old and referred by Dr. Mark Ozier.

Patient History

She is in good health with no major medical problems. The medication she is taking includes Zoloft 100 mg 1 tablet q.d. 

Jennie states that she does have earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo but no hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her right knee, and she has had three surgeries on that. The original injury was from a ski accident. She has allergies to mountain cedar and cats and has no known allergies to jewelry. She is aware of nighttime clenching and bruxism and also during the day when she is tense. She does get some headaches but not on a very routine basis, and she doesn’t relate it to the jaw area. She feels it is more related to her allergies. When she gets her sinus headaches, they occur predominantly in the frontal and anterior temporal area and behind the eyes. She is getting some headaches now from caffeine withdrawals as she apparently is trying to wean off of caffeine. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, overall pain at 4 on an average day, she rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 4, and disability at 5. She had orthodontics in junior high and has had her currently orthodontic appliances on since 10/10/03. There is clicking in the jaw joints.

Initially she had four bicuspids extracted and then head gear to pull the upper teeth back to the lower teeth. However, it has only been within the last five years that she has become more aware of having problems with her jaws, and the etiology is basically unknown. 

Patient Concerns

Teeth and jaws don’t fit together properly
Difficult to get the lips together
Earaches 
Ringing in the ears
Lightheadedness
Dizziness
TMJ pain
Severe snoring
Difficulties eating and chewing primarily related to jaw fatigue
Worsening retrusion of the lower jaw
Difficulties breathing through the nose and predominantly a mouth breather particularly at night

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Jennie is has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Nasal tip is wide, and the lower alar cartilages are large. Upper lip length is about 20 mm if it is filled out. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. She does not show much upper vermilion. Maxillary dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline and chin. Nasal tip is deviation just slightly to the right 1 to 2 mm. 

In profile view, Jennie is at least 6 mm of AP maxillary deficiency. Chin is at least 20 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is extremely short, and chin-neck angle is essentially nonexistent. Has a slight prominence of the nasal dorsum. Has a slight obtuse nasolabial angle. 

Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids. The rest of the teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and leveled. She has adequate attached gingiva, although it is extremely thin around the incisors and cuspids. Lower incisors appear may be a little bit overangulated. In the upper arch, she is missing her first bicuspids but has the rest of the teeth. She is essentially a Class II end-on occlusal relationship and probably has an overjet of probably about 1 to 2 mm. As she shifts her lower jaw forward to eliminate the overjet, she still has a slight Class II cuspid relationship. Probably has a significant tooth-size discrepancy. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is hyperplastic. She only has about a 2-mm overbite relationship.

Intranasally, right turbinate appears a little bit enlarged and appears to be a decreased airway on that side. On the left side, the turbinate appears relatively normal in size and appears to be a better airway. Transverse width of the nose appears somewhat constricted.

To palpation, she has some moderate tenderness over the TMJs and milder tenderness over the masseter muscles. On opening, the right joint seems relatively smooth, but she does have a glitch in the left joint at about 25 mm. Maximal incisal opening is 39 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 9 mm and to the left 10 mm. As I gently push back on the mandible, Jennie does have pain in her TMJ areas. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear relatively normal in size. Condyles appear a little bit arthritic. Good space between the upper laterals and cuspids. Extremely thick inferior border of the mandible with cortical bone being probably 7 mm thick. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic and posteriorly positioned in the fossa with minimal posterior and superior joint space. Increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Disc is probably anteriorly displaced with questionable reduction.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some mild arthritic changes and somewhat displaced posteriorly in the fossa. Superior joint space and anterior joint space appear better balanced. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

On opening, she has reasonably good translation bilaterally with it being a little bit greater on the right side as compared to the left side, although clinically there is good translation in both joints. 

Waters view shows the septum is relatively straight, and the turbinates are of moderate size with the right one being a little bit larger than the left one. Facial structures appear relatively symmetrical. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are retruded, and there is also some AP microgenia. A high occlusal plane angle is present. She is postured forward in the mandible a couple of millimeters and is not in centric relation. Oropharyngeal airway dimension at the base of the tongue measures less than 4 mm and at the soft palate level measures 0. This is probably a causative factor for her severe snoring. There is a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 1 mm higher than the left side. 
Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with questionable salvageability. MRI will be required to evaluate the TMJs
AP maxillary deficiency and posterior vertical deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Class II end-on occlusion
Missing all four first bicuspids (previous orthodontic extractions) and all four third molars
High occlusal plane angulation
AP microgenia
Tooth-size discrepancy secondary to extremely wide labial lingual dimensions teeth
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Headaches 
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of less than 4 mm (normal 11 mm)
Severe snoring
Sleep disorder

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing about 2 m of tooth structure and retract the teeth

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction by one of the following methods:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors if discs are salvageable
Bilateral TMJ total joint prostheses to include mandibular advancement if discs are nonsalvageable and there are significant osteoarthritic changes. Bilateral coronoidectomies and fat grafts would be required if total joint prostheses are indicated
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward in a counterclockwise direction, downgrafting the posterior aspect
HTR implant to anterior mandible

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
