CRYSTAL MCBRIDE								3/21/05

Crystal is 38 years old, referred by Dr. Devek Frech, 3621 Maplewood Ave., Wichita Falls, TX 76308, phone number 940-691-1671.

Crystal's problems began a long time ago and she cannot remember exactly when, and of unknown etiology.  The only treatment she has had for her jaw problems include orthodontics that began in July of 2003 and she is currently still in those orthodontic appliances. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Underbite.
Headaches.
Clicking of left jaw joint.

MEDICATIONS:  Excedrin Migraine and Zomig for her migraines, but they do not occur as frequently now as they used.  The last one was about 3 weeks ago.  

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo and no hearing loss.  The only other joint she has problems with is her neck will pop.  She cannot wear cheap earrings as this causes her ears to turn color and get infected.  She is not aware of any clenching or bruxism.  Not aware of any nasal airway obstruction.  She gets headaches about 3 to 4 days per week at a level of 5 beginning in the posterior head area and transgresses up to the temple and to the frontal area.  No TMJ pain per se.  She rates her average daily pain of 4, jaw function 3, diet 0, disability at 4.

In frontal view, Crystal has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline.  Actually, there is a little bit of a transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being about 2 mm higher than the right side.  The chin midline is off to the left side about 2 to 3 mm.  Mandibular dental midline, however, is on the facial midline.  In the profile view, she has a C-shaped curve in the upper lip.  There may be 2 to 3 mm of AP deficient in the maxilla.  Chin with fairly good AP position.  The lower lip, however, is a little bit prominent by probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Cuspid has a moderately high angle profile shift to the lower jaw.  There is a little prominence in the nasal dorsum.  Chin-neckline appears okay and chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Crystal has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars and a slightly curved increased curve of Wilson in the molar area.  She has adequately attached gingiva of lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has some space open between the cuspids and laterals.  She has some turbos on the first bicuspids.  She has an end-on Class III occlusion bilaterally by about 4 to 5 mm.  She has about a 1/2 mm reverse deep-bite.  She has an anterior crossbite, but from the bicuspids posteriorly there is not really in a crossbite.  Oropharynx appears clear.  Uvula is relatively in shape.  Soft palate may be mildly elongated.  Fascial pillars may be moderately constricted, but difficult to tell because of hyperfunction of the oropharyngeal tissues in the examination.  Tonsils are present and are relatively normal in size.  Turbinates appear fairly enlarged with a little more obstruction on the left side than the right side.  It certainly appears okay.  This is probably moderate airway obstruction.  Nostrils appear adequate as do the luminal valves.  She also has a slightly accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.  
CRYSTAL MCBRIDE			3/21/05				Page 2


To palpation, there is no tenderness around the head and neck area.  She does have some popping type of noises in both joints.  She is more aware of it than the left side.  In palpation, however, particularly palpating the external meatus, there was actually greater evidence of clicking in the right side as compared to the left side. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except for the third molars.  Difficult to evaluate the sinuses and the airway on this radiograph.  Lateral incisors are tipped distally in the upper arch.  Difficult to evaluate the condyles.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows the condyle is somewhat narrow anteroposteriorly.  Articular eminence is moderately steep and somewhat elongated.  There appears to be decreased joint space.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows condyle that appears a little bit larger than the left side.  There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.  The condyle appears to have adequate shape.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow, but somewhat elongated.  On opening, there is restricted translation of both joints.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates appear to be moderately enlarged.  Crystal does feel that she has a little bit more nasal airway today than normal.  

Cephalometric radiograph shows she has a good oropharyngeal airway.  She has a Class III skeletal occlusion relationship.  Over angulation of the upper incisors is present.  Some vertical discrepancy at the occlusal level as well as at the inferior border with probably the left side being shorter vertically than the right side.  Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm, but only 26 mm without significant discomfort.  Excursion movement to the right 6 mm, to the left 5 mm.  On excursion movements, crepitus was noted in the left TMJ.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Left TMJ arthritis and posterior dislocation of the articular disc.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated anteromedially.
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Transverse maxillary excess (in the Class I cuspid molar position.)
Increased curve of Wilson in maxillary arch. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Mandibular prognathism.
Transverse occlusal asymmetry with the left side being 2 mm shorter vertically than the right side.
Chin deviated off to the left side 2 to 3 mm.
Class III occlusion.
Over angulation of maxillary incisors. 
Headaches.
CRYSTAL MCBRIDE			3/21/05				Page 2

Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of at least 1 mm.
High-occlusal plane angle of 13 degrees (normal 8 degrees.)

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.
b.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for       inter dental osteotomies.  
c.  Close spacing on the left side between the cuspid and the first bicuspid.
	      d.  Continue to align and level mandibular arch. 

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to upright the anterior segment and advance it forward approximately 3 mm and downgraft the posterior aspect of the maxilla approximately 4 to 5 mm.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible posteriorly. 

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

