MARY (MOLLY) MCCABE								01/28/2009

Molly is 18 years old, referred by Dr. Jim Compton, 4610 North Garfield, Midland, TX 79705.  It is unknown exactly when her problem began, but even in the sonogram before she was born her mother Leslie noticed that the lower jaw was protruded somewhat forward.  She had orthodontic treatment from the age of 10 to 14 including an expander.  This was done by Dr. Robert Henry.  She has had no further treatment since the age of 14.  The only medication she takes is Advil.  

She gets headaches at about a level of 5 in the frontal and temporal areas, but particularly behind the eyes at least once a week.  Her mother notes that when she does get headaches they are commonly present in the morning.  She rates her TMJ pain at 2, average daily pain at 0, jaw function, diet, and disability at 0.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, nor hearing loss.  Her knees bother her some, but no other joints cause her problems.  She is not aware of clenching or grinding her teeth at night.  She does not believe that she snores, but she does have some moderate tiredness during the day.  She sleeps reasonably well at night, although she feels she may breathe through her mouth when sleeping.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Molly has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is shifted about 1 mm to the left and the mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The chin may be just slightly to the right 1 to 2 mm.  In profile view, the maxilla may be retruded about 3 to 4 mm and the chin may be a little bit strong by 3 to 5 mm.  Intraorally, Molly has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has fairly good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  The lower teeth may be slightly lingually inclined.  In the upper arch, Molly has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class III cuspid relationship by approximately 5 mm on the right side and 6 to 7 mm on the left side.  She has an anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites. She has about an zero overbite relationship and a negative 4 to 5 mm overjet.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal.  Intranasally, the left turbinate appears a little bit larger than the right side, but there appears to be a reasonably good airway.  She does have a wide columella and narrow nostrils.  Holding the nostrils open improved her abilities to breath a little bit, but not a significant difference.  To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the masseter muscles and moderate pain over the temporalis, TMJs, retromandibular area, and shoulders.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Incisal opening is 65 mm.  Excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  Condylar heads and necks appear slightly elongated.  She has a Class III occlusal relationship.  
Axial view shows that she has moderately enlarged turbinates.  The nasal septum in the bony area is deviated off towards the left side.  The sinuses appear clear.  
In the coronal view, the turbinates are moderate in size, but the bony septum is deviated off towards the left side and may be causing a little bit of obstruction and there is a small spur extending outward.  Sinuses appear clear.  She has bilateral posterior cross bites.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology, and joint space looks fairly well balanced. The condylar head and neck appear elongated.  
Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle with a good morphology and good joint space.  Condylar head and neck appear elongated.  
Left TMJ coronal view show a condyle that appears slightly enlarged mediolaterally as well as vertically.  Joint space is a little bit narrowed at the lateral aspect of the joint, but otherwise joint space appears reasonably good.  
Right TMJ coronal view show a condyle with good morphology.  The condylar head may be slightly elongated.  Joint space appears fairly good, although at the lateral aspect of the rim, the joint space is decreased some.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Molly has some AP maxillary deficiency and mandibular prognathism.  Lower incisors may be a little bit vertical in orientation.  She may have a slight reversed curve of Spee in the lower arch and also in the upper arch.  Oropharyngeal airway appears slightly constricted with an AP dimension of about 5 mm at the base of the tongue and about 6 mm at the soft palate level.  It is possible that her tongue may be in a low posture.  

Dental model analysis shows that she has fairly good tooth size balance.  She does have a reversed curve of Spee in the upper arch with the incisors being probably 2 mm lower than they should be, but the cuspids are also slightly low.  However, the first molar mesial ridges are elevated compared to the bicuspids so part of this change could be related to the orientation of the lower first molars.  The roots may be kicked slightly mesially on the first molars bilaterally.  In the model analysis in the upper arch, there is a slight reversed curve of Spee with the upper incisors being about 2 mm lower than they should be. 

Basic diagnoses for Molly would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ condylar hyperplasia. 
Mandibular prognathism.
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia. 
Class III occlusion.
Anterior and bilateral posterior cross bites. 
Marginal ridges on mandibular first molars are elevated.
Slight lingual inclination of lower incisors.
Slight reversed curve of Spee in the lower arch and in the upper arch. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Tip first molar roots distally to better align the mesial marginal ridges of the first molar and bicuspids.  Try to tip lower incisors forward 1 to 2 mm if possible. 
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchor to arrest the active condylar hyperplasia. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, expand it, and maximize the occlusal fit.  
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion and retain.