CELIA MCCADDEN-MARTINEZ						08/11/2011

Celia is 55 years old, birth date 07/12/1956.  She did have hepatitis when she was 18 years old, but otherwise she is healthy.  She takes a number of medications:

Covaryx-HS.
Aspirin 81 mg.
Zeid 10 mg.
Paxil 1/8 of a 20 mg tablet.
Vitamin D. 
Melatonin.
Acido folico.
Placimine 300 mg.
Surfak.
Vitamin C.
Echinacea.

The onset of Celia’s jaw and joint problems is unknown, but she thinks they began at least 2 years ago.  The etiology is unknown.  She went to see an ear doctor and he treated her with some medications and some exercises.  

Celia gets headaches about once a week at about a level of 4 predominantly in the temple areas.  These are fairly well controlled with Tylenol.  She rates her TMJ pain that occurs only on the left side at 4, average daily pain at 4, jaw function and diet at 3, disability at 0.  She has no earaches, but get right-sided tinnitus, but no vertigo.  She may have some hearing loss.  The only other joint that really bothers her is her left shoulder and her left knee does make some noises from kneeling a lot.  Celia does states that if she drives in a car a long way or is in a boat she does develop vertigo.  She is aware of clenching her teeth at nighttime.  She sometimes will wake up in the morning with her right side of her jaw and neck hurting.  

Celia was a thumb sucker when she was younger.  She had orthodontics from about the age of 9 to 10 and it appears as though she had head gear to reposition the upper teeth.  

In frontal view, Celia has good facial symmetry and balance. Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm. The maxillary dental midline, mandibular dental midline and chin are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, she has some fairly good facial balance.  She is just slightly retruded maybe about 6 mm in the mandible and maybe 2 or 3 mm in the maxilla.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not as well defined.  Intraorally, Celia has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some very mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class I cuspid molar relationship and about a 2 mm anterior overbite.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the right SCM and milder pain over the left TMJ and left shoulder.  On opening, she has a loud audible click at about 40 mm of opening in the left joint and a closing click at probably about 30 to 35 mm.  The maximal opening is 50 when she can pop her joint and reduce her disc on the left side.  The excursion movement to the right is 9 mm and to the left 11 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The roots are fairly short on the mandibular second molars.  She has a root canal on the maxillary second bicuspids and left first molar.  The condyles may appear a little bit arthritic.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  

Coronal view shows that the septum appears reasonably straight.  Turbinates appear enlarged.  Sinuses appear clear. 

Axial view shows that the septum appears fairly straight.  Turbinates are moderate in size with a somewhat constricted airway.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that the condyle is somewhat arthritic.  It appears somewhat small in size.  It is posteriorly positioned in the fossa and there is decreased posterior and superior joint space but increased anterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is some sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is larger than the left side.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking present.  The condyle is slightly posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  The articular eminence is much more shallow on this side as compared to the opposite.  There appears to be decreased posterior joint space.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves probably about 3 mm.  There is a decreased lateral joint space with what appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm or so.  There is a significantly decreased lateral joint space, but towards the center of the condyle and medially the joint space appears more normal.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is a Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 9 mm and at the base of the tongue about 6.5 mm, although the tongue is postured low in the mouth with a distance from the tongue to the palate of about 9 mm.  

Relative to the ringing in her ears, she has been to see ENT doctors in Mexico.  They have done extensive testing on her and have not been able to identify any etiology from their standpoint to cause the tinnitus.  

Basic diagnoses for Celia would be as follows:

Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteromedially displaced with late reduction on opening and with significant deformation of the articular disc.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc medially displaced and slightly anterior.  
Relative mandibular hyperplasia.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
History of clenching.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics:  Place maxillary and mandibular orthodontic appliances.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral ramus sagittal split osteotomies to maintain the occlusion and 			create space in the joints to accommodate the articular discs.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  

I believe that the displaced discs particularly in the left TMJ have been present for many years and is not a recent development.  She did report getting hit by a car and striking the right side of her jaw which could have been the etiology for the displacement of the left disc.  The length of time that the disc has been out of place and the significant deformation of the disc will affect the prognosis.  However, I still feel that the disc would be the best option for Celia.  She understands that the prognosis is somewhat guarded because of the length of time and deformation of that left disc.  However, I still feel the disc would be the best approach to try to remedy her problems at this time.  I did inform her that if it did not hold up that a total joint prosthesis would be indicated.  She will think about the treatment options as I also told her she could have nonsurgical treatment such as splint therapy and also could do arthroscopy and/or medications, but that these modalities of treatment will not fix the joint situation.  