CHAD MCCALISTER									04/09/2007

Chad is 26 years old and referred by Dr. George Q. Adams, 2845 Parkwood, Blvd., #100, Plano, TX 75093.  Primary concerns that Chad has are how his teeth fit together and how they look.  

In frontal view, Chad has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1.5 mm to the left and chin is pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, he has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  Mandible appears a little bit retruded and chin-neckline and chin-neck angle are not well defined.  Intraorally, all the teeth are present back to the second molars.  There is significant crowding in the lower anterior arch.  There appears to be adequate attached gingiva between the lower anterior teeth.  Mandibular left cuspid may be 1 mm or 2 posterior to the right cuspid.  In the upper arch, Chad has all of his teeth back through the second molars present.  Laterals may be a little bit small.  Chad has an anterior open bite of about 3 mm.  He is fairly close to being a Class III on the right side by about 6 to 7 mm and is a Class III on the left side by probably about 4 to 5 mm.  He has almost and end-on incisor type relationship anteroposteriorly that is primarily due to the crowding in the lower arch.  Posteriorly he has crossbite tendencies on the right side.  The left side is not in crossbite. Uvula is fairly large.  Soft palate appears relatively normal in length.  Faucial pillars appear somewhat constricted primarily due to the tonsils which are moderate in size.  Chad appears to have occlusion on all but the anterior 6 teeth.  Intranasally, turbinates look relatively normal in size and the septum looks reasonably straight.  There does not appear to be any significant nasal airway obstruction.  Chad has no history of snoring, daytime somnolence or sleep apnea problems.  Maximal incisal opening is about 59 mm.  Excursive movements are about 4 mm in each direction.  To palpation, he has no tenderness around the head and neck area and joints seem to function relatively smoothly.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:  
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth back through the third molars and are all erupted.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Top of the condyles are cut off.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Nasal septum deviates a little bit off towards the right side in the bony area.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Jaws appear fairly symmetric.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of sclerosis on top of it.  Otherwise, he seems to have reasonably good morphology.  Joint space appears fairly well balanced. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit posteriorly positioned but otherwise appears to have reasonable space superior.  Articular eminences are moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles with the right side translating a little bit more than the left one.  Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is a high occlusal plane angle with an anterior open bite and there appears to be some AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency.  Oropharyngeal airway looks adequate.  There may be slight reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch.

CHAD MCCALISTER				04/09/2007				Page 2


BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Anterior open bite.
Crowding of lower anterior arch.
Class III end-on occlusion being worse on the right side as compared to the left side.
Mandibular asymmetry with the left cuspid being 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.
Slight reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch and accentuated curve in the upper arch.
 Retained erupted third molars x4.
 High occlusal plane angle.
 Mandibular dental midline shifted 1 to 2 mm to the left of the chin and facial midlines. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch to occlusal plane levels.  Align the 4 incisors in an elevated plane level and place a step in the archwire to align the cuspids, bicuspids and first and second molars at the lower occlusal plane level.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to improve lower arch asymmetry by retracting the mandibular right cuspid and slightly advancing the left cuspid as well as shift the midline about 1 mm to the right to get the dental midline aligned with the chin and facial midline. 
Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible in a counterclockwise direction to decrease the occlusal plane and advance the chin.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. 
Extract 4 erupted third molars.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

