EMMA MCCALMONT								04/16/2007

Emma is 11 years and 10 months of age and is referred by Dr. Mike Steffen, Edmond, OK.  Emma gets headaches at about a level of 7.  They occur behind the eyes involving the frontal and temple areas.  She rates her TMJ at 5, average daily pain at 3, jaw function, diet and disability at 0.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo and no other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  

Her jaw problems began about 1-1/2 years ago of unknown etiology.  Her jaws started to click and pop.  There is no history of any significant trauma that could be contributory to the situation.  When she was 2 years old she was pushed by a 6-year-old off a bar and fell and broke her arm.  More recently in the past year she did chip a tooth on the side of the swimming pool but other than there is no significant trauma.  Parents think that she is probably a mouth breather when she sleeps and may do that also during the day.  There is no evidence of snoring or any sleep apnea symptoms.  

In frontal view, Emma has good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline.  In profile view, Emma has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 mm or so and chin is AP deficient by probably 10 to 12 mm.  Chin-neckline may be a little bit short although chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, she is in mixed dentition with retained primary E's but the rest of her teeth are in place.  Some mild crowding of lower anterior teeth.  She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  Cuspids are erupting in.  Fairly close to being a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has about 2.5 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal area looks normal.  Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear within normalcy.  Tonsils appear normal in size.  Intranasally, her turbinates are extremely large and appear to occupy a good portion of the nasal airway.  The septum may be deviated a little bit towards the right side but then there is a little spur at the base on the left side that extends into the left nasal airway space.  Maximal incisal opening is 47 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is 6 mm, left 7 mm.  I think she has an audible click on the left TMJ at about 35 mm of opening and occasional closing click.  Right joint seems to function relatively smoothly.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the presence of unerupted second molars and developing third molars.  The second bicuspids are present but unerupted yet with retained primary E's still in place.  In the upper arch the cuspids are high but erupting downward.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates appear enlarged.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates appear large.  Bony septum appears reasonably straight.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows that there appears to be decreased joint space.  The condyle appears to have reasonably good shape as does the fossa. Articular eminence is relatively normal in steepness.  

EMMA MCCALMONT			04/16/2007				Page 2


Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Articular eminence is relatively normal in size and inclination.  There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space.  No opening views printed. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II relationship with a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway measurement is about 7 to 8 mm at the base of the tongue and about 7 mm at the soft palate level.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation (possibly AICR.)
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Slight AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Retained primary E's.
Unerupted mandibular second bicuspids.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Nasal airway obstruction.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Surgery Stage 1
            a.   Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek  Anchors.
Orthodontics.
Make post surgical occlusal splint to support the occlusion and posterior open bite that will occur as a result of the TMJ surgery.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Close posterior open bite by selective decrease in the occlusal splint and eruption of teeth.
Continue to monitor growth and development. 
Surgery Stage 2 (Recommended at age 15).
Maxillary osteotomies to advance and downgraft the posterior aspect.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance in a counterclockwise direction.
Augmentation genioplasty. 
Partial turbinectomies.
Nasal septoplasty if indicated.
Removal of impacted third molars x4.
Post surgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
