CALEB MCCANDLESS								10/08/2007

Caleb is 14 years old and is referred by Dr. George Adams.  The only previous surgery he had was a ranula that was removed in 2006.  Caleb has also had shingles in the past that involved his neck and head area.  He had singles approximately 4 years ago.  He takes Lexapro 10 mg daily and Concerta 108 mg per day.  He also has rosy cheeks more so on the left side than the right side.  He gets headaches about once a week in the frontal and temple areas that registers at about a level of 5.  His mother observes him bruxing at night.  When he was younger it was real severe.  He has no TMJ pain.  He rates his jaw function, diet and disability all at 0.  Headaches are 5 in the temporal and frontal area.  Caleb began his orthodontic treatment in 2001.  He has had appliances for most of the duration of the last 6 years.  His orthodontics has been performed by Dr. Skybell.  Caleb recently switched to Dr. George Adams.

In frontal view, Caleb has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  He has some slight increased fullness in the cheek on the left side but not much.  Upper lip is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, he has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 mm or so.  The chin dificiency is probably around 10 mm.  Intraorally he has all his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has appliances on.  Teeth appear to be aligned and leveled.  In the upper arch he has all his teeth back through the second molar and he has slight Class II end-on occlusion.  He has an overbite of about 2 mm.  Oropharyngeal areas look healthy.  He has a bifid uvula but normal appearing length, and soft palate and faucial pillars all look relatively normal.  Transversely the occlusal plane looks fairly level.  To palpation, he has just some very minimal tenderness over the masseters, TMJs and posterior neck area.  The joints seem to function very smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is about 47 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is 7 mm, left 8 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of the maxillary right third molar developing and the other third molars appear to be absent.  He is getting some foreshortening of his roots particularly the maxillary incisors and mandibular incisors.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  I see no other gross pathology present.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The bony nasal septum is reasonably straight.  The turbinates are moderate in size.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has reasonably good morphology and fairly good joint space present.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be postured a little bit forward in the fossa.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there appears to be some slight AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency with a little bit of an overjet.  Oropharyngeal airway measurement at the soft palate level is about 8 mm and at the base of the tongue it measures about 6 mm.  Caleb has a tooth size discrepancy of 1 mm. 
CALEB MCCANDLESS 			10/08/2007				Page 2

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
AP maxillary deficiency.
Slight posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Impacted maxillary right third molar.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Stabilize the occlusion in its present condition and consider debanding and placing into retainers.
Monitor facial growth and development.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open a little spacing around the upper lateral incisors about ½ mm to compensate for a small tooth size discrepancy. 
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery (perform in the summer of 2010 when Caleb will be 17 years old.)
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance it in a counter clockwise direction. 
Removal of impacted maxillary right third molar.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
