CHASE MCCANDLESS								07/07/2008

Chase is 19 years old and referred by Dr. George Adams.  He has had previous orthodontics from the age of 12 to 15 by Dr. Skibell.  He currently takes the following medications:

Concerta 54 mg q.d.
Klonopin 0.25 mg p.r.n. anxiety, but he has only taken about 4 or 5 doses to date. 

Primary concerns that Chase has includes the following:  

Possible TMJ problems. 
Weak chin projection.  

He has had his wisdom teeth removed.  Chase has been diagnosed as having ADHD/dyslexia.  

Chase has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  He apparently does clench or brux his teeth at night.  He has no apparent jaw dysfunction at this time.  He has no history of snoring, although he does have some mild to moderate daytime somnolence, but this could be due to medications or being a teenager and staying up late at night.  No sleep apnea symptoms and he states that he breathes through his nose when he sleeps at night.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Chase has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the left side, and mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much on the facial midline.  The chin is also just shifted off to the left side 2 to 3 mm.  In profile view, he has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of about 3 mm and the chin is retruded probably 10 to 12 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is moderately well defined.  Intraorally, Chase has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  There is some mild crowding of the lower anterior of the lower arch.  There is a little inflammation of his gingiva, but he has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side by probably 3 to 4 mm.  Chase has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy.  The uvula may be just mildly elongated as is the soft palate.  The fascial pillars may be just mildly constricted, but not too significant.  Tonsils look relatively normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear quite large, but septum appears straight.  To palpation, he has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Incisal opening is 60 mm.  Excursion movement to the right 10 mm, to the left 7 mm.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  All the rest of teeth are present.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  The left condyle appears a little bit shorter in height as compared to the right side.  
Waters view shows that the turbinates are quite large and appear to obliterate a good part of the nasal airway.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has reasonable morphology.  It may be a little bit narrow mediolateral and maybe could be a little bit of anterior beaking present.  There could be some decreased joint space vertically, but difficult to tell on these views.
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly.  There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep on both sides.  On opening, there fairly good translation of both condyles.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Chase has a head postured forward neck position.  He has a skeletal Class II relationship and a high occlusal plane angle.  However, oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal.  The turbinates appear large.  Chase has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.  
Basic diagnoses for Chase would be as follows:
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Class I occlusion on the right side, Class II end-on occlusion on the left side.  
Mandible deviated to the left side about 2 mm at the incisors and 3 mm at chin.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Crowding of the lower anterior arch. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm. 
Lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. 
Rule out TMJ pathology. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

MRI of left and right TMJ.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.   
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 3 mm of tooth structure.  Use some Class III elastics on the left side to try to distalize the left mandibular cuspid about 1 mm.
Surgery.
Maxillary osteotomies to move it forward approximately 4 to 5 mm and down graft it posteriorly approximately 4 mm.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction advancing the chin approximately 10 mm.
TMJ surgery, if indicated. 
Reduction turbinectomies.