BREONNA MCCLAIN								08/11/2008

Breonna was referred by Robert Marciani, MD, University Medical Arts Building, 222 Piedmont Avenue, Suite 7300, Cincinnati, OH 45219.  Her orthodontist is Dr. Alex Casanelli, 7908 Cincinnati Dayton Road, Cincinnati, OH 45069.  Breonna is not exactly sure when her jaw problems began, but at least in her early teen years it was brought to her attention that her joints clicked and popped.  Her bite has been slightly opening, and it became more noticeable about three years ago, and her discomfort also began to increase at that time.  The etiology is unknown.  When she was a teenager, apparently her teeth and jaws were fairly well aligned as she had seen an orthodontist, but they did not really recommend any treatment.  The only treatment she has been given so far has just been a split that she wears at night that she received in 2006.

Breonna gets headaches about two times per week in the temporal areas at about a level of 5.  She rates her average TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 6, diet at 6, and disability at 1.  She has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She feels that her speech is affected.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Breonna has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all fairly well aligned to each other.  The nasal tip may be just slightly to the right side 1 or 2 mm.  In profile view, Breonna has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  Chin appears retruded.  Chin neckline is not well defined.   As Breonna holds her lower jaw forward and the upper lip is filled out slightly, it improves her overall facial balance.  Intraorally, Breonna has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She occludes only on her second molars bilaterally, and all other teeth are out of occlusion.  She has probably about a 3 mm anterior open bite.  She has about 3 to 4 mm Class II cuspid relationship.  The turbinates are quite large.  They do not particularly look inflamed, but the size is large and it may significantly impede her nasal airway.  The oropharyngeal tissues all look normal.  Breonna does tend to breathe through her mouth a lot.  This is likely due to the hypertrophied turbinates and nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, she has a click in the left joint at about 25 mm and a closing click at probably around 10 mm.  On the right side, she can create a pop in the joint by manipulation, but not on just opening and closing.  She has no pain to palpation.  Maximal incisal opening is about 42 mm and she could open to about 28 to 30 without discomfort.   Excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.   Bolton's analysis reveals a tooth size discrepancy of 1 mm.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  All the rest of the teeth are present.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  She has some significant arthritic changes in both joints.  
Waters view shows that the bony septum at least is reasonably straight.  The turbinates are enlarged particularly on the right side, and this turbinate is very large and tends to obliterate the entire nasal cavity.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone significant condylar resorption.  The condylar head is quite small.  Decreased superior and posterior joint space is present.  
In the left joint, the condyle likewise is quite small.  The joint space appears to be decreased superiorly.  The articular eminences are moderate in inclination.  On opening, there is good translation in both joints.   
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Breonna has a high occlusal plane angle and a skeletal Class II occlusal relationship.  She occludes only on the second molars.  All her other teeth are out of occlusion.  Oropharyngeal airway is significantly constricted at the base of the tongue with an airway dimension of only about 4 to 5 mm.  At the soft palate level, the dimension is closer to about 11 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Breonna would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia.  
AP maxillary hypoplasia.  
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Apertognathia.  
Occludes only on the second molars bilaterally with all other teeth out of occlusion.  
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Crowding of the lower anterior arch.  
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1 to 2 mm.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Try to decrease width in the cuspid area.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth particularly the left central incisor and lateral incisor as they are about 0.5 mm larger than the right side.
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it slightly, but down graft it posteriorly.  
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.  
4.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.