SANDI MCCLOSKEY								02/20/2006

Sandi is 46 years old.  She is referred by Dr. Tom Pitts, 4786 Caughlin Pkwy, Suite #306, Reno, NV, 89509.  Her dentist is Dr. Steve Sims, 4991 N. Lake Blvd., Carnelian Bay, CA, 96140.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Right TMJ pain. 
Right ear pain.
Left-sided frontal headaches.
Difficulty using the jaw.

The onset of Sandi's TMJ problems is unknown and the etiology is also unknown.  The only treatment she has really had is diet control and controlled use of the jaws.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: 
Nexium.
Vicodin.
Zyrtec. 
Allegra.

She may have Klonopin that she uses very infrequently.  At one time she was on Vioxx but she got an ulcer from it but has been able to get the ulcer treated and relieved.  

She gets earaches, right side much greater than the left side.  She gets ringing in her ears but no vertigo.  She feels she has some hearing loss on the right ear.  Other joints that bother include her knees, neck, right index finger and right wrist.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  She does have an artificial implant in her knee and it is a unicompartment knee reconstruction. 

She gets headaches about once a week that are about a level of a 3 in the left frontal area but she has had headaches escalate to an 8.  Her TMJ pain is worse on the right side than the left side at a level of 5.  Average daily pain at 3.  Jaw function at 7, diet at 3, disability at 6.  In frontal view, Sandi has good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm, upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  

In profile view, Sandi has good facial balance vertically and anteroposteriorly.  Intraorally, Sandi has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a good Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2.5 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal.  Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear relatively normal.  She gives no history of significant snoring problems nor does she have any problems with daytime somnolence or sleep apnea.  To palpation she has some mild to moderate discomfort over the TMJs a little bit worse on the left side than the right side.  She has some mild tenderness over the right masseter and left styloid area.  On opening, she has an audible click about 35 mm on the right side and closing click about 10 to 15 mm.  The left seems to function relatively smoothly.  On closing, she could hear some crepitations in the right joint.  She can open to about 35 mm with reasonable comfort.  By manipulation and popping the right joint she can get to 55 mm but then had to manipulate her jaw significantly in order to get it closed again.  
SANDI MCCLOSKEY			02/20/2006				Page 2


Excursive movement to the right was about 6 to 7 mm with pain in the left masseter muscle area.  Excursive movement to the left was about 9 mm with pain in the left masseter muscle area.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The condyles look quite large.  She has a root canal in the mandibular left cuspid and a crown on the right second molar.  

Waters view shows that the septum is reasonably straight and the turbinates are of moderate size.  The sinuses appear clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be increased anterior joint space.  There is some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  There is increased anterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is a little bit of flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.  On opening, there is excellent translation of both condyles with the condyles coming anterior to the articular eminences.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Sandi has a good Class I cuspid molar relationship with perhaps a slight low angle kind of facial morphology.  Oropharyngeal airway looks fairly good with a little bit of constricture at the tip of the uvula and soft palate area of about 4 mm.  The tongue is positioned low and oropharyngeal airway dimension at the base of the tongue is about 6 mm.  

For pain management, Sandi gets very minimal to no relief with morphine.  She actually had much better results with Percocet orally as compared to the IV morphine.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. 
Relative mandibular hyperplasia. 
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
Earaches.
Masticatory dysfunction. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch.
SANDI MCCLOSKEY			02/20/2006				Page 3


Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
