SYBIL MCCLOSKEY							11/15/2011

Sybil is essentially a self-referral, but did get my name indirectly through a dentist in San Antonio.  Primary concerns that Sybil has include the following:

Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Bone deterioration in her joints related to plates in her jaw joints.
Picks up distant sounds in both ears.  
Ears are sore to touch, particularly on the left side. 

Sybil’s TMJ problems began when she was about 42 years old of unknown etiology.  She developed headaches and joint pain at that time.  She had splint therapy from 1989 to 1990 x2, although ineffective.  She was then treated by Dr. Lamar Byrd who did what sounds like arthrocenteses bilaterally.  In June 1991, Dr. Byrd then eventually went in and apparently by history she had bilateral diskectomies and perhaps bilateral Christensen fossa prostheses placed.  She actually did fairly well until about 5 years ago when her pain began to escalate again.  

Sybil gets headaches at about a level of 7 predominantly in the right side in the frontal and temple area at a level of 7.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 8, diet at 4, disability at 8.  She has moderate earaches, constant tinnitus and vertigo.  Her vertigo is a little bit different because it occurs when she lays on the right side and rotates to the left, but clears if she sits up.  Other joints that bother her include her hands, fingers, neck (she has had previous surgery on 3 disks in her neck) and back.  She has significant allergies including beef, oranges and scents, cats, flowers and their scents, environmental stuff and seasonal allergies.  She reacts to jewelry except for solid gold and sterling silver.  Additional medical conditions she has include:

Asthma (allergy induced). 
The above-mentioned allergies. 
Diabetes.  
Diverticulitis. 
Elevated triglycerides and cholesterol.
Increased blood pressure. 
Anemia.

She takes the following medications:

Estraderm patches 0.1 mg.
Bupropion XL 300 mg in the morning.
Meclizine 25 mg p.r.n. 
Xopenex HFA 45 mcg.
Cyclobenzaprine 10 mg q.d.
Triamcinolone 0.1%.
Epi-Pen 0.3 mg for auto injection.
Fenofibrate 160 mg q.d.
Simvastatin 80 mg q.d.
Janumet 50/500 (575) 1-1/2 daily and 1/2 in the evening.
Lisinopril 20 mg 1/2 tablet per day.
Metoprolol 25 mg q.d.
Singulair 20 mg q.d.
Nitrofurantoin 50 mg per day.
Phenazopyridine 200 mg 2 per day.
B12 500 mcg sublingual 2 per day.
Co Q-10 10 mg q.d.
Biotin 500 mcg 2 per day.
Flaxseed oil 1200 mg b.i.d. 
Aspirin 375 mg 1 q.d.
Niacin 500 mg q.d.
Nitrostat 0.4 mg, although she has not used it yet.
Zyrtec 10 mg q.d. 
Docusate 100 mg b.i.d. 
Cosamin DS 1 q.d.
Women’s Senior Centrum vitamins 1 per day.
Benadryl 25 mg p.r.n.  
Lysine 500 mg 1 to 2 per day.

Sybil does have some mild snoring and positional sleep apnea.  If she lays on her side, she does not have sleep apnea.  If she lays on her back, she does.  She has some mild daytime somnolence.  She breathes through her mouth at nighttime and also during the day.  She does have restless leg problems as well.

In frontal view, Sybil has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1.  The maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, she has some AP maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia of probably 5 to 6 mm and probably 6 to 8 mm in the mandible.  Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular right second and third molars and left second and third molars, but has the rest of her teeth.  She has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She is a slight Class III cuspid relationship by probably 2 mm.  She has a left-sided posterior open bite and on the right side she has a posterior cross bite.  She has about a 1.5 mm vertical over bite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  The maximal incisal opening is 26 mm, excursion movement to the right about 1.5 mm and to the left 1 mm.  To palpation, she has significant pain over the masseter muscles and shoulder areas and moderate pain over the SCMs, retromandibular area, temporalis muscles and left TMJ.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of bilateral Christensen fossa liners.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  She is missing mandibular left and right first and second molars and maxillary third molars.  She has a root canal in the mandibular right first molar and maxillary right second bicuspid.  She has crowns on all four incisors and reconstructions on most of the molars and most of the bicuspids as well. 

Coronal view shows that the turbinates appear quite large and appear to block most of the airway.  The sinuses appear clear.  

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight, but turbinates are large and constricting the nasal airway, but the sinuses are relatively clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows the presence of a Christensen fossa prosthesis.  There is heterotopic bone extending anterior from the condylar head.  The fossa appears to be reasonably well adapted.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows that the fossa component is fairly well adapted.  Also, there could be a crack in the lateral aspect of the fossa component.  There is heterotopic bone growing forward from the condylar head.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows the presence of the Christensen prosthesis.  There appears to be some kind of mass between the condyle and the metal fossa that may be bony in nature.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows the possibility of there being a fracture at the lateral aspect of the fossa component, but very difficult to tell.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Sybil has an extremely constricted oropharyngeal airway.  She basically has a Class I skeletal relationship, but maxilla and mandible are retruded.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ presence of failed Christensen fossa prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and heterotopic bone formation.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Slight Class III occlusal relationship.
Posterior open bite on the left side and cross bite on the right side. 
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Sleep apnea syndrome.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Missing mandibular left and right second and third molars and maxillary third molars.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Sleep study to evaluate the level of sleep apnea.
2.	Evaluation at the Environmental Center to test for metal hypersensitivities.
3.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
4.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses.
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	c.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
	d.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward.
	e.	Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.
5.	Removal of arch bars at 4 to 6 weeks post surgery.  