CLAUDIA MCCLURE								10/15/2007

Claudia is 46 years old and is referred by William Hang, DDS, MSD.  She has had problems with her TMJs, back and neck pain and sleep apnea.  The only surgery she has had is for removal of two lipomas from her back.  She has some mild arthritis in her cervical spine.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: 
Vicodin 5/500, 0 to 4 per day.
Estriol cream 3 mg per day.
Progesterone cream 5%, ¼ to ½ teaspoon per day as needed.

She has had an adverse reaction to Cipro and sulfa drugs.

Claudia's problems may have begun back during her teenage years.  In her late teens she began developing headache, neck and back problems as well of unknown etiology.  She did have orthodontics as a teenager.  Her joints were relatively asymptomatic, however, until about 2 years ago when acutely she developed TMJ pain.  She has pain problems in both joints.  She was put in splint therapy in January of 2006 and although temporarily it may have helped but the improvement did not last.  She had physical therapy from March through June of 2006 and this was of no benefit to her either.  She began orthodontics again in April of 2007.  For awhile she had difficulties with a closed lock situation.  Since starting her orthodontics, this has lessened.  The severity of her pain has decreased also since beginning her orthodontic treatment.  She currently does wear a splint in the shape of retainer that tends to open her bite and disarticulate her.  

Claudia gets headaches at about a level of 8 throughout the head and neck area that occur daily.  She rates her average daily TMJ pain at 5 which is an improvement over what it was prior to the splint therapy.  She rates her average daily pain around the head and neck area at a level of 8, jaw function at 4, diet 5 and disability at 8.  She has no problems with earaches but gets frequent tinnitus and vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her neck and her thoracic and lumbar spine.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime and she is aware of clenching during the day.  

In frontal view, Claudia has fairly good facial symmetry.  Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  The nose is just a little bit off towards the right side about 2 mm.  In profile view, she has just some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably a couple of millimeters.  The chin is retruded probably 15 to 18 mm.  Chin-neckline is extremely short and she has fullness in her submental area.  When Claudia postures her mandible forward, she has significant improvement in her facial profile.  Intraorally, she is missing mandibular second bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has orthodontic appliances on back through the first molars.  In the upper arch, she had the spaces reopened, the right central incisor.  She has Class II cuspid relationship.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.  On reevaluation it appears that the left central incisor may be a little bit elevated compared to the right side.  She has about a 2 mm anterior vertical overbite relationship and has about a 2 to 3 mm overjet relationship.  Intraorally, the oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy.  The Uvula is moderately elongated.  
CLAUDIA MCCLURE			10/15/2007			Page 2

The soft palate looks relatively normal although it is asymmetric in morphology with the left side being a little bit lower and a little bit longer than the right side.  It may be related to her tonsils being removed and excessive scarring on the left compared to the right side.  Intranasally, the turbinates are in fairly good size and it appears to decrease the nasal airway.  She does tend to breathe primarily through her mouth when she sleeps.  To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the masseters, TMJs, styloid areas, posterior neck and shoulders and moderate pain over the temporalis and milder pain over the SCMs.  She has significant crepitation that is audible in the left TMJ.  The right joint seems to function reasonably smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 54 mm.  She can open to about 30 mm without significant pain.  Excursive movements are about 9 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars as well as the mandibular second bicuspids and maxillary first bicuspids.  This space has been opened up in the upper arch for the first bicuspids.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  The left condyle appears arthritic with sclerosis on the anterior aspect with anterior beaking.  The right joint appears a little bit more normal.

Waters view shows that she appears to have a septal spur off to the left side and back in the bony septum area.  Turbinates appear to obliterate most of the nasal airway.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows the anterior aspect of the condyle appears sclerotic with some anterior beaking.  Articular eminence is fairly steep and somewhat sclerotic as well.  The joint space may be just slightly decreased in the vertical aspect but not too significant.  It may be decreased posterior.

Right TMJ tomogram shows an articular eminence that is in vertical orientation.  The condyle appears flattened on the anterior aspect and there is a little bit of anterior beaking present.  The joint space otherwise looks reasonably good.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency but significant AP mandibular deficiency.  She has moderately high occlusal plane angulation.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 2 to 3 mm and at the base of the tongue it measures about 4 to 5 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ arthritis (left side worse than right side.)
AP mandibular deficiency.
Slight AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Class II occlusion.
Missing mandibular second bicuspids and maxillary first bicuspids. 
Spaces opened up for maxillary first bicuspids. 
CLAUDIA MCCLURE			10/15/2007				Page 3

Class II cuspid relationship, Class I molar relationship.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 Hypertrophied airway.
 Nasal airway obstruction.
 Sleep apnea.
 TMJ pain.
 Headaches.
 Myofascial pain.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral inferior turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
