MATTHEW MCCLURE								10/29/2007

Matthew is 37 years old and referred by Dr. William Hang.  He is in relatively good health except for chronic fatigue and jaw associated problems.  He has the following problems:
Difficulty swallowing.
Feeling of choking on food.
Cannot chew or bite food easily.
He has been told he is a tongue thruster.
Reduced airway. 
Chronic fatigue.
Teeth do not fit together very well.
Pain around the head and neck area.
Numbness to left lower lip and chin area.

By history, Matthew had orthodontic treatment and then in 1995 had double jaw orthognathic surgery.  In about 1998, it became aware that his discs were dislocated in his jaw joints.  By 2000, his TMJ symptoms became very apparent.  At that time he started going to chiropractic therapy as well as seeing a number of TMJ specialists as outlined in his well done historical review.  Since his problems began in 2000, he has had some significant chiropractic treatment including physical therapy, cranial therapy and neurocranial therapy.  He likely has had splints and also has had some partial orthodontics done to try and improve his bite.  Because he has an open bite he was told that he was a tongue thruster.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Amitriptyline 5 mg q.h.s.
Propecia daily.

Because of some other factors, Matthew stopped taking the amitriptyline about three weeks ago.  Matthew gets headaches in the frontal, temple and on the top of the head at about a level of 7 and most commonly occurs after eating or chewing.  He rates his average daily TMJ pain at about a level of 2, average daily pain is 7, jaw function 4, diet at 9 and disability at 9.  Matthew has had splint treatment.  In fact, he carries a splint with him.  He was placed on a nightguard since he has nocturnal clenching and bruxism.  He sometimes clenches during the day as well.  He did have a nightguard that he wore at night but it is old and apparently has worn out.  Mathew says he has been observed with apneic episodes.  He has some mild snoring.  Severe daytime somnolence and maybe some mild to moderate sleep apnea.  The last study, he said he did not sleep at all during this study and had breathed fairly normal and perhaps the reason why the sleep study reported no evidence of sleep apnea.  

In frontal view, Matthew has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about –2.  Maxillary midline is shifted off to the left side.  In profile view, Matt has some significant AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency.  Upper lip supralabrale is actually probably at least 3 mm posterior to subnasale.  The maxilla is probably good 6 mm AP deficient.  The mandible is probably close to about 15 mm AP deficient.  Chin-neckline is extremely short.  Chin-neck angle is not defined.  Intraorally, Matt has 1st and 2nd molars present.  
MATTHEW MCCLURE			10/29/2007				Page 2


Actually there is space in the upper arch between the cuspids and first bicuspids although probably of about 1 to 2 mm being greater on the right side.  He has close to a Class II cuspid relationship on the left side by 1 to 2 mm although he is a Class I molar.  He has about 1 mm vertical overbite relationship.  When he occludes, he hits a little bit prematurely in the maxillary first bicuspid lower second bicuspid area.  The left cuspid is probably at least 1.5 mm higher than the right cuspid.  The lower cuspid is up about 1 mm on the left side compared to the right side and upper cuspid 1.5 mm elevated compared to the right side.  The uvula is mildly enlarged.  The soft palate appears mildly elongated and close to the posteropharyngeal wall.  Faucial pillars may be mildly constricted.  Tonsils appear relatively normal.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off to the right side.  The right turbinate is moderately enlarged.  There may be some slight constricture there.  On the left side although the turbinates are a little bit enlarged, the airway looks good.   To palpation he has no significant tenderness around the head and neck area although there are times when he has pain and discomfort.  Joints seem to function relatively smooth although there are times when he can get some popping in the right jaw.  Incisal opening is about 39 mm.  He can open to about 29 mm with reasonable comfort.  He has about 5 mm of excursive movement in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows that there are six bone plates in the maxilla three on each side.  In the mandible there are three bone screws on each side of the ramus.  One screw looks like it is fairly close to the neurovascular bundle on the left side.  The joints look somewhat arthritic but actually look worse on the tomograms than they do here.  The left joint on the Panorex looks significantly worse than the right side.  Articular eminences are extremely steep particularly the left side is greater than the right. 

Waters view shows that the nasal septum is reasonably straight.  Turbinates are moderate in size with a little bit more obstruction on the right than the left side.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is extremely narrow anteroposteriorly and deformed.  Significant reduction in the superior and posterior joint spaces around the condyle.  Articular eminence is extremely long vertically.  

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle that is severely deformed and extremely narrow anteroposteriorly.  It has a hockey stick shape to it.  Significantly decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is extremely steep.  On opening, there is significant restriction in translation although the condyle particularly on the right side comes down to the bottom of the articular eminence.  On the left side the condyle comes maybe two-thirds down along the articular eminence.   





MATTHEW MCCLURE			10/29/2007				Page 3


Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Matthew has significant retruded maxilla and mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway space at the soft palate level measures only about 2.5 mm and 3 mm at the soft palate level and the base of the tongue measures about 2 mm.  Matt has a significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of at least 3.5 mm.  He has also about a 1 mm tooth size discrepancy in the bicuspid areas.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis. 
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusion.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm (normal AP dimension is 11 mm.)
Severe sleep apnea. 
TMJ pain.
Headaches. 
Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3.5 mm.
 Hyperplastic and elongated soft palate. 
 Previously placed hardware including 6 bone plates and 20 screws in the maxilla. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Retract maxillary cuspids distally to close up the spacing between the cuspids and first bicuspids.  Do not retract the incisor teeth but place the spacing between the lateral incisors and cuspids to help correct for the significant tooth size discrepancy.  Keep cuspids roots tipped distally and lateral incisor roots tipped mesially.
Align and level mandibular arch.
CT scans of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward.
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Palatopharyngoplasty (UPPP.)
Removal of 6 previously placed bone plates and 20 bone screws.
Post surgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors. 
 