PATRICIA MCCOLLUM							02/24/2011

Patty is 27 years old.  She has had four hand surgeries, two tubal ligations, one breast reduction, and a hysterectomy.  The only medication she currently takes is Aleve.  She has had adverse reactions to Demerol and to Benadryl.  Patty’s TMJ problems began in about 2004 when she was 20 years old of unknown etiology.  Her problems began with headaches first and then the clicking began.  She got a splint in 2004 and has worn it since, although she does not wear it all the time because she does not feel that it is helping her and tends to make the muscles more sore.  She saw Dr. Rick Riggs who placed her on exercises and muscle relaxers.  She had some positive effect from the muscle relaxers, but she realized that this was not going to fix the problem.  

Patricia gets headaches in the temporal and posterior head at a level of 9 and she gets these three to five times per week.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 7, diet at 3, disability at 5.  She gets occasional earaches, no tinnitus, no vertigo, but she has decreased hearing the left ear but relates that to a bee sting that occurred when she was much younger.  Other joints that bother her include her fingers on her right hand and her knees that get a little achy with weather changes.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and particularly during the daytime. 

The orthodontist’s name is Dr. James Caskey, 210 E. Lamberth, Sherman, TX 75090, phone #903-893-6341.

On frontal view, Patty has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm, upper tooth lip relationship is probably about 3 mm on the left and 4 mm on the right.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm and mandibular AP deficiency of probably about 10 mm.  Intraorally, Patty has all of her teeth in the upper and lower arch back through the second molars.  She has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship and about a 2 mm vertical overbite. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy.  She does have quite large tonsils.  Fascial pillars may be slightly constricted, but soft palate and uvula look relatively normal.  She is predominantly a mouth breather at night.  She does have moderate snoring, mild daytime somnolence, but no sleep apnea.  She is predominantly a mouth breather at nighttime and also during the day.  At least anteriorly, the turbinate on the right side is moderately enlarged, but the left side looks a little bit more normal.  To palpation, she has some moderate pain over the masseter muscles and milder tenderness over the medial pterygoids, but no pain directly over the TMJs, but she also has moderate pain over the right retromandibular area.  On opening, she has a click in the left joint at about 25 mm and a closing click at probably 20 mm.  On the right side, the click is probably closer to 35 mm on opening and 30 on closing.  Her condyles hyper-translate so she also has an additional pop as the condyles come anterior to the articular eminences.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but the rest of the teeth are all present.  Patty has had no orthodontic treatment to date.  Sinuses look clear.  
Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The right nasal airway is almost totally blocked with essentially no airway passage due to hyperplasia of the middle and inferior turbinates.  The left side turbinate is moderately enlarged  and there is some airway passage however.  

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight and the sinuses are clear.  Again, the right nasal airway is almost totally blocked along almost the entire length of the turbinate as it touches against the septum.  On the left side, there is some airway, although somewhat narrowed.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology and fairly good shape.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow.  Joint space actually looks fairly balanced, although clinically she does have displaced discs in this joint.  Some the joint space that has been maintained could likely be due to the splint therapy.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head.  There is small sclerosing areas present.  There is a little tendency for development of an anterior beak.  The joint space actually looks reasonably balanced.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows that there is decreased lateral joint space and vertical joint space is somewhat decreased as well.  The condyle has good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  

Right TMJ shows that there is fairly good condylar morphology.  There is decreased vertical joint space, but more so at the lateral rim of the fossa.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Patricia has a Class I occlusion.  She has some AP microgenia.  Oropharyngeal airway actually looks reasonably good with an AP dimension at the soft palate level of about 9 mm and at the base of the tongue probably 8 to 9 mm.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular discs dislocation with reduction. 
Mandibular relative hyperplasia.
Severe headaches.  
Severe TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Hypertrophied turbinates causing nasal airway obstruction. 
Hypertrophied tonsils.
Chronic clenching and bruxism.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to maintain occlusion 		and create space in the TMJ joints to accommodate the articular discs.
	c.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies (by Dr. Larry Weprin).
	d.	Bilateral tonsillectomy (by Dr. Larry Weprin).
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 