CAMI MCCRAW									10-28-02

Cami is 43 years old and referred by Dr. Charles Holt.

Patient History

Cami is in good health except for her jaw problems. Since her last surgery, Cami has had problems where she gets very nervous when she rides in a car or airplane or whatever. Cami’s TMJ problems began in high school around the 11th or 12th grade and began with headaches and clicking and popping in her joints. By the time she was a freshman in college, she had severe headache problems that usually started before it would rain. She also had problems with nausea. She began seeing Dr. Holt while in college and for three or four years was treated with splint therapy. She then saw Dr. Dean White in about 1983-1984, and Dr. White did three bilateral TMJ surgeries, placing Proplast Teflon in the joints. Apparently they were found to be “broken or fractured” and required replacement. Also, she apparently got staph infections with these implants. She was then referred down to Dr. Raymond Reid in Houston. From 1985 to 1989, Dr. Reid has placed three sets of total joint prostheses bilaterally on Cami and performed at least a couple other operations to debride the joints. He also has done an osteotomy. She has had a lot of splint therapy as well. 

No other joints bother her. She has no known allergies. No problems wearing jewelry, although she only wears a wedding ring and does not wear other jewelry. No problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo, and no evidence of hearing loss. She has a sister who has fairly severe rheumatoid arthritis. She has numbness in the left cheek area. She rates her headaches at a level of 4 that she gets weekly in the temporal area. She will occasionally get a severe headache about once a month that may last for a couple days. She rates her left TMJ pain at 7, right TMJ pain at 2, overall pain at 5, jaw function and diet at 7, disability at 4.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Cami has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. A little bit increased facial fullness on the right side as compared to the left side back at the angle area. Maxillary midline is about a millimeter off to the left. Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly close to being on the facial midline. 

In profile view, Cami has some significant maxillary deficiency, probably 6 mm or so. Chin is retruded probably 12 to 15 mm. There is no definition of the chin-neck angle. Cami feels that her chin is significantly retruded over what it was prior to the onset of her problems.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some moderate crowding, lower anterior arch. Transverse width of the arch is somewhat constricted. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has about a 1-mm overbite relationship. Oropharynx appears reasonably clear although difficult to see. She does have snoring problems. Nasal airway actually looks pretty good, and turbinates are relatively small in size. 

To palpation, she has some mild pain over the left side including the temporalis, masseters, medial pterygoid, and TMJ. Maximal incisal opening is 26 mm, excursive movement to the right 1 mm and to the left 2 mm. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly, although she feels that occasionally on the right side she’ll have something occur in there that tends to relieve her pain for a while.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of bilateral Osteomed total joint prostheses. There are 7 screws on the right side and 6 screws on the left side. As best I can tell, prostheses appear to be intact. There are 4 bone plates in the maxilla with 3 bone screws in each plate. There are fossa components present on both sides with what appear to be 4 screws in each one. All four third molars are absent. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Nasal airway looks good. It appears that there may be some reactive bone going up the medial side of the joint prostheses bilaterally but difficult to tell on these films.

Right TMJ tomogram shows the presence of the Osteomed prostheses. Condyle appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa almost against the posterior wall of the fossa. Fossa prosthesis appears to fit well. There may be a cement base present here. Difficult to tell if there is bone formation on the medial side, but there are some shadows that may point to that. The styloid process is somewhat elongated.

Left TMJ tomogram shows the Osteomed prosthesis and position. It appears that there is cement in the fossa component. From this you cannot tell if there is reactive bone around the prosthesis. It appears there may be some erosion of the fossa roof. Very little translation present, although there is a little bit more on the right side as compared to the left side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. Four bone plates are seen. Heads of the condyles appear to be fairly well symmetrically positioned within the fossas.

Cephalometrically, she appears to have retrusion of the maxilla and mandible. Appears that the soft palate almost touches against the posterior pharyngeal wall area with virtually no airway. At the base of the tongue, the dimension of the posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 7 mm. Actually, from the soft palate, the posterior pharyngeal wall measures probably about 2.5 mm. Following her last total joint prosthesis surgery, Dr. Reid gave her radiation therapy to try to prevent heterotopic bone formation. She does have difficulties falling asleep at night indicative of a sleep disorder. She sometimes will take a couple of naps during the day. She does sleep pretty well during the day when she takes her naps. She does go to bed usually between midnight and 2, and then gets up about 7:15 and will help get the kids off to school and then go back to sleep for another hour-and-a-half or so. Then on top of that, she’ll take a couple naps, at least one more nap, later in the day. She does not take anything to help her sleep at night.



Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ Osteomed total joint prostheses with probable reactive bone.
Previous history of Proplast Teflon implants x 5 to each joint including IPIs and Kent-Vitek total joint prostheses.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
Severe AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.

Recommended Treatment

Tomograms of left and right TMJs to include sagittal and coronal views

CT scan of joints and jaws if Cami elects to proceed on with surgery, following the TMJ Concepts protocol

Surgery
Removal of previously placed Osteomed prostheses and thorough joint debridement.
Mandibular advancement and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen).
Maxillary osteotomies to advance it and downgraft the posterior aspect.
HTR implant to anterior mandible.