ZACHARY MCCUTHIN							02/22/2011

Zach is 31 years old, birth date 06/03/1979.  He was referred by Dr. Lorin Berland, 2121 San Jacinto, Dallas, TX 75201, phone #214-999-0110.

Zachary’s main concerns are that he does not have enough room for teeth to reconstruct his upper jaw.  He is congenitally missing the maxillary lateral incisors bilaterally and the maxillary second molar.  His grandfather also is congenitally missing some teeth.  He has some pontic teeth replacing the maxillary lateral incisors and he has a retained primary E that is in the position of the missing maxillary right second bicuspid, although the tooth is quite loose and currently displaced and about to come out.  Zachary states that he has no TMJ issues, headaches, earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, hearing loss, etc.  He rates jaw function, diet, and disability all at 0.  

In frontal view, Zach has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  The mandibular dental midline and chin are pretty much on the facial midline.  The maxillary dental midline is shifted to the left about 1.5 mm.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  In profile view, he has some maxillary deficiency of about 3 to 4 mm.  The chin has reasonably good AP projection.  Zach has an end-on incisor relationship.  He has a Class I cuspid relationship on the left side and just slight Class III on the right side.  He has a cross bite on the right side and anteriorly with an end-on incisor relationship and zero lateral vertical over bite.  Zach is missing probably the mandibular second bicuspids.  The lower arch appears somewhat constricted.  He has some spacing between the lower cuspids and first bicuspids of about 1 mm on each side.  TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly.  He has no myofascial pain problems.  TMJs function smoothly, but as he opens real wide he does translate anterior to the articular eminences.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary lateral incisors and the maxillary right second bicuspid.  Also, the mandibular second bicuspids have been removed for orthodontic reasons.  He does have a hyper-erupted maxillary right deformed third molar.  The sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is a little bit deviated off to the right at the superior aspect, but turbinates are normal in size.  The sinuses are clear.  Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and turbinates are normal in size.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  

Bilateral TMJ coronal and sagittal radiographs shows that there is good joint space and condylar morphology is relatively normal.  In both joints, there is some slight decreased lateral joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla is AP hypoplastic.  The maxillary lateral incisors are slightly over angulated.  The lateral incisors are a little bit vertically inclined.  Oropharyngeal airway space looks good.  In the lateral cephalometric radiograph, the tonsils also appear fairly large.  Zachary actually has his lower third molars erupted in and they are functioning with the maxillary second molars.  

Basic diagnoses for Zach would be as follows:

Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia. 
Anterior and right posterior cross bite.
Congenitally missing maxillary incisors bilaterally and right second bicuspid with a retrained primary E remaining.
Missing mandibular second bicuspids extracted for orthodontic reasons.
Erupted malaligned maxillary right third molar.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip maxillary left central incisor root 			mesially and cuspid root distally to make room for a dental implant.  			Maintain the spacing on the right side between the central incisor and 			cuspid.  Maintain root position on the right side between incisor and 			cuspid.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla, advance it and 			maximize occlusal fit.  
	b.	Extract maxillary right third molar. 
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
4.	Placement of osteointegrated implants into maxillary lateral incisor position as 	well as maximize the right maxillary second bicuspid.  
5.	Restorative dentistry to place crowns on dental implants.  