CHRISTOPHER SIMONS-MARTUCCIO						06/06/2008

Christopher is a 17-year-old male and is the grandson of James V. Martuccio, DDS, MS, 8096 E. Market Street, Warren, OH 44484.  Christopher has had previous orthodontics.  Evaluation is made from records provided which include:

Photographs.
Lateral cephalogram.
Panorex. 
Dental models.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Probable bilateral condylar hyperplasia.
Mandibular prognathism.
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
Slight vertical maxillary hyperplasia.
Class III end-on occlusion. 
Slight anterior open bite.
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.
Slight increased curve of Wilson in the posterior maxillary and mandibular occlusions.
Impacted maxillary third molars and impacted maxillary left fourth molar.
Partial erupted mandibular third molars.
Supernumerary tooth in the posterior right maxillary between the first and second molars.
Slight accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and slight reversed curve of Spee in the lower arch.
Possible nasal turbinate hyperplasia.
Rule out difficulties breathing through the nose.
Rule out nasal septal deviation.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Extraction of supernumerary tooth right maxillary posterior arch between the first and second molars.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Keep lateral incisors roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Open about 1 mm of space between the upper lateral incisors and cuspids. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to tip the molar teeth lingually.
Evaluate growth by assessing serial cephalograms to identify the presence or absence of bilateral condylar hyperplasia.
Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies, if condylar hyperplasia is verified, with repositioning of the articular discs. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it slightly, expand, and upright the incisors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible backwards and rotate it superiorly to close the open bite.
Removal of impacted maxillary third molars, maxillary left impacted fourth molar, and bilateral partially soft tissue impacted mandibular third molars.
Consider bilateral turbinectomies if turbinate hyperplasia is verified.
Consider nasal septoplasty if nasoseptal deviation and spurring is confirmed to contribute to nasal airway obstruction.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 