BARBARA MASSEY								11/18/2009

Barbara is 58 years old.  I had previously performed surgery on Barbara on July 13, 1985, with reconstruction of both TMJs with Proplast Teflon implants.  She has done reasonably well until more recently.  Since August 9, she has had two bouts of swelling in the right temporal and cheek areas and over the TMJ area.  The second bout began about 3 weeks ago and the swelling has not yet resolved.  

Barbara has constant headaches at about a level of 5 in the frontal and temporal area.  She does not have any pain directly in the jaw joint area unless she tries to chew something more difficult.  Her average daily pain is about 5.  Jaw function is at 5, diet at 3, disability at 2.  She gets right earaches, but no tinnitus or vertigo.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

Barbara has been aware of having TMJ problems since the fourth grade (at approximately the age of 9 years old) of unknown etiology.  She began locking open at that time.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Barbara has fairly good facial symmetry and balance, but there is some slight increased swelling in the right preauricular area.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 0.5 mm to the right.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are pretty much aligned with each other.  In profile, the upper lip is retruded about 3 mm retruded and the chin is about 15 mm retruded.  Chin neckline is not defined.  Intraorally, she is missing mandibular right first bicuspid and mandibular left second and third molars.  She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She is a little bit Class II end-on by maybe 1-2 mm and has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, turbinates appear relatively healthy but are moderately enlarged.  There could be some mild to moderate airway obstruction.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the right retromandibular area and right masseter area.  Maximal incisal opening is 31 mm and excursion movements are only about 1 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of Proplast Teflon implants in the TMJs bilaterally and interosseus wires.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  She is missing the mandibular right first molar, mandibular left second molar, and all four third molars.  
Coronal view shows hypertrophied turbinates and deviated septum off to the right side.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  
Axial view shows that she has hypertrophied turbinates.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows the presence of a Proplast Teflon implant on the condylar head and in the fossa stabilized with interosseus wires.  There is some erosion in the fossa area and on the head of the condyle.    
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a little bit greater reaction on this side, but the implants are present as well as the interosseus wires.  There may be erosion in the roof of the orbit.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows the layers of Proplast Teflon and interosseus wires supporting them in place.  There is significant condylar resorption and resorption of fossa.  
Right TMJ coronal view shows that there is erosion and perhaps perforation in the roof of the fossa towards the medial side of the joint.  Interosseus wires and the Proplast Teflon materials are noted.    
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Barbara has a relatively high occlusal plane angle.  She has a retruded maxilla and retruded mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway is constricted to about 3.5-4 mm. 

Basic diagnoses for Barbara would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ arthritis secondary to severe foreign body giant cell reaction as a result of previous Proplast Teflon implants. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of  2 mm (normal 11 mm).
Severe sleep apnea.
Chronic constant headaches. 
Hypertrophied turbinates with nasal airway obstruction. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral coronoidotomies with bone screw stabilization.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Placement of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.
Removal of arch bars 3-4 weeks post surgery. 