AMANDA MCNEILL								07/26/2007

Amanda is 19 years old.  She is a self-referred patient.  The only previous surgery she had was having her wisdom teeth removed.  Amanda has always had some achiness in her jaws as far back as she can remember.  However, it was not until she started college in 2006 that her pain problems became quite intense.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches. 
Difficulties sleeping.
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints. 

Amanda says that since she has returned home from college that her headaches and TMJ pain levels have significantly decreased.  Therefore, she relates them to stress of college life.  

Amanda gets headaches that develop during the day.  She usually does not wake up with the headaches.  Headaches seem to develop sometime around 2 to 3 in the afternoon.  She rates her headaches at about a level of 3 in the temple areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 7 on an average day.  Her average overall daily pain is a level of 3.  She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 0. 

Amanda had orthodontic treatment when she was in the 4th grade but did to get a full set of braces until the age of 12 to 14.  She has her wisdom teeth removed in 2004.  She takes Advil and vitamins.  She gets earaches and tinnitus but no vertigo or hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her knees, ankles and her lower back.  Amanda has allergies to codeine, Bactrim and sulfa drugs.   She is not aware of clenching and bruxing.  In frontal view, 
Amanda has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, Amanda has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Amanda has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  A little bit of crowding in the lower anterior arch.  A little bit of attached gingiva around the right lateral incisor.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Oropharyngeal tissues look good.  The uvula, soft palate, faucial pillars and tonsils all appear normal.  She has Class I cuspid molar relationship and a 3 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear relatively normal in size and the septum appears relatively straight.  To palpation she has some minimal tenderness over the styloid area and right TMJ area.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly although she does subluxate her condyles over the articular eminences.  Incisal opening is 55 mm without discomfort of about 43 mm.  Excursive movements are 7 mm in each direction.






AMANDA MCNEILL			07/26/2007				Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars but the rest of the teeth are present.  Joints look relatively normal.  Sinuses appear clear.

Waters view shows there is some deviation of the nasal septum off towards the right side.  The sinuses appear a little bit cloudy perhaps in the maxillary sinus area.

Right TMJ tomograms show a condyle with fairly good morphology.  There is a little bit of flattening on the superior head and a little bit of sclerosis there.  Joint space looks fairly reasonable.  Articular eminences are moderately steep.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that may have a little bit of flattening on the anterior head.  Joint space appears reasonably good.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening there is some hypertranslation of the condyles extending considerably anterior to the articular eminences.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Amanda has good facial balance and a good Class I cuspid molar relationship and good airway.

Amanda states that when she gets her pain it is down through her jaw areas over the masseter muscle, up in the temple areas, behind the lower jaw and into the ear.  Her symptoms are significantly decreased at this time as compared to when she is in school.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Myofacial pain affecting predominately the temporalis and masseter muscles bilaterally.  
TMJ articular disc slightly anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint.  
Sleep disorder.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications. 
Klonopin 1 mg tablet p.o. q.h.s., dispensing 30 tablets, refill x4.
Consider splint therapy.
Continue monitor TMJs.
If symptoms worsen and the articular discs become more displaced, consider the following.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion.
Consider orthodontic appliances if surgical treatment is recommended.

