LILLIAN HUNT-MEEKS								12-23-02

Clinical Evaluation

Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Nose is deviated a little bit to the right about 2 mm. Mandibular dental midline and chin are deviated off towards the right side about a millimeter at the incisor edge and about 3 to 4 mm at the chin area. 

In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Chin appears a little bit retruded by maybe 5 to 8 mm. Chin-neckline is a little bit short, although chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.

Intraorally, Lillian has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth are fairly nicely aligned and leveled. She has adequate gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars except she has a retained primary E on the left side with a missing permanent second bicuspid. Lillian has about a 2-mm anterior open bite. She has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and just a slight Class III on the left side. Slight lower arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being about a millimeter posterior to the left cuspid. Upper arch is fairly symmetric. Transversely, the maxillary arch appears fairly level. Mandibular arch appears to be down a little bit on the right side compared to the left side. Lillian has almost an end-on incisor relationship. Open bite is a little bit worse on the right side where it is about 3 to 4 mm compared to the left side, where it is only probably a couple of millimeters. Oropharynx looks clear except Lillian has huge tonsils that take up about two thirds. 

Nasal airway looks good. Septum is deviated a little bit to the left side but not too significantly. Turbinates are moderate in size. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars. There is a primary E remaining in the maxillary left arch with the missing permanent tooth above it. All other teeth are present. Joints look reasonably good. Turbinates look okay except the left one looks slightly enlarged. Sinuses appear clear. Styloid processes are relatively long and approach the posterior inferior border of the mandible. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows that there is some anterior beaking present and what appears to be some decreased vertical joint space. Some slight alteration perhaps on the architecture of the cortical bone on the condylar head. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology with a little bit of sclerosis on it. Joint space may be slightly decreased. Articular eminence is moderately steep and similar to the steepness on the opposite side, except on the right side, the articular eminence is a little bit longer in length.

Opening shows some restricted translation bilaterally. It appears that there may be some bony changes on the condylar heads.

Cephalometrically, Lillian appears to have a high occlusal plane angle and a Class II skeletal relationship, although the occlusion is closer to Class I. Some vertical discrepancies appear in the occlusal planes. The tonsils are huge and fill a good portion of the oropharynx. Dimensions from the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall measure about 5 mm, but at the base of the tongue, the distance is about 15 to 16 mm possibly due to the tonsils holding the tongue forward. 

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation 
AP mandibular hypoplasia
Slight AP maxillary deficiency
Slight anterior vertical maxillary excess
Anterior open bite
End-on incisor relationship
Occluding only on the mandibular right first and second molars, mandibular left maxillary first and second molar, and mandibular second molar
Mandibular dental midline shifted off to the right 1 to 2 mm
Transverse cant in the mandibular occlusion with the left side being a millimeter or so lower than the right side
Severely hypertrophied tonsils
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 1 to 2 mm
High occlusal plane angle

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Consider maxillary osteotomies to advance it about 3 mm and decrease the occlusal plane slightly
Consider tonsillectomy

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

Restorative dentistry to either build up the retained primary second molar in the maxillary right arch versus extracting the tooth and placing and implant and a crown (root length is still pretty good, so building up the tooth may be the simplest treatment and give her longtime service)