DOROTHY SCHMIDT-HEILBUT-HUTCHERSON			07/15/2011

Dottie is currently 49 years old.  I did orthognathic surgery on her on 04/23/1996, so she is here for a 15-year followup.  She gets headaches about 4 days a week at a level of 7 in the frontal and temporal areas.  The headaches can last a week at a time.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, left side greater than the right side.  Average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 4, diet at 5, disability at 5.  The incisal opening is 49 mm.  Excursion movements are 7 mm in each direction, but as she goes to the left side, she has significant pain in the left TMJ.  She has a very good occlusion with a solid Class I and a 2 mm vertical over bite.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the masseters, medial pterygoids and very minimal tenderness over the TMJs and SCMs.  She still has some numbness in the upper lip.  

She takes the following medications:

Wellbutrin XL 150 mg b.i.d. and she has been taking since about the age of 25 to 26. 
Klonopin 1 mg t.i.d. with 3 tablets at midnight and she has been on this for 20 years.
Trazodone 100 mg b.i.d. 
Amitiza and Aciphex for GI problems.
Albuterol.  

She gets earaches bilaterally, tinnitus bilaterally, and she gets frequent vertigo.  She has been diagnosed as being bipolar.  She has also been diagnosed as having fibromyalgia.  She has had loss of concentration, loss of brain function, and she had pneumonia for most of last year.  In the past 8 years, she has had 7 major falls secondary to vertigo.  She has some neck problems that have not been evaluated recently.  In April 2003, she had an accidental overdose created by the psychiatrist who placed her on too much medication and she started falling over that.  That is when she developed the loss of concentration, loss of brain function.  She also feels her IQ is lower than it used to be here.  She was here with her husband today and based on the MRI she has a displaced disc in the left tm, but in the right side the disc looks to be in reasonable position.  Today under topical anesthetic, I numbed up the left TMJ.  This essentially removed all of the pain on the left side of her head and face area.  This occurred within about 10 minutes of the injection. She is to keep a diary on how she does over the next couple of days.  However, based on this initial impression, I believe that surgery would be helpful for her. 

Her diagnoses would be as follows:

Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteromedially displaced.
Left TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain and headaches.
Earaches, tinnitus and vertigo.
Relative mandibular hyperplasia.
Cervical arthritis and radiculopathy.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Cervical evaluation to determine if cervical pathology is contributory to the pain 	about the head, neck, shoulders, and back. 
2.	Application of orthodontic appliances to maxillary and mandibular teeth.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor.
	b.	Left mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I believe this treatment will give us the best opportunity to eliminate at least some of her pain factors.  I believe she also has some cervical pathology and I will recommend that she see a neck specialist for evaluation and treatment.  
