KEVIN NYGREN								01/28/2011

Kevin is 39 years old, birth date 02/17/1971.  He is referred by Dr. Lauck, 1675 Keller Parkway, Keller, TX 76248.  Primary concerns that Kevin has includes the following:

Pain in the left jaw and neck.
Left-sided headaches.  
Left-sided TMJ pain.
Left-sided jaw pain.

His TMJ problems began about 7 years ago of unknown etiology but feels it may have been related to the occlusion.  He began orthodontic treatment in April 2009.  He wore a night guard for about 6 months which was an Alfa appliance.  

He gets headaches in the left frontal, temporal and posterior head area at a level of 7.  He rates his TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 3, diet at 2, disability at 2.  The incisal opening is 47 mm and excursion movement to the right 9 mm, to the left 10 mm.  The right joint functions smoothly.  The left joint clicks on excursive movements.  To palpation, he has moderate pain over almost the entire left side of his head and neck area.  He gets no earaches, tinnitus, gets moderate vertigo, but no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother him include his lower back, right knee, and left shoulder.  He is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day.  He frequently wakes up with headaches in the morning.  He does get his headaches 2 to 3 times per week.  He has moderate to severe snoring, moderate daytime somnolence and moderate sleep apnea symptoms.  He is a mouth breather at nighttime and also during the day.  He currently is not using his CPAP machine. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, he has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 23 mm and upper tooth lip relationship is 2 mm.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 3 to 4 mm and chin is retruded about 10 mm.  There is anterior vertical overbite of about 2 mm.  On the left side, he has an end-on Class II occlusion.  On the right side, he has almost a full Class III occlusion.  The maxillary midline is about 1.5 mm off to the right side and mandibular dental midline is at least 2 mm off to the left side.  The maxillary right cuspid is almost 4 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side.  He has had his third molars removed.  He has a cross bite on the posterior right side.  Uvula is moderately enlarged and the soft palate is mildly increased in length and the fascial pillars are mildly transverse deficient.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged, and the septum is deviated off towards the right side.  There is probably moderate nasal airway obstructions.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  It is quite possible he may be missing the mandibular and he does have a significant space between the roots of the teeth in the mandibular left first molar position and the second bicuspid.  He has a root canal on the mandibular right first molar.  He has all of his teeth in the upper arch.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints.  The nasal septum appears deviated.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The vertical joint space looks reasonably good.  The condyle has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is significantly decreased joint space at the lateral rim of the fossa.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  There is slight narrow dimension at the lateral rim of the fossa, but overall better joint space balance than the opposite side.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is somewhat posteriorly postured in the fossa with a decreased posterior joint space and slightly increased anterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle seems to have reasonably good morphology.

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows that the condyle and fossa have good morphology.  There appears to be good joint space throughout.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are reasonably clear.  The turbinates are quite enlarged particularly the inferior and middle turbinates.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Kevin has a slight increased occlusal plane angle.  There is two significant differences in the vertical height of the occlusal plane and the inferior border of the mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm (normal 11 mm).  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Left TMJ articular disc dislocation probably medial and anterior.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and vertical asymmetry.
Maxillary AP transverse hypoplasia as well as vertical asymmetry.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side.  
Significant maxillary arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 4 to 5 mm posterior to the left cuspid. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Large nasal septal spur off to the right side.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
Left-sided TMJ pain. 
Left-sided headaches.  
Left-sided myofascial pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJs. 
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch.   Try to place a bracket on the 			maxillary left second molar to try to elevate it slightly.  Tip lateral incisor 			roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental 			osteotomies. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor. 
	b.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies to advance forward approximately 8 mm and 			level it transversely.  
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to reestablish AP symmetry, level it 			transversely and counterclockwise rotate to decrease the occlusal plane 			angle.
	d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
	e.	Nasal septoplasty to remove large septal spur.  
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  