PATRICK GERARD MCDONNELL						04/26/2010

Gerry is 49 years old and is a self-referral.  Gerry’s jaw problems began when he was about 22 years of age in 1982 of unknown etiology.  He basically came to realize that he did not have room for his tongue in his mouth.  He had some left jaw symptoms for a quite a few years that he did not feel were directly in his joint, but related to the muscles.  He has had approximately 5 splints through the years, both upper and lower splints.  He has had myofascial therapy directed towards the tongue which occurred about 12 to 15 years ago.  He has had numerous equilibrations and extensive dental restorations.  He currently has some temporary caps on his molar teeth and also has some built-on splints onto those teeth as well.  Gerry has had orthodontics twice; once when he was about 20 and then he lost a lower first molar tooth on the left side and the second molar started to drift forward and so he went back into full braces to open space and do some adjustments at the age of 33.  Primary concerns that he has are as follows:

Tongue is deprived of adequate space.
History of left-sided TMD/TMJ problems starting about 27 to 28 years ago.

Gerry gets headaches at about a level of 3 that are continuous predominantly behind the right eye and on top of the head.  He rates his TMJ pain at 1, average daily pain at 1, jaw function at 1, diet at 1, disability at 1.  He takes the following medications:

Zantac 2 tablets per day.
Advil 2 tablets per day.

He has no problems with earaches, has moderate continuous tinnitus on the right side but no vertigo.  He has no other joint problems.  He clenches his teeth at nighttime and also during the day.

In frontal view, Gerry has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 26 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The nasal tip is just slightly to the left about 1 mm or 2.  The mandible dental midline and chin are also pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, he has a prominence of subnasale.  Upper lip may be probably about 5 mm AP deficient.  Upper lip supralabrale is probably 4 to 5 mm posterior to subnasale.  The chin is retruded about 18-20 mm.  Chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, he has got his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has some splints on his lower teeth extending from the lower first bicuspid through the second molar.  He has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch, but has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars except his maxillary right central is an implant.  He is very close to being Class I cuspid relationship and has just a slight open bite likely due to the fixed splints that he has on his lower teeth.  He is missing mandibular left first molar.  He has root canals on the maxillary right central and lateral incisor and left lateral incisor.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the right turbinate looks relatively normal, but the left one appears enlarged.  There is a slight septal spur off at the base of the septum.  He has mild to moderate nasal obstruction.  He does have a slight head postured forward neck position.  Gerry feels that in casual photographs that he carries his left shoulder higher than the right shoulder.  He has bilateral posterior cross bites.  To palpation, he has very mild tenderness over the temporalis, masseters, even lesser over the medial pterygoids and TMJs.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 57 mm.  The excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Also, the mandibular left first molar is missing and the maxillary left central incisor.  The maxillary left central incisor has been replaced with an osteointegrated implant.  He has root canals on the right central and both lateral incisors.  He has crown preparations on all of his molar teeth.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  The septum appears reasonably straight, however.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  It is difficult to evaluate the TMJs.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology and the fossa also has fairly good morphology.  There is slightly increased joint space, but this may be due to the temporary splints that are currently in place.  The articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be good joint space present.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows there is good joint space vertically, but there is decreased joint space at lateral aspect of the fossa.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 4 to 5 mm.  Cortical bone actually looks reasonably good. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  There is decreased lateral joint space and the lateral rim curves inferiorly about 4 or 5 mm.  This joint actually looks a little bit better than the opposite one which has just a little depression in the mid condyle area that would go along with a medially displaced disc. 

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Left turbinate is quite large and appears to block most of the functional airway.  The right turbinate appears normal in size.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The nasal septum is reasonably straight.  Left turbinate appears quite enlarge and appears to block most of the functional airway.  Right turbinate appears relatively normal in size.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that both maxilla and mandible appear to be retruded.  He has a moderately occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway, however, appears reasonably good.  He has a skeletal Class II and a slight occlusal Class II jaw relationship.  

Basic diagnoses for Gerry would be as follows:

Maxillary AP,  posterior vertical, and transverse hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral posterior cross bites.
Hypertrophied left turbinate.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Sleep apnea symptoms.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch. 
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 				counterclockwise direction.
	b.	Bilateral maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction and expand it. 
	c.	Left nasal partial turbinectomy.
	d.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy. 
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 