SEAN MCDERMOTT								11/17/2006

Sean is 18 years old and is referred by Dr. George Adams.  Sean's primary concern is that he has an underbite.  Sean has had previous orthodontics including a palatal expander in about 2001 and he had braces at that time for alignment issues.  

In frontal view, Sean has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 10 mm.  Nasal tip may be off to the right side by maybe 1 to 2 mm.  Maxillary midline and mandibular dental midline are pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin.  Sean appears to have a little bit more fullness on the right side of his face than the left side by maybe about 3 mm or so.  In profile view, Sean has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip.  He appears to have some deficiency in maxillary projection. AP position of the chin actually looks reasonably good.  Chin-neckline might be a little bit long and chin could be just slightly prominent.  He has deficiency of the maxilla probably by a good 5 to 6 mm.  Intraorally, Sean has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  A little bit of crowding in the lower anterior arch.  There is some slight lower arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being about 1 mm or 2 posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch, Sean has all of his teeth back through the second molars present.  He has a Class III occlusion being probably almost 5 to 6 mm Class III on the left side and probably 5 mm on the right side.  The upper arch looks a little bit more AP symmetric.  The lower arch actually appears that the left side is down about 1 mm compared to the right side.  Maxillary arch may be a little bit more level.  Sean has anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites with the crossbite on the right side being worse than the crossbite on the left side.  Chin appears to be actually deviated a little bit off to the right side about 2 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look fairly healthy.  Tonsils are relatively normal in size.  The uvula appears mildly elongated.  Soft palate is relatively normal length.  Faucial pillars are somewhat mildly constructed.  Intranasally, the septum maybe deviated just slightly off to the left side but not too significantly.  Turbinate on the right side is relatively normal and on the left side it may be just mild to moderate enlargement but decreased airway that may be due to slight septal deviation.  He does have a very wide columella making the nostrils somewhat narrow.  Holding the nostrils open, he was able to breathe a little bit better through his nose.  The luminal valves look relatively normal.  No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  Joints function smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is about 71 mm.  Excursive movements are about 8 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The left condyle is partially cut off the x-ray.  

Waters view shows that there is a little bit of deviation in the septum off to the left side.  The right turbinate actually is enlarged but this must be way posteriorly as it not evident anteriorly.  Sinuses look relatively clear. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with relatively normal morphology and good joint space.  Articular eminence is actually relatively steep.  


SEAN MCDERMOTT			11/17/2006				Page 2


Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle probably with relatively normal morphology but looks a bit narrow anteroposteriorly.  The posterior joint space may be a little bit narrow.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Styloid process is fairly prominent but it appears to be positioned to the ramus and the mandible.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  The left styloid process is very prominent and somewhat elongated but the left side does not show up very well. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a skeletal Class III relationship.  Good oropharyngeal airway appears to be present.  It appears he is in a Class III occlusal and skeletal relationship.  On reassessment it appears that the mandibular dental midline may be about 1 mm off to the right and the chin is about 2 mm off to the right.

Sean's father and uncle both have had a Class III jaw relationship and the uncle had his corrected.  His dad has not.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Mandibular deviated prognathism.
Rule out bilateral condylar hyperplasia.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
Class III occlusion.
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.
Wide columella and narrow nostrils.
Nasal airway obstruction. 
Hypertrophied turbinate particularly on the right side. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Monitor facial growth and development to rule out condylar hyperplasia.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and expand it.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back into facial midline and improve facial symmetry.
Consider bilateral high condylectomies if condylar hyperplasia is present and documented. 
Partial right turbinectomy.
Reconstruct columella and widen nostril.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
