MEGAN MCDIVITT								10/25/2011

Megan is 14 years old, birth date 05/21/1997.  Referred by Dr. Jim Dyer, Highway 377, Argyle, TX.  

Primary concerns that Megan has include the following:

Lower jaw is moving backwards.
Popping and locking of the jaw joints.
Pain and soreness.

Megan feels that her lower jaw is becoming slowly but progressively more retruded.  Her bite is shifting out of position and this has been documented by Dr. Dyer.  The onset of her joint problems was at the age of 11 when she developed a closed lock situation which got worse by the age of 13.  In fact, Dr. Dyer occasionally would have to manipulate her jaws to unlock them.  She has had previous orthodontics including a palatal expander at the age of 8 that had to be removed prematurely because the family moved to Germany.  She began orthodontics again upon return her in 2008 when she had a palatal expander done again when she was 11 years old.  She has had splint therapy beginning at the age of 12 and has just gotten a new splint from Dr. Dyer about 2 weeks ago.  Her orthodontics were reinitiated in June 2011.  

Megan does have some hormonal issues.  She developed cysts in both breasts.  She apparently developed staph infections in both breasts and started to have leakage.  She went to a cancer center and they identified that it was a benign process and they apparently are just observing.  She has had menarchal problems with bleeding and has almost continuous periods.  She takes Ortho-Cyclen.  She does take Advil for some of her pain and discomfort issues.

Megan gets occasional headaches predominantly on the left side that are only at about a 1 or 2 level.  Her TMJ pain is at a 4, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 5, and diet and disability at 3.  She gets some left-sided earaches, no tinnitus, no vertigo and no hearing loss.  Her right shoulder does bother her some.  She is aware of bruxing at nighttime and also sometimes during the day.  When she was sick with all the hormonal factors, her shoe size increased from size 7 to 9 and her bust cup size enlarged one size as well.  

When Megan sleeps, she primarily breathes through her nose.  She has some mild snoring and she has some mild daytime somnolence but no sleep apnea.  

In frontal view, Megan has fairly left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is on the facial midline, and the mandibular dental is about 1 mm to the left and the chin is about 1 mm to the left.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 5 to 6 mm.  The chin appears to be retruded about 12 to 15 mm.  The chin neckline now is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Megan has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She does have appliances on her teeth.  The teeth are fairly well aligned with just a little bit of crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has thin attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by about 2 mm and the same on the left side.  She has about a 2 mm over jet.  She has just about a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the right turbinate looks relatively normal and the left one is just mildly enlarged, but there appears to be good functional airway.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the left TMJ.  Joints function smoothly except she could hear a little bit of a glitch in her left joint.  The incisal opening is 49 mm and excursion movements are 8 mm in each direction. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four developing unerupted third molars.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  The condyles appear to have undergone some significant condylar resorption.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight.  She has a significantly enlarged sphenoid sinus on the left side.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  The septum appears reasonably straight. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant condylar resorption.  There is increased vertical joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  There is some anterior beaking present. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant condylar resorption.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking present.  There appears to be perhaps some increased soft tissue thickness in this joint.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant condylar resorption with probably loss of at least half the vertical height in the mandibular condyle.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  The joint space looks almost excessive.  There is some medial peaking of the condyle.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant resorption.  The joint space appears almost excessive.  There is some lateral beaking of the condyle.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is a high occlusal plane angle with a skeletal Class II jaw relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway measures 4 mm at the soft palate level and about 7.5 mm at the base of the tongue.  


Basic diagnoses for Megan will be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR). 
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle of 23 degrees (normal angulation 8 degrees).
Slight Class II end-on occlusion.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Impacted third molars x4.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJs.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics:  Continue to align and level maxillary and mandibular 	arches.  Do not use any inner arch mechanics.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward 			in a counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it 			posteriorly in a counterclockwise direction.
	d.	Removal of impacted third molars x4.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  