HOLLY MC ELWEE									02-18-05

Holly is 20 years old and a student in Boca Raton majoring in psychology referred by Dr. Richard Ingraham, 5525 Staples, Corpus Christi, TX  78411.

Patient History

Holly has had previous surgery for an appendectomy, and also she has had her wisdom teeth extracted. Holly has had previous orthodontic treatment. Holly had orthodontics performed when she was in the fourth grade through the seventh grade, roughly ages 9 through 12 years old. Holly’s problems began when she was about 13 years old of unknown etiology. She would have loud clicking that even her friends could hear. She did have orthodontics from the fourth grade to the seventh grade, but this did not develop at that time. She really hasn’t had any treatment for her jaw problems. Last summer she did have speech therapy and some tongue therapy. She was told that she doesn’t have room in her mouth for her tongue. She feels that she is pushing against her teeth with her tongue. 

The only medication she takes is Depo-Provera injections.

She has no trouble with earaches, does get occasional tinnitus, and no vertigo. The joints that bother her include her hips and knees. No allergies. No known problems with jewelry. She is aware of nighttime clenching, and when she is under stress during the day, she also clenches. She wakes up with headaches in the morning frequently at about a level of 4. Her headaches can escalate to a 10, however, and this occurs at least once a month. The headaches occur predominantly in the temporal and in the back and top part of the head. She rates her average TMJ pain at about a 5, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 5, diet at 4, and disability at 1. She has about 1 cup of coffee a day. She has one or two Cokes per day, and some days she will drink tea instead of the Cokes.

Holly does have significant sleep disorder and apparently tosses and turns all night long. She also reports a history of having restless leg and extremity problems.

Patient Concerns

Lower jaw retruded
Swallowing problems
Not enough room for her tongue
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints
Closed locking of the jaw
Headaches 
Pain in the jaw joints
Muscle pain
Restless sleep
Tosses and turns and has leg and arm jerking problems
Clenching particularly at night
Wakes up with headaches most mornings

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Holly has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. A little bit of orbital dystopia with the right eye being about 2 mm higher than the left. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 7 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm to the left as is the chin. 
In profile view, Holly has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip. Maxilla appears to be retruded by probably about 4 or 5 mm. Chin appears to be retruded by probably 15 to 18 mm or so. Chin-neckline is very short, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. Lower third face appears somewhat elongated. She does have significant lip incompetence of about 11 mm.

Intraorally, Holly has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch. She has really thin attached gingiva around the lower incisors and cuspids. Roots are quite prominent and extend out through the buccal cortex. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Upper incisors are somewhat tipped lingually, so she has a tendency toward a Division II malocclusion. Upper laterals are blocked a little bit out of the arch labially. She has a Class II end-on occlusion being about 2 mm Class II on the right side but being probably 6 mm Class II on the left side. She has about a 0.5-mm overbite relationship anteriorly. She has an over jet of about 2 mm. Transversely, she has a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being about 1.5 mm to 2 mm higher than the right side. 

To palpation, she has mild to moderate discomfort over the masseters, TMJs, and right temporal area. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly at this time, although she said this morning when she was doing the MRI that she did have clicking and popping in her joints. Incisal opening is 40 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 10 mm and to the left 7 mm.

Intraorally, the oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal. Uvula is mildly enlarged but not too significantly. Soft palate may be slightly elongated but not too bad. Faucial pillars are a little bit constricted. Tonsils are present but appear uninflamed and relatively normal in size. Left side of the lower jaw appears might be just slightly elongated 2 to 3 mm, but on the other hand, there is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being vertically shorter than the right side.

Intranasally, the left turbinate appears somewhat enlarged and a little bit more inflamed. The right turbinate appears more normal in size. Airway looks really good on the right side at least anteriorly. The left side appears somewhat constricted. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except for the third molars which are all absent. She has short roots on a number of her teeth particularly the molars, bicuspids, and anterior teeth in the upper arch. Lower arch has a 3 x 3 retainer on it. Both condyles appear arthritic. She has a nasal ring in place. Difficult to evaluate the airway. Difficult to evaluate the sinuses. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows some significant arthritis present. Appears to be some loss of condylar volume. Joint space is decreased superiorly and posteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit smaller in size compared to the opposite side and has some significant arthritic change associated with it. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep but not quite as steep as the opposite side. 

On opening, there appears to be some restriction of translation, although the condyles do move fairly well forward beneath the articular eminence. A little more resistance to translation on the left side as compared to the right side in this particular view.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear including the maxillary, ethmoid, and frontal sinuses. Frontal sinuses are quite large. She does have a nasal ring in place. Left turbinate appears quite a bit larger than the right side with a greater decreased airway on the left side. Some deviation is present in the bony septum. Difficult to evaluate the cartilaginous septum.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Holly appears to have vertical maxillary excess anteriorly and AP mandibular deficiency. Vertical height of the condyle-ramus area appears a little bit short. She has a high occlusal plane angle and a Class II skeletal and dental occlusal relationship. Lower incisors might be a little bit over angulated. Oropharyngeal airway dimension measures about 2 mm at the base of the tongue and at about 5 to 6 mm at the base of the soft palate. Tongue at least on this radiograph appears to be carried low in the oral cavity. Holly has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction (probably arrested idiopathic condylar resorption pathology)
Anterior vertical maxillary excess
AP mandibular deficiency
Slight AP maxillary deficiency
Class II occlusion being worse on the left side as compared to the right side
High occlusal plane angle 
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Hypertrophied turbinates
Partial nasal airway obstruction
Anterior open bite tendency
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Difficulties eating and chewing
Sleep apnea syndrome
Restless leg and extremity syndrome
Daytime somnolence

Recommended Treatment

Periodontal evaluation with possible gingival grafting in the lower anterior arch

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and keep cuspid roots tipped distally
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 3 mm of tooth structure and retract

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 