CHERILYN MCGOWAN 								08/20/2007

Cherilyn is a 30-year-old female.  Her TMJ problems began when she was 29 years old in 2006.  The etiology is unknown. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Worsening of her condition. 
Jaw pain and fatigue.
Headaches.
Ear popping.
Jaw popping, clicking and cracking. 
Limited opening.
Retrusive jaw especially of the lower jaw.
Bite is slowly deepening again.

The only medication she currently takes is Yasmine.  

Other conditions she has had includes endometriosis and ovarian cysts.  In 1998, she had uterus surgery for the endometriosis.  In 1995, she had a rhinoplasty.  In 1994, she had her lower wisdom teeth removed and in 2007 she had the upper wisdom teeth removed.  

Relative to her TMJ problems she began conservative therapy on April 21, 2006, which included Motrin, soft diet, massages, hot and cold pack therapy.  On July 6, 2006, she was placed on dexamethasone 0.75 mg for three days.  On September 7, 2006, she was placed in orthotic splint therapy.  On July 24, 20007, she began some stretching exercises.  Currently she takes Motrin 3 to 4 times per day, continues stretching exercises, massage therapy, soft diet, and hot and cold packs.

She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 7 to 8.  Her average daily pain around the head and neck area averages around 8.  She gets headaches at about a level of 5 to 6 that are present in the morning and she gets these 4 to 7 times a week.  They occur predominately in the temple areas.  She also gets pain in the neck, shoulders and back that can be moderate to severe.  She is aware of clenching her teeth at nighttime.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo.  No other joints bother her.  She rates her jaw function at a level of 7 to 8.  Her diet is at 7 to 8.  Her abilities to carry on normal life activities are affected to a level of 7 to 8.  

She does have some mild snoring at night.  She is moderately tired during the day but not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  She has mild problems sleeping at night.  Her MRI shows that she has some arthritic changes in both TMJs and displacement of the articular discs.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex is unavailable because our machine broke and unable to obtain one at this time. 
CHERILYN MCGOWAN 			08/20/2007				Page 2

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The septum is reasonably straight.  The left turbinate appears enlarged and appears to be obliterating the left nasal airway.  On the right side it appears that the septum does deviate off towards the right perhaps in the cartilaginous area.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic.  There is a little bit of an osteophyte extending superiorly.  Decreased joint space vertically.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that a little bit of an osteophyte sticking up.  Joint space may be a little bit decreased in the area of the osteophyte.  Otherwise, looks fairly good.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints.  

Lateral cephalogram shows a skeletal Class I position with a good oropharyngeal airway.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
A-P mandibular hypoplasia.
A-P maxillary hypoplasia 
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Clicking, popping and cracking in the jaw joints upon function.
Significantly decreased jaw function.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level the maxillary and mandibular archs.
Surgery  (Option #1).
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion but create space within the   joints to accommodate the articular disc.
            Surgery (Option #2)
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible 8 mm.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance and down-graft the posterior aspect.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
Post surgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.


