CHAD MCIVER									7/26/05

Chad is 27 years old, referred by Dr. Duane Keller.  He has had a previous hernia repair and his ulnar nerve operated on.  Chad is in fairly good health.  He has some anxiety related to his jaw problems.  He also has had a previous tear in his stomach lining.  He does not take any kind of medications.  He has no allergies that he is aware of.  His problems began when he was about 18 or 19 years of age of unknown etiology.  He was a freshman in college when it all started.  He eventually had some orthodontics done in 1998 to 2001.  This was done primarily by Dr. Fox.  He then went to see Dr. Farhad Moshiri who made a splint for him.  He spent about a year with Dr. Moshiri and then consulted with Dr. Duane Keller and has been with Dr. Keller for about a year.  He has had other treatments such as chiropractic treatment and physical therapy, but none of this has really helped him with his symptomatology.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS AND PROBLEMS 
Joint pain.
Headaches.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Previous problems with clicking and popping in the joints.
Pain down through the neck and shoulders. 

Chad said that his joints used to click and pop.  Now he can get the left side to pop.  However, the right side if he tries to pop it, he has excruciating pain on that side and so he does not like to manipulate his right joint much at all.  He gets earaches, right side greater than left side and occasional tinnitus.  He gets frequent vertigo, but has no hearing loss.  He has no known allergies.  Other joints that bother Chad include his neck and back, but it is difficult to differentiate it between the muscle problems and bony problems.  The left shoulder bothers him and as does his right wrist which he fractured his scaphoid bone previously and he still has problems with it.  Chad gets headaches at a level of 4 that cover his entire head and these are his average headaches.  He gets TMJ pain, right side worse than left side between an 8 and 9.  His average daily facial pain and headaches is a level of 6 and the worse it gets is about an 8.  He rates his jaw function and diet at 7, disability at 6.  

In frontal view, Chad has good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are pretty close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, Chad has AP deficiency of the maxilla probably about 6 mm at the upper lip level.  Chin is retruded by probably 15 to 20 mm.  He has an obtuse nasolabial angle.  Chin-neckline is quite short although chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Chad has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled although the lower right cuspid lateral incisor could be lying a little bit better.  He has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, Chad has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  Chad has an end-on incisor relationship and bilateral posterior open bites.  He has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship being much worse on the right side than the left side.  He is probably a 3 to 4 mm Class III on the right side and probably 2 mm Class III on the left side.  Chad's right mandibular cuspid is probably almost 2 mm anterior to the left cuspid.  Upper arch appears a little bit more symmetric.  Slight cant in the maxillary occlusal plane with the right side being about a mm lower than the left side.  
CHAD MCIVER				7/26/05				Page 2


Oropharynx appears clear.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off toward the left side. Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  By holding open the nostril on the left side, he had improved breathing, but on the right side the nostril did not improve his airway significantly.  He appears to have some constrictor of the luminal valves.   He says he has relatively severe daytime somnolence.  He is not aware of snoring at night and he is not aware of any sleep apnea problems, although he does have a significant problem with restless sleep and basically a sleep disorder.  He is predominantly a mouth breather when sleeping.  He does have a tendency towards bilateral posterior crossbite.  He essentially wears the bite splint all the time and cannot go without it.  He tends to posture his lower jaw forward and unload his joints.  Chad says he cannot go without his splint now.  Maximal incisal opening is 35 mm, but he can only open to about 21 mm without significant discomfort.  Excursive movement to the right 5 mm, left 3 mm.  To palpation, he has some mild tenderness of the shoulders, right styloid area and minimal tenderness over the temporalis muscles.  On opening, he had a little bit of crepitus in the right TMJ.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
On Panorex, the condyles are not seen.  Sinuses appear relatively clear, but difficult to really evaluate.  He is missing all 4 third molars.  The rest of the teeth are all present.  Chad did have his wisdom teeth taken out.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some arthritic changes and some anterior beaking present.  Decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.  It appears that it could be bone-on-bone contact.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  

Left TMJ tomogram also shows a condyle with some arthritic changes with a little flattening on the superior head, but does not appear quite as arthritic as the other side.  Decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.  Articular eminence is relatively flat.  On opening, there is restricted translation of both joints.  

Waters view shows the sinuses appear clear.  The bony septum appears to be deviated a little bit off towards the right side and at the base off to the left side.  Turbinates appear enlarged bilaterally.  

Lateral encephalogram shows that Chad has some AP maxillary deficiency and AP chin deficiency.  Oropharyngeal airway and soft palate level measures about 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  In one area it measures only about 4 to 5 mm and up a little bit higher closer to about 7 or 8 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and one side of the disc is anteriorly displaced and significantly degenerated on the opposite side.  It appears to be in position, but it may have a reactive pannus surrounding it.
AP maxillary deficiency.
CHAD MCIVER				7/26/05				Page 3


Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP macrogenia.
Anterior mandibular vertical excess.
Class III occlusion being worse on the right as compared to the left side.
End-on incisor relationship.
Bilateral posterior crossbites extending from lateral incisors all the way to the second molars.  
High occlusal plane angulation.
TMJ pain.
 Headaches.
 Myofascial pain.
 Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 Hypertrophied turbinates. 
 Nasal airway obstruction.
 Prominent mouth breather.
 Mild crowding of lower anterior arch.
 Lower arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being about 1 to 2 mm anterior to the left  
       cuspid.
 Rule out connective tissue autoimmune disease. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Laboratory studies to rule out connective tissue autoimmune disease.
Rheumatoid factor.
ANA.
ESR (erythrocyte sedimentation rate.)

Redo MRI to include coronal views to better assess condition of the TMJs and verify the joint pathology (more recent MRI lacks coronal views.)

Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.

CT scan of bilateral TMJs and jaws. (TMJ Concepts protocol.)

5.   Surgery.
	     a.   Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts     
                 total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it        
posteriorly as well as expand it.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.
CHAD MCIVER				7/26/05				Page 4


Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to reduce the vertical height and augment the chin.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

 5.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 


