PRISCILLA MCKASKLE							11/30/2009

Priscilla is 39 years old and referred by Philip Everett, DDS, 2100 West Michigan Avenue, Midland, TX 79701-5928.  Priscilla’s TMJ problems began in about 2006 when she began having jaw pains.  The etiology was unknown at that time.  By history, however, Priscilla was diagnosed with Lyme disease in 2006.  By tracing her symptoms backwards, she feels that she contracted it in 2001 in California.  She has had significant problems with the disease process.  Besides the Lyme disease symptoms and problems, the only major medical problem she has is sinus tachycardia.

In 2006, she developed facial pain over the sinus areas bilaterally, but examination and radiographs showed that the sinuses were not the etiology of her pain.  In 2006, she received an occlusal splint which helped decrease her symptoms.  However, she then developed jaw tremors.  She has actually only been on the Flexeril since September.  Following the development of the jaw tremors, apparently Priscilla has had tremors for a number of years and was on a medication called Primidone.  When her tremors increased in 2006, the dosage was increased.  She started Flexeril in September taking it at night, but now takes it two times per day which is helpful for her.  The medications Priscilla is currently taking include the following:

Flexeril b.i.d.
Primidone 50 mg t.i.d.
Zyrtec 1 tablet q.h.s.
Toprol XL 50 mg q.h.s.
Fentanyl patch 70 mcg q. 48 hours.
Flonase 1 to 2 puffs per day.
Lyrica 100 mg in a.m., 50 mg at noon, and 150 mg at bedtime.
Prilosec 40 mg q.d.
Acidophilus 2 per day.

Priscilla gets headaches only about two or three times per month that she relates to migraines, but they are at about a level of 8 and can occur in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area.  She rates her average TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 8, diet at 6, disability at 7.  She has no problems with earaches nor tinnitus, but gets occasional vertigo.  She has no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her knees, wrists, ankles, and occasionally her elbows.  She does tend to clench her teeth at nighttime and also during the daytime, but she consciously puts her tongue between her teeth and bites down on her tongue.  

She has some mild snoring, moderate daytime somnolence that she attributes to the Lyme disease and also perhaps to the medications.  She is not aware of sleep apnea.  She has a moderate sleep disorder because of the pain and difficulties getting to sleep.  She does not believe that she is a mouth breather at night.  

Primary concerns that Priscilla has include the following:

Jaws continues to move and shift.
Teeth do not line up.
It is hard to chew.
The jaw muscles hurt.
Hard to open her mouth.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Priscilla has fairly good left-to-right symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth relationship is probably about minus 1 to minus 2.  Maxillary midline and mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other.  In profile view, she has some AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency with the maxilla probably being 4-5 mm AP deficient and the mandible probably about 8 mm AP deficient.  Intraorally, Priscilla has all of her lower teeth back through the third molars and in the upper arch she has all of her teeth also back through the third molars.  She has an end-on Class II occlusion of I think probably about 3 mm Class III.  The rest of her teeth appear not to touch.  It is hard to tell which teeth are actually touching, but it may be her maxillary second molar and lower first molar.  All other teeth appear to be out of  occlusion.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Uvula is moderately elongated, but the roof structures are relatively normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates may be just mildly enlarged, but she appears to have a good airway and she has no complaints of difficulties breathing through her nose.  She has about a 1-2 mm anterior overbite.  Incisal opening where she is comfortable is about 15 mm.  Maximal opening was about 37 mm.  Excursion movement to the right was 4 mm and to the left about 6 mm.  In going into excursion movements, it set off jaw tremors for her.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the TMJs, medial pterygoids, and the right masseter muscle.  Although Priscilla hears popping occasionally in her joints, at this particular visit her joints seemed to function reasonably smoothly.  

Diagnoses for Priscilla would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ Lyme disease.
Malocclusion.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. 
Headaches.
Difficulties eating and chewing.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Medications:  Use appropriate antibiotic effective against Lyme disease to see if this helps to decrease symptoms. 
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints to construct plastic 3-D models of the jaws and jaw joints.
Surgery (if medications do not relieve her symptoms.
      a.   Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, joint debridement, and reconstruction with TMJ 	Concepts total joint prostheses.
      b.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
      c.  Application and then removal of maxillary and mandibular arch bars. 