HOLLY MCKAY								09/08/2011

Holly is 43 years old,  birth date 12/29/1966.  Holly was here about 12 years ago for evaluation of her TMJ problems at that time.  Since then, she has been under the care of some other doctors including Dr. Charles Holt from 2000 to 2004 who made a splint for her that seemed to help her and also she was placed on Vioxx and Trazodone.  She has also been under the care since about 2003 to 2004 with Dr. Don Cheatum, a rheumatologist, who has kept her basically on medications including Daypro which controls her pain reasonably well.  She had orthodontics from 2008 to 2010 by Dr. Mike Allen.  She also had orthodontics in the 6th grade that included the extraction of four bicuspids by Dr. Strader and the orthodontist was Dr. Charles Taylor.  

Holly’s TMJ problems actually began at age 31 in roughly 1999 of unknown etiology.  She just began having headaches on the right side.  She would get daily headaches at about a level of 8 in the frontal and temporal area if it were not for the Daypro medication.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 2, diet at 1, disability at 8.  She does not have any trouble with earaches, but gets occasional tinnitus and vertigo but no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her right hip, knees, and right great toe.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime.  Her jaws feel stiff in the morning usually when she wakes up.  

In frontal view, Holly has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 28 mm.  Upper lip tooth relationship is 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline and chin.  The nasal tip is just slightly off to the right side about 1 to 2 mm.  In profile view, she has retrusion of the maxilla by about 5 mm and the chin is retruded about 10 mm.  Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids, but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  The teeth are nicely aligned and leveled and she has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she is also missing the first bicuspids.  She has a Class I cuspid molar relationship and about a 2 mm anterior deep bite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  The maximal incisal opening is 42 mm and excursion movements are 10 mm in each direction.  To palpation, she has some moderate pain over the right temporalis muscle and mild tenderness over the right retromandibular area, but no other pain to palpation around the head and neck area.  Joints function relatively smoothly.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the absence of probably mandibular first bicuspids, but perhaps the maxillary second bicuspids.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  The turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  The condyles look relatively normal.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is just slightly deviated to the left side and the turbinates appear moderate in size but appear to have adequate airway.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Axial view shows the septum is deviated a little bit towards the left side.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show that there appears slight decreased vertical joint space.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence has a relatively normal inclination. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows that there is actually a greater vertical joint space present.  The condyle appears to be reasonably centered in the fossa.  

Left TMJ coronal views show that there is some significant flattening on the condylar head from about the mid portion of the condyle down to the lateral pole of the condyle.  There is perhaps even some slight beaking of the lateral pole of the condyle.  There is definite decreased lateral joint space and also superior joint space is less than normal.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  

Right TMJ shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is also some flattening on the lateral aspect of the top of the condyle.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she does have some AP maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia and probably a mildly increased occlusal plane angle.  The oropharyngeal airway actually looks reasonably good except down at the base of the tongue where the dimension measures about 5 mm.  

Basic diagnosis for Holly would be a destructive lesion right mandibular condylar neck.

Recommended treatment would be surgical removal of lesion right mandibular condylar neck.  

Additional diagnoses:

Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc medially displaced.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.  Place brackets and arch wire on maxillary and 	mandibular teeth.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandibular in a 			counterclockwise direction advancing pogonion 10 mm.
	b.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance it about 5 to 6 mm at the incisal edges 			and down graft it posteriorly approximately 4 to 5 mm.  
	c.	Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  