KIMBERLY MCKINNEY 								03/15/2010

Kimberly is 31 years old.  Her jaw problems began when she was about 28 in 2005.  The etiology is unknown.  She began taking Wellbutrin 300 mg q.d. in 2006.  Other medications she takes include:

Spironolactone 50 mg q.d.
Ibuprofen.
Levocet for headaches but she does not like to take it very often.

Kimberly gets headaches about 3 to 5 days per week at a level of 5 in the temporal and posterior head area bilaterally.  Her headaches can escalate to a 10 and this occurs about every 3 or 4 months when she develops a severe migraine headache.  She gets some earaches, occasional tinnitus, and occasional vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her hips, knees, and 3 fingers on the right hand.  She has been told that she has a possible autoimmune disorder and has an elevated ANA.  She has chronic fatigue and generalized achiness.  SHE IS ALLERGIC TO PENICILLIN.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Kimberly has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.   Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  The maxillary midline and chin are pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted maybe 1 to 2 mm to the left side.  In profile, she has reasonably good facial balance with maybe just a slight minimal deficiency of 3-4 mm in the maxilla and mandible.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has quite a shift in the lower arch on that side with the first bicuspid being blocked out lateral and the cuspid being tipped a little bit lingually on that side.  Also, she has an accentuated curve of Spee on the left side with the cuspid being about 2-3 mm higher than the right side.  The entire dental alveolus appears to be a little bit higher on the left side as compared to the right side.  The mandibular left cuspid is probably almost 2 mm higher than the right cuspid.  She is basically a Class I cuspid on the right side and maybe just slightly Class II on the left side by maybe 2 mm.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy with a normal uvula, soft palate, fascial pillars, but the tonsils are moderately enlarged bilaterally.  Intranasally, the structures look reasonably normal.  In 2004, she did get a car door slammed into her nose and may have cracked or broken her nose and she has a little bit of a bump on top of it.  To palpation, Kim has some very minimal tenderness over the medial pterygoid muscles and retromandibular area.  On opening, she has popping in both joints with an opening click at 10 mm in the left joint and closing click at 5, while on the right side, the opening click is probably at 15 mm and closing click at 10 mm.  Occasionally, the right side make a loud audible popping noise.  The maximal incisal opening is about 50 mm and excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction.  On excursion movements, she has popping in both joints.   
Basic diagnoses would be:

Bilateral temporomandibular joint arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
Mandibular hyperplasia.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Elevation of the mandibular left central incisor through cuspid with lingual tipping of the cuspid and buccal tipping of the first bicuspid.
Chronic trauma to her left check and lip area because of malocclusion.


Recommended Treatment includes:

1.	Bilateral TMJ disc repositioning with Mitek anchor		
2.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies