ERICA MCLAUGHLIN								09/02/2010

frostortho@gmail.comThe patient is to be referred to us by Dr. Stuart Frost, frostortho@gmail.com.  I do not have an age on her, but she appears to be in her mid to late teens.  She apparently has TMJ issues with clicking and popping in her joints.  

In frontal view, it appears that her maxillary midline is aligned to her facial midline, but the mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm to the left as is the chin.  Tooth lip relationship I would guess is about 3 mm as she does have her lips forced together.  In profile, she has a head postured forward neck position.  She has her head tipped up and forward.  The maxilla and upper lip are probably 10 mm AP deficient and the mandible is probably 20+ mm AP deficient.  Occlusion shows that she has an anterior open bite of about 4 to 5 mm.  She has a Class II occlusion.  She has bilateral posterior cross bites and an accentuated curve of Spee.  She has an over jet of probably about 7 or 8 mm.  She has mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.  She appears to occlude predominantly on the second molars.  

Panorex shows that she has impacted maxillary third molars, but is absent the mandibular third molars.  The condyles show maybe some mild arthritic changes, but for the most part look reasonably good, although the left one appears a little bit shorter in vertical height as compared to the right side.  The turbinates appear enlarged.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a significantly retruded maxilla and severely retruded mandible with a skeletal Class II relationship and about a 4 mm anterior open bite.  She has an oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue of about 4 mm and at the soft palate of about 8 mm.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocations (need to be confirmed by MRI).
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia with asymmetry off towards the left side.
Anterior open bite.
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.
Mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.
Bilateral posterior cross bites.
Impacted maxillary third molars x2.
Probable hypertrophied turbinates with nasal airway obstruction.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Possible sleep apnea.
Lip incompetence.
Occluding predominantly on the second molars.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch in two occlusal plane levels.  Place a vertical step 			in the arch wire to align the four incisors in an elevated plane compared to the 			cuspids and posterior teeth.  Try to extrude the posterior teeth by at least 1 mm.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
3.	Surgery.	
	a.	Bilateral TMJ and articular disc respositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 				counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand and level the occlusal planes.
	d.	Partial inferior turbinectomies. 
	e.	Surgical removal of impacted maxillary third molars x2.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

I have already sent this plan to Dr. Frost via e-mail.  I believe this treatment plan will get us the best treatment outcome.  