TODD MCMICKLE									07/25/2007

Todd is 22 years old and is referred by Dr. Sam Marynick.  Todd has had mono in the past but otherwise is in good health except for his presenting problems.  Todd has been diagnosed as having the following:
Sleep apnea.
Polyurination.
Right leg pain.

He has been to a number of specialists including a sleep specialist who did a sleep study and diagnosed Todd with sleep apnea.  Apparently Todd never goes into REM sleep pattern. 

Todd has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, and myofascial pain.  He gets occasional earaches, occasional vertigo but no tenderness or hearing loss.  No other joints are really a problem for him except his ankles are weak and he sprains them playing sports at times.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism. 

In frontal view, Todd has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is 0.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  He does have a soft tissue cleft in the chin that is a little bit asymmetric but the bony aspect is relatively symmetric.  In profile view, Todd may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe 2 mm.  The mandible appears to be retruded by probably about 10 mm.  Chin-neckline and chin-neck angle are not well defined and are relatively short.  Intraorally, Todd has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars present.  Some mild crowding is present in the lower anterior arch.  He has good attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch.  Some mild crowding probably about 3 to 4 mm in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, Todd has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  He has about a 3 mm anterior deep bite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy.  The uvula is moderately enlarged.  The soft palate looks relatively normal in length.  He has fairly large tonsils that could be causing some mild airway obstruction.  This also causes some moderate constricture of the transverse width of the oropharynx and some constricture of faucial pillars.  There is fairly good AP pharyngeal dimension from the soft palate to the posteropharyngeal wall.  Intranasally, the nasal septum is deviated off to the left side.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged and in fact on the left side it appears that the nasal airway is fairly obstructed.  In the right side the turbinate is moderate in size but it appears there is a more passable airway at least anteriorly.

Todd has had this sleep disorder since his teenage years.  Prior to that he was very active with a lot of energy.  Since developing the situation, he has significant problems relative to his energy level.  He states that he feels like half a man.  

To palpation he has very minimal tenderness over the temporalis, TMJs, styloids and SCM areas.  TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly.  Incisal opening is about 58 mm.  Excursive movements are about 11 mm in each direction.  


TODD MCMICKLE				07/25/2007				Page 2

A few medications had been tried with Todd to help him sleep and this includes melatonin which helped him fall asleep but did not keep him asleep.  He also was placed on an antidepressant but he apparently had an adverse reaction to that medication.  The medicine is unknown.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars but the rest of the teeth are all present.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Difficult to evaluate the joints.  

Waters view shows that the septum is significantly deviated in the bony area and clinically in the cartilage area.  Turbinates appear fairly large and most of the nasal airway appears to be obliterated.  Sinuses appear to have overlay structures but appear reasonably clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it.  Articular eminence is moderately steep but there appears to be reasonably good joint space around the condyle.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with reasonably good morphology.  It is sitting fairly centered in the fossa although slight decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening there is good translation of both joints.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows Todd has an oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level of about 9 mm and at the base of the tongue about 11 to 12 mm.  There does appear to be perhaps some slight AP mandibular deficiency.  The tongue appears to fill the oral cavity in a relatively normal fashion, although clinically there are creations on the lateral borders of the tongue indicative of probably some hypertongue activity.  Todd does have a slight head postured forward neck position.  

Todd has significant problems with his right leg and calf area.  He gets pain in those areas.  It actually feels best when he exercises and that seems to relieve his pain problems in that leg.  At night he cannot lay in back because he get achiness in that right leg area.  It also bothers him when he is trying to sleep.  If he lays on his side particularly on his right side and puts some pressure against the leg it does feel much better for him.  It is worse when he sleeps and tries to lay on his back. 

Todd had orthodontics from about the age of 11 to 14.  He had his wisdom teeth removed when he was 14.  In 2003, Todd went through a sleep study and was diagnosed with upper airway resistant syndrome.  He was tried on a CPAP machine but he was unable to tolerate it. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Upper airway resistance syndrome. 
AP maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
Deviated nasal septum.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
TODD MCMICKLE				07/25/2007				Page 3

Hypertrophied tonsils.
Sleep disorder.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a slight counterclockwise direction. 
Nasoseptoplasty. 
Partial inferior turbinectomies. 
Tonsillectomy.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
