SHEILA MCMURRY-LEMONS						04/01/2011

Sheila is 43 years old, birth date 02/25/1967.  She is referred by Dr. James Baker, 10900 Hefner Point Drive #204, Oklahoma City, OK 73120.

Sheila’s TMJ problems began she was about 10 years old.  She had orthodontics from about the age of 10 to 11 years old.  She had popping in her joints and she had what were described as migraine headaches at that time.  Her symptoms continued on.  She had seen some other doctors for treatment but this did not help her.  In 2004, she began orthodontics for 2 years to treat her TMJ issues and this did not work either.  She got orthodontic appliances back on again in approximately 2007.  She had surgery 10/09/2008 that included bilateral articular disc repositioning with Mitek anchors, maxillary osteotomies, and bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies.  She had lots of physical therapy after that.  The braces stayed on until December 2010.  She has had splints almost since her teenage years.  Her current splint she got in approximately 2009.  

Primary concerns that Sheila has at this time include the following:

TMJ pain.
Severe headaches. 
Muscle pain.
Severely limited jaw opening.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Difficulties at work because of headaches and muscle pain and tension as well as increased pain factors when talking.

Sheila gets headaches three to four times a week and sometimes for a while they can occur daily at a level of 9 in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 6, jaw function and diet at 8, disability at 7.  She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss and no other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day.  She takes the following medications:

Tramadol 50 mg tablets approximately two per day..
Klonopin 1 mg q.h.s.
Advil p.r.n.

She still has residual numbness in her lower lip and chin area bilaterally since the previous surgery.  With removal of her splint in her occlusion, she occludes only on the maxillary central incisors, mandibular central and lateral incisors.  All other teeth are out of occlusion.  She has approximately about 2 mm posterior open bite.  She is basically Class I cuspid relationship however.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 1 mm.  Intranasally, her turbinates are moderately enlarged.  She has more difficulties breathing through her nose when it is allergy season which it currently is in Oklahoma.  In profile, she has good facial balance.  In September 2010, Dr. Baker took Sheila back to surgery and did bilateral TMJ debridements.  He does about 6 to 8 bilateral TMJ lavage treatments per year and after that she could open fairly well for a few weeks, but then it closes back down again.  After lavage treatment, she can open to about 24 mm as long as physical therapy is also being performed. The incisal opening is 19 mm.  Interestingly, transverse movements to the right are about 4.5 mm and to the left 3 mm.  To palpation, she has high moderate, low severe pain over the temporal muscles, masseter muscles, right TMJ and posterior neck muscles.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows she is missing four bicuspids, one from each quadrant.  Third molars are also absent.  There are bone screws in the mandible and the ramus area x3 in each side.  She has bone plates in the maxilla, two on each side with four bone screws in each plate.  Mitek anchors are present in the condyles.  The coronoid processes are angled forward somewhat.  I need to rule out impingement on the back of the zygomatic buttress process.  

Coronal view x-ray shows that the septum has a little deviation to the left side about a centimeter from the palate.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight and the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The sinuses look fairly clear. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is arthritic and appears narrow anteroposteriorly.  Mitek anchor is present in the lateral aspect of the condyle.  The joint space actually looks reasonable except for the medial side the space is decreased.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is arthritic.  It appears very narrow anteroposterior.  There is a Mitek anchor present at the lateral aspect of the joint.  There are areas of significantly decreased joint space and perhaps bone-on-bone contact.  The articular eminence is a little more shallow than the opposite side.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with a Mitek anchor in it.  The lateral pole of the condyle is probably resorbed.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  There is evidence of erosion on the head of the condyle.  joint space is decreased more towards the medial side of the joint.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears more arthritic.  There are areas of erosion on the top of the condyle.  The lateral pole is absent.  Mitek anchor is present.  There is decreased vertical joint space and it appears that there is likely bone-on-bone contact.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a fairly good Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm at the soft palate level and 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Bilateral temporalis muscle fibrosis.
Limited jaw opening.
Neuromuscular disorder of muscles of mastication.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a. 	Place appliances on the maxillary and mandibular arches back through the 			second molars.  No arch wire will be necessary.
2.	CT scan of jaw and jaw joints.  
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	c.	Consider coronoidectomy if determined the temporalis muscles are 			inhibiting the jaw opening or coronoid is creating impingement to the 			maxillary or zygomatic buttress area. 
4.	Removal of orthodontic appliances.