AMBER MCNABB									02-02-04

Amber is 15 years old. She was referred by Dr. Richard Ingraham, 5523 S. Staples, Corpus Christi, TX  78411.

Patient History

Amber is in good health with no major medical problems. She takes no medications and has no known allergies to medication. Amber has had some previous orthodontic treatment but only to widen the upper jaw. She has not had full braces. She apparently had some partial braces to help align the upper and lower teeth. Relative to developing facial asymmetry, the family has only been aware of that for about the last three years. 

Amber’s problems began about three to four years ago of unknown etiology. She had orthodontic treatment when she was in the fourth to sixth grade that included basically a palatal expander and then 4 x 6 appliances to align the anterior teeth. No other joints bother her. She has no known allergies and no problems wearing jewelry. No history of clenching or bruxism. No earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, hearing loss, TMJ problems, or pain around the head and neck area. She rates her jaw function at 0, diet at 0, and disability at 0. 

In 06/2003, she had her third molars removed, and they found one little extra tooth, and this extra little calcification was in the upper jaw, but they were not sure which side it was on.

Patient Concerns

The teeth and jaws don’t fit together 
Worsening facial asymmetry

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Amber has good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1. Maxillary midline is shifted to the left about a millimeter. Mandibular dental midline is shifted to the right about 2 mm. Chin is shifted to the right about 5 to 6 mm. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other if the slight cant in the occlusion is also taken into consideration. She has some increased fullness in the angle of the mandible on the left side by probably a couple of millimeters.

In profile view, maxilla appears to be about 4 or 5 mm AP deficient. Lower lip looks a little protrusive. Chin may be just slightly AP deficiency, although the chin-neckline and chin-neck angle appear pretty good. She has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip with upper lip supralabrale being about 2 mm posterior to subnasale, but soft tissue A point is retruded a couple of millimeters posterior to upper lip supralabrale and probably about 4 to 5 mm posterior to subnasale. Vertical facial heights appear fairly good.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Some crowding in the lower anteriors and some lingual inclination. AP positions of the cuspids are fairly well-balanced. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Left cuspid is 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. Has a total crossbite on the right side and a Class III end-on occlusion. On the left side, she does not have a crossbite but is in a full Class III occlusion. She also has an anterior crossbite. She has a 0 vertical overbite relationship. Vertical heights of the cuspids in the upper arch are fairly level transversely, but the right first bicuspid is about a millimeter or so lower. Also, there is a cant in the maxillary four incisors with the left side being higher than the right side. 

Oropharynx appears clear. A couple of little areas that show some residual adenoid kind of tissue present but just little sparse areas. Intranasally, septum is deviated a little bit off toward the left side. Left turbinate appears somewhat large, although there is some airway present, and it is more constricted than on the right side. 

On opening, left TMJ functions smoothly. On the right side, she did have a very soft opening click at probably about 35 and then a closing click that could be felt at 30 mm. In excursive movements, she also would occasionally have a little glitch in the right joint. Then going back to opening, it wasn’t always consistently having a click.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. A little calcification between the left first and second molars. Sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Appears there is adequate airway. Left condyle appears slightly longer than the right one, although both appear to be fairly long in the head and neck dimension. Decreased vertical height of the mandible with the tips of the second molars almost on the cortical bone in the inferior border with there being less vertical height on the right side as compared to the left side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle on one view that looks fairly well-centered, although the joint space is relatively thin vertically and posteriorly indicative of perhaps a thin disc or slight displacement. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit more flattened on top and may be some minor bony changes. Decreased superior and posterior joint space but rather similar to the opposite side where it is thin but maybe just slightly thinner than the opposite side. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

On opening, there is reasonably good translation in both joints. Left condyle appears to have better architecture than the right condyle in the open view.

Waters view shows asymmetry in the dentition in the mandible. Maxillary midline looks a little bit off to the left, mandibular dental midline off to the right. Appears to be some deviation in the nasal septum. Turbinates appear a little bit enlarged, particularly on the left side, and nasal airway is a little bit more compromised on the left side as compared to the right side. Sinuses overall appear very clear.

Cephalometrically, Amber appears to have a skeletal Class III jaw relationship with some slight overangulation of the maxillary incisors. Appears to be two different occlusal plane levels and a discrepancy in the vertical height of the inferior border bilaterally. Appears to be slight AP deficiency in the maxilla. Good oropharyngeal airway. Turbinates extend just slightly beyond the hard palate. 

Reviewing some previous x-rays, Panorexes, the earliest one taken 07/25/94 at the age of 6 years, 4 months, she had no evidence of calcification between the right first and second molar. On 06/19/00, at the age of 12 years, 2 months, there was evidence of calcification between the mandibular left first and second molar. By 06/04/03, that calcification was a little bit more prominent but not significantly enlarged. Compared to today’s radiograph, it might be slightly enlarged over the past year. 

Photographs sent by Dr. Ingraham dated 06/22/00, 08/12/02, and 07/24/03 show that the asymmetry of the mandible appears to have gotten somewhat worse. Radiograph taken 05/31/96 at the age of 8 years, 3 months, shows that she had a Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship. A little bit of vertical discrepancy between the left side and right side but basically a Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship. X-ray taken 04/08/99, her teeth are apart, and she wasn’t in occlusion. Appears that if she wasn’t translated in the joints, that if she would close down, she would be more towards an end-on incisor relationship. She had her 4 x 4 orthodontic appliances on at that time. She had an anterior open bite at that time, but again difficult to tell if this is because her jaws are just held open or whether there was an actual true open bite. There was an x-ray taken 07/24/03. Tooth-size analysis reveals no Bolton’s discrepancy. If the teeth were properly aligned and leveled, it appears that there wouldn’t be any significant crossbite difficulties holding the models in a Class I position. There is an increased curve of Spee with the incisors and right cuspid being about 2 mm higher than they should be. Lower arch has just a slight reverse curve of Spee with the lower incisors being about 2 mm lower than they should be. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ condylar hyperplasia with the left side being greater than the right side
Right TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction
Deviate mandibular prognathism
AP maxillary deficiency
Maxillary midline shifted to the left a millimeter, mandibular dental midline shifted to the right 2 mm, with the chin shifted 5 mm to the right 
Full Class III occlusion on the left side, Class III end-on occlusion on the right side
Anterior and right posterior cross bites
Accentuated curve of occlusion, maxillary arch
Slight reverse curve of occlusion, mandibular arch
Crowding, mandibular anterior arch and maxillary anterior arch
Calcified lesion, left mandibular first-second molar area that is enlarging

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJ

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch. Try to correct the slight reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch by extruding the lower incisors slightly

Continue to monitor facial growth and development particularly in reference to active or inactive condylar hyperplasia

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and correct any transverse and vertical discrepancies that are present
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back on the facial midline
Remove lesion, left mandibular posterior body, dimensions 8 x 8 mm

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 