LINDA MCNALLY									03-26-04

Linda is 54 years old and referred by Dr. Shridhar Kotta, 2200 Haine Dr., Harlingen, TX  78550.

Patient History

She has had previous surgery for the following:
Umbilical hernia
Knee surgery
C-section
Hysterectomy
Jaw surgeries

Linda smokes 1-1/2 packs of cigarettes per day. She states she is going down. Hopefully she will achieve that. She had a severe kidney infection when she was about 13 years old, and they were contemplating removing the kidney, but with some medications, the problem cleared, and she has had no problems since then.

Linda’s problems began in the early 1980s. There is a familial history of TMJ clicking and popping. She had problems with her jaws locking open and had some displaced articular discs most likely. In 1983, Dr. Kevin McBride performed bilateral TMJ Proplast Teflon interpositional implants. Later that year, she fell and hit her jaw on a table, and the implant on the left side sustained damage. Later in 1983 she was taken back to surgery, and the left TMJ was reconstructed with a Vitek-Kent total joint prosthesis. That was done by Dr. Kevin McBride. In 11/1994, Dr. O’Dell Marshall performed right TMJ surgery and removed the Proplast Teflon interpositional implant and placed a temporal fascial graft. She has had some splint therapy, but this has increased the pain. 

Current Medications

Nexium 40 mg 
Ambien 10 mg
Celexa 20 mg
HCTZ (diuretic)
Claritin D
Alprazolam 0.25 mg
Darvocet-N 100, approximately 4 per day
Citracal 

Allergies

CODEINE causes Linda to itch.

Patient Concerns

TMJ pain
Pain down through the jaws and muscles in the head and neck area
Talking increases the pain levels
The jaw is tilting
Difficulty in eating and chewing as this brings on increased pain and causes GI problems
Teeth loosening
Ringing in the ears
Clenching and grinding of the teeth both during the day and at night
Difficulties laughing and smiling

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Linda has fairly good facial symmetry in the midde and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm on the right and 3 mm on the left. Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline or just may be about a millimeter off to the left. Nasal tip is about 2 mm off to the left. Mandibular dental midline is about 1.5 mm to 2 mm off to the left, and chin is probably close to 5 mm off to the left. 

In profile view, Linda has fairly good facial symmetry. Perhaps just some slight AP mandibular deficiency of probably about 5 or 6 mm. 

Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular right first molar and on the left side appears to have her teeth back through the second molars. Some mild crowing in the lower anterior arch but not too significantly. Appears to have good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars except she is missing the maxillary left second bicuspid. Some moderate crowding, upper anterior arch. All four third molars appear to be missing. She has almost a full Class II cuspid relationship bilaterally. She has an anterior deep-bite of about 4 mm. She has an overjet of about 3 to 4 mm. 

On opening, her mandible deviates about 4 to 5 mm to the left side. There is a transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side. To palpation, there is fairly severe tenderness over the left TMJ but high moderate tenderness over the styloid areas and moderate over the right TMJ and temporalis muscle areas. Maximal incisal opening is 30 mm. Excursive movement to the left is 9 mm and to the right about 3 mm. As she opens, she does deviate significantly off toward the left side 4 to 5 mm. Left joint seems to function relatively smoothly on opening, and on the right side there is some crepitus.

Intraorally, despite the heavy smoking history, Linda’s tissues actually look fairly healthy. 

Intranasally, turbinates appear fairly large. Septum is deviated a little bit off toward the right side with a little septal spur at the base. 

She feels she has some problems with her neck bones, and she gets occasional bursitis in her shoulders but not very often. She has allergies particular to pollens and seasonal factors. She can’t wear cheap jewelry as she has a mild contact dermatitis with it. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, maxillary left second bicuspid, and mandibular right first molar. Sinuses appear relatively clear. 

Right TMJ appears very arthritic. 

Left TMJ demonstrates a Vitek-Kent total joint prosthesis, and it appears that the condyle portion has completely penetrated through the fossa component. 
Left TMJ tomogram shows that the Vitek-Kent prosthesis is in position. There appears to be a radiolucency with the bony margin around it in the superior posterior aspect of the remaining condyle. The roof of the fossa appears to be missing. The condylar component penetrates through the fossa component by approximately 5 mm. It appears that the majority or a good portion of the roof of the fossa is absent. May be a little bit of reactive tissue extending above where the roof of the fossa would be. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic. There is very minimal joint space between the fossa and the condyle. Articular eminence appears to have some abnormal morphology. May be some pseudocysts in the head of the condyle. 

On opening, there is moderate translation of the left condyle. Right condyle has some movement of probably 2 to 3 mm. It appears that the condylar head travels forward through a hole in the fossa component. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Nasal septum is deviated significantly off toward the right side, and there is a large septal spur present. Turbinates appear moderate in size, and the right one appears larger than the left one. Appear to be three screws in the fossa component, although it appears that there may be some bone loss around the screws themselves.

Cephalometrically, Linda has a skeletal and occlusal Class II jaw relationship. Oropharyngeal airway, however, looks good. The left inferior border is positioned significantly higher than the right side by about 8 mm at the angle area and at the first molar area about 4 mm. There is a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ severe foreign body giant cell reaction, perforation of the Vitek condyle through the fossa
Cranial base perforation beneath the Vitek-Kent fossa prosthesis with associated foreign body giant cell reaction
Right TMJ severe arthritis with perforations
Left vertical maxillary deficiency
Mandibular AP deficiency and asymmetry
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Tinnitus
Class II occlusion 
Missing mandibular right first molar and maxillary left second bicuspid
Arch asymmetry in both the maxilla and mandible with the left cuspid being 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 2 mm
Mild crowding, upper anterior arch
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Slightly accentuated curve of occlusion lower arch
Anterior deep-bite of 4 mm
Radiolucent lesion, left mandibular ramus

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up space between the left first molar and first bicuspid until that space equals 6 mm (approximately a 2-mm space increase). Try to stabilize the posterior occlusion and shift the anterior teeth forward. This will cause some increased angulation of the upper incisors and hopefully help shift the maxillary midline a little bit toward the right side as well as establish better cuspid symmetry between the left and right cuspids (left cuspid is 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid)
Align and level mandibular arch. Close up the space on the right side approximately 2 mm until it equals about 6 mm of space to equal the size of a bicuspid tooth. Try to shift the lower dental midline a millimeter to the left and try to retrude the bicuspids and cuspids on the right side approximately 2 mm to establish lower arch symmetry between the cuspids. 

Surgery, stage I
Removal of left TMJ Vitek-Kent total joint prosthesis
Extensive debridement of the left fossa area
Biopsy and removal of lesion associated with the ramus
Placement of acrylic spacer

CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery, stage II
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Extensive TMJ debridement
Removal of spacer on the left side
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
 
Restorative dentistry to reconstruct and finalize the dental arches