NATALIE MCNEAL									12-20-04

Natalie is 25 years old.

Patient History

She had wisdom teeth extracted. She has had eardrum reconstruction and had Lasik eye surgery. She does have a lot of pollen and outdoor environmental kind of allergies. She is not aware of any food allergies. She cannot wear sterling silver ear studs but can wear gold and stainless steel. She does have an allergy to SULFA. She does take Lesse 28. 

She has had her tonsils and adenoids removed. She doesn’t snore when she sleeps. 

About four or five years ago, Natalie hit the water with the left side of her face and was hit very hard. It blew out her eardrum, and she had to have that repaired. Her whole face hurt for a while after that. Her severe pain was with her eardrum, and this is what required reconstructive surgery. 

Patient Concerns

The upper teeth and gums are too exposed when her lips are relaxed
Difficulties getting her lips together
She used to be able to whistle but cannot do that now without difficulties
A lot of nasal congestion
A lot of postnasal drainage

Clinical Examination

To palpation, Natalie didn’t really have any tenderness around the head and neck area. Incisal opening is 45 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 6 mm and to the left 6.5 mm. She has no trouble with headaches or TMJ pain or myofascial pain. She rates her jaw function and diet at 1 and disability at 0. To palpation, there is no tenderness around the head and neck area. She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or healing loss. No other joints bother her. She has been told by two dentists that she has a tongue thrust problem. She is not aware of clenching and bruxism. She has had orthodontics x 3 with the first round at age 13 to 15, second round from age 16 to 18, and third round from age 24 to 25. Of interested, in high school she could get her lips together easily without any strain. Now she has to strain her lips to get them together. She says this problem has occurred since in college and law school.

In frontal view, Natalie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 7.5 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline. 

In profile view, she has good balance between her cheeks, nose, and eyes. A little bit of a dorsal bump on the nose. Has an acute nasolabial angle. She has probably about 3 to 4 mm of AP maxillary deficiency relative to subnasale. Chin is back probably about 10 mm. Chin-neckline is a bit short, although chin-neck angle is well-defined. When she puts her lips together, she has some hyperfunction of the mentalis muscle. Lip incompetence is approximately 11 mm. 

Intraorally, Natalie has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has a 3x3 lower retainer. Has adequate attached gingiva, lower anterior arch, that appears a little bit inflamed. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a crown on the maxillary right central incisor. She is basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship. Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level. Some slight orbital dystopia with the right eye being maybe 2 mm higher than the left one. 

Intranasally, Natalie has a little spur off the left side of the septum. Turbinates are fairly large. She probably has moderate nasal airway obstruction. The columella is okay. Nostrils are okay. Some slight constricture of the luminal valves but probably not worth treating. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. She has a root canal on the maxillary right central incisor. Sinuses look relatively clear. Turbinates look moderately enlarged. Condyles  are a little bit difficult to identify.

Left TMJ tomograms show a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space could be a little bit decreased vertically. Some flattening on the posterior head of the condyle.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit flattened on the anterior head. A little bit of flattening on the posterior head but not quite as significant as the opposite side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Superior joint space looks okay. 

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyles.

Waters view shows some deviation of the nasal septum with it going off toward the left side then back onto the midline back in the bony area. Turbinates appear significantly enlarged and does not appear to be much viable airway. She has an air fluid level in the sinuses with the right side being about three fourths full and the left side about one third full. Ethmoid and frontal sinuses appear clear. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows good oropharyngeal airway. She has vertical maxillary excess. May have a slight skeletal Class II occlusal relationship. High occlusal plane angle appears to be present. Significant lip incompetence is really noticed. Fluid levels in the sinuses are noted. 

Basic Diagnoses

Vertical maxillary excess 
Mandibular prognathism 
Severe lip incompetence
Hypertrophied turbinates 
Nasal airway obstruction
Displaced left TMJ articular disc 

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJs

Presurgical orthodontics 
Place appliances in the maxillary arch
Place appliances in the mandibular arch



Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly approximately 6.5 mm
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to move the mandible straight superiorly
Reduction turbinectomies
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
