JEFFREY MCNEILL									07/02/2007

Jeffrey is 47 years old and is referred by Dr. Ron Groves.  He is in good health with no major medical problems.  He takes Pravachol 40 mg.  He has had an adverse reaction to sulfa medications.  Jeff's jaw problems began probably sometime around 1987.  He had some blows to his jaws when he was younger playing football, baseball and wrestling.  He had orthodontics at age 14 to 16.  In approximately 1994, he had his wisdom teeth removed.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Major jaw discomfort.
Popping in the jaws.
Pain when eating.
Sleep affected with waking up 3 to 4 times a night with the jaws locked.
Bite out of alignment.  

He has had no treatment to date for his jaw and TMJ problems.  

The objectives Jeff has in seeking treatment would be:
Fix the alignment of the jaws and teeth.
Stop the popping and locking.
Stop the pain. 

Jeff gets headaches about once a month about a level of 6 in the posterior aspect of the head and on top.  He rates his TMJ pain at 6 average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 5, diet at 4, disability at 7.  He has some mild to moderate snoring.  He has mild daytime somnolence.  He is not aware of having sleep apnea factors.  He has a mild to moderate sleep disorder as he wakes up at night with pain and with his jaws locked.  He has no problems with earaches or vertigo but has some tinnitus and some hearing loss.  Other joints that bother him include his right knee, right shoulder and his feet occasionally.  He is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime and also during the day.

In frontal view, Jeff has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline.  In profile view, Jeff has fairly good facial balance.  The chin may be just slightly retruded and chin-neckline is not too well defined.  As Jeff postures his mandible forward and the upper lip is held forward slightly, it does improve his profile.  Intraorally, Jeff is missing lower first bicuspids.  He had some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch with the left central block almost completely out of the arch.  He has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch he is also missing first bicuspids or possibly the second bicuspids.  He has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  He has about a 6 mm overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear within normal range.  Tonsils look relatively normal in size.  Intranasally, turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  Septum is deviated off towards the left side but there is a large bulging spur at the base of the septum that extends into the right side of the nose.  To palpation, Jeff has no particular tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function reasonably smooth.  
JEFF MCNEILL				07/02/2007				Page 2

He says occasionally he gets a pop in the right joint that occurs usually when eating and it can make a loud pop and cause discomfort for him.  This occurs predominately on the right side although it has occured on the left side.  With normal opening at this point in time the joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars and it appears that all 4 first bicuspids are absent.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Condyles appear somewhat large.  Gonial notches are prominent. 

Waters view shows that there is a deviation in the septum off towards the left side.  It appears that there is passable nasal airway.  At the base of the nose on the right side it appears that there may be some enlarged turbinate that may be blocking some of the airway.  The left sinus looks relatively cloudy compared to the right side.  Right frontal sinus is either absent or sinusitis is occurring. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good shape and morphology.  Articular eminence is mildly steep.  There actually appears to be some increased joint space superiorly and slight decreased joint space posteriorly.  Based on radiographs it appears that the disc is likely in position at the time these x-rays were taken.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Articular eminence is relatively normal in steepness.  There appears to be good joint space and slightly decreased posterior joint space.  Extrapolation of this x-ray would tend to point to the fact that the discs are in place.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Jeff has a good Class I skeletal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway appears to be about 11 to 12 mm at the soft palate level and about 12 mm at the base of the tongue.  THE MRI WAS NOT TAKEN IN CENTRIC RELATION AS CLINICALLY THE DISCS ARE DISPLACED AND THE TRUE CENTRIC RELATION POSITION IS NOTED WITH THE CLICKING THAT OCCURS WITH ABOUT 10 MM OF OPENING AND 5 MM OF CLOSING.  Jeff does tend not to bite on his back teeth because that causing clicking and popping in the joints consisting.  Starting from the centric relation position he has an opening click at about 10 mm and a closing click at 5 mm in both joints.  The noise is almost audible.  To palpation, however, there is no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Incisal opening is 51 mm.  Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocations with reduction.
Mandibular hyperplasia.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain.
Previously extracted four first bicuspids.
Anterior deep bite of about 5 to 6 mm. 
JEFF MCNEILL				07/02/2007				Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth to help with the alignment. 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

	