KATHLEEN MCNEILL								03/22/2006

Kathleen is 22 years old, referred by Dr. Mike Steffen, Edmond, OK.  Kathleen is in good health.  She does have some problems with kidney stones.  She does get occasional sinus problems.  Kathleen's problems began about four years ago when she developed some mild popping in the joints of unknown etiology.  During the past year her pain problems have gotten much worse.  She originally had orthodontics done from the age of 12 to 14.  She reports that when she was about four years old she did fall and hit her chin and had to have some stitches there.  She has had two splints.  One made by Dr. Bob Talley in Norman, OK, and one by Dr. Beavers in Little Rock, AK.  However, wearing the splints made Kathleen's symptoms much worse.  Her pain got much worse but she found that she tended to clench into the splints which probably exacerbated the muscle and TMJs.  Her pain has always been predominately in the left joint with virtually no symptoms that she is aware of the in the right TMJ area.  Of interest she did have shingles on the left side of her head approximately five years ago and as a result of that she has experienced some slight hearing loss in the left.  She gets earaches on the left side but no tinnitus or vertigo.  She has been diagnosed as having scoliosis.  She has a pelvic rotational problem and does get some pain in her left hip.  Her left ankle bothers her particularly when the weather changes as she has had two previous fractures to that ankle.  She fractured her ankle on the trampoline.  She is allergic to amoxicillin.   She has no problems with wearing jewelry.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime and during the day clenches particularly if she has pain.  She gets headaches about three days per week at about a level of 5 in the frontal, temple and posterior head area with the most intense pain in the posterior head.  About two times per month, she gets rather severe headaches at a level of 8 that are described as migraines.  The pain directly in the jaw joints she rates at a level of 9 in the left side and 0 on the right side.  Average daily pain is at 7, jaw function at 7, diet at 8 and disability at 7.  Kathleen's pain is usually worse in the afternoons but occasional she will wake up with pain and then she is aware that she has been clenching.  

In frontal view, Kathleen has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 17 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 3.5 mm.  In profile view she has fairly good facial balance.  Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids.  In the upper arch she is missing first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth.  There is a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look good.  Tonsils are present and the left one is just mildly enlarged.  The right one is pretty much normal.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off to the right side.  The turbinates are relatively normal in size.  The nasal airway is greater on the left side than the right side because of deviated septum. She gives no history of snoring or daytime somnolence or sleep apnea.  Kathleen reports that she sleeps fairly well at night.  To palpation, she has moderate tenderness over the left TMJ, some milder tenderness over the SCMs posterior neck and styloid areas.  On opening, she has a relatively soft click at about 15 mm of opening in the left joint and a closing, sometimes loud audible click probably about 10 mm.  The right side seems to function relatively smoothly.  She really has no tenderness on that right side.  Maximal incisal opening is 56 mm and she can open 45 mm without much discomfort.  Excursive movement to the right was 11 mm and to the left 10 mm.  On excursive movement she has click in the left joint as well. 


KATHLEEN MCNEILL			03/22/2006				Page 2



RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids.  Kathleen has a 3 x 3 retainer on the lower arch.  The condyles appear a little bit flattened with the left condyle appearing a little bit smaller than the right condyle.  Styloid processes are moderately prominent.  Cannot evaluate very well but they do look clear in this particular view.

Waters view shows that the right maxillary sinus is opacified and with almost the same density as the adjacent bone.  The nasal septum has some deviation to it.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged.  There is a septal spur coming off the left side of the septum that may possibly block some of the airway.  The left maxillary sinus appears clear.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some arthritic changes.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Decreased superior and posterior joint space.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head and it does not appear quite as arthritic as the opposite side.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space is a little bit better balanced on this side compared to the opposite side.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Kathleen has a skeletal and an occlusal Class I relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway looks good.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
TMJ pain, left side greater than the right side.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Relative mandibular hyperplasia.
Large mass in the right maxillary sinus.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
CT scan of maxillary sinuses. 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Place appliances on the upper arch.
Place appliances on the lower arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization to maintain occlusion.
Exploration and removal of mass/tumor from right maxillary sinus.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
