KATHERINE MCNERNEY								04-10-03

Katie is 20 years old and referred by Dr. Duane Keller, 3929 Bayless Ave., St. Louis, MO 63125-1437.

Patient History

Katie’s problems began probably when she was about 12 years old when her jaw got locked open. She was able to manipulate it and get it closed. She feels she has been aware of clicking and popping in her jaw joints since that time or even perhaps before. When she was 13, she had her third molars removed, and this severely aggravated the situation. By age 16, her problems began to worsen. She has been on numerous splints during this time, mainly night splints, and it has only been since August of 2002 that she has been in a splint full-time. She feels that the splint, however, may make her situation and discomfort worse. She has been on medications for her condition, primarily Celebrex, and she has had osteopathic treatment and physical therapy treatment. 

She was managing reasonably well until last summer, when she received a couple of concussions at a military camp. Since that time, her condition has further worsened. She gets earaches occasionally. She gets tinnitus, and this sometimes can get quite severe where she essentially can’t hear conversations. She gets vertigo, particularly when she stands up but doesn’t seem to have much of a problem with that if she is sitting down or if she is already up and moving about. She is aware of nocturnal clenching and bruxism. She gets shooting pains up through her neck that go up through the back of her head. She has fairly constant headaches that she registers at about a level of 4 in the posterior head and temporal area, but she gets severe ones that occur usually every Thursday, and she may have another one or two during the week if she is under a lot of stress. The headaches tend to start posteriorly and then work forward. She does have rather constant pain in her TMJ area. Katie rates her TMJ pain at about a level of 4 and overall facial pain at 4. Her mother registers it at about a level of 7, and Katie says it does escalate up to 8 at times. She rates her jaw function at 2, diet at 2, and disability at 4. Her mother feels that the disability is more at a level of 7 because oftentimes there are days that Katie cannot really do very much at all and has to spend a lot of time in bed.

Katie has to sleep on her side. She can’t sleep on her back because she just is unable to go to sleep in that position.

Current Medications

She currently takes Celebrex 200 to 600 mg per day and also BCP.

Patient Concerns

Primary concerns that Katie has, therefore, include the following:

Headaches 
TMJ pain
Pain down to the neck and back area
Severe ringing in the ears
Difficulties eating and chewing some foods
Difficulties breathing through the nose
Snoring

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Katie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline. 

In profile view, Katie has probably about 4 to 6 mm of AP maxillary deficiency. Chin appears deficient by about 10 to 12 mm. Chin-neckline is short, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. Katie and her family have noticed that the lower jaw has become more retruded than it was before these problems began.
Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth actually back through the second molars. She seems to have adequate attached gingival around the lower anterior teeth although quite thin in some areas. There is some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids, but the rest of the teeth are present back through the second molars. She has an end-on Class II cuspid relationship bilaterally of probably about 3 mm. Upper laterals appear small in size. She has about a 3-mm overjet relationship. She has a vertical overbite of about 1 mm. Transversely, the maxilla and mandible appear fairly level. Intraorally, the oropharynx appears clear. The uvula is about normal in shape and size.

Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off toward the right side. Right turbinate is moderately large and seems to decrease the functional airway. In the left side of the nose, it appears she has a nasal polyp up superiorly and posteriorly along the septum. The inferior turbinate is moderately enlarged. The columella base is extremely wide due to lateral flaring of the alar feet. When the nostrils are physically opened with a speculum, she had significant improvement in her breathing through her nose indicative of the fact that the wide columella base is causing significant dysfunction of her nasal airway.

To palpation, she has high moderate to severe pain in the posterior neck area and moderate pain around the masseters, SCMs, shoulders, and mild to moderate in the temporalis areas. She had no pain to palpation directly over the joints in the resting position, but upon function, the pain level escalated to about a 5. Maximum incisal opening is 51 mm but without significant discomfort 28 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 9 mm and to the left 12 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses are relatively clear. The turbinates are extremely large and seem to block off a lot of the airway. It is interesting that in the nasal septum superiorly there is a significant lateral projection of the septum that seems to be occluding the airway. On the left side, the nasal polyp can be seen, and the turbinate on that side is moderately large. She is missing all four third molars and the maxillary first bicuspids. Condyles appear to have undergone significant resorption with the left side looking worse than the right side.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses look clear. Right nasal airway appears to have some significant obstruction. On the left side, it appears that there is some airway above the inferior turbinate. Condyles look quite small in size in the coronal type of view and probably maybe a third of normal width with significant loss of condylar volume vertically and transversely. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have undergone some significant degenerative changes. The condyle actually looks larger here than it does on the MRIs. Joint space appears a little better balanced; however, this may be due to the wearing of the bite plate. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows severe condylar resorption in this joint. The fossa and articular eminence appear to be intact, and articular eminence is moderately steep. There is increased joint space in all dimensions probably secondary to either the pathology occurring in the joint and/or the splint treatment that she is currently in. Small anterior beaking is present on the head of the condyle.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of both joints, with the right side being a little bit better than the left side. In the open view, a pseudocyst is seen in the right condyle.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows both maxilla and mandible are probably AP retruded. The occlusal plane may be somewhat high. Oropharyngeal airway is decreased some and is about 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 6 mm at the base of the tongue. She may not have been all the way back in centric relation in this film. 

She does have some problems with the bones and joints in her neck, back, elbows, fingers, left hip, and her knees.
Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ severe idiopathic condylar resorption with perforations and non-salvageable discs
AP mandibular deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Class II end-on occlusion
High occlusal plane angle
Missing maxillary first bicuspids
Tooth-size discrepancy of 1.5 mm		CHECK THIS
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Hypertrophied turbinates
Deviated nasal septum
Polyp, left nasal airway
Extremely wide columella base
Nasal airway obstruction due to above
Severe TMJ pan
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Earaches 
Tinnitus (severe)

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 1.5 to 2 mm of tooth structure to account for the tooth-size discrepancy 

CT scan of TMJs and jaw structures (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomy, debridement, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it posteriorly
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)
Bilateral coronoidectomies
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies
Nasal septoplasty
Remove polyp from the left nasal cavity
Reconstruct columella

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
