LESLIE MEHLMAN									06-20-03

Leslie is 32 years old and referred by Dr. Tom McDougal. 

Patient History

She smokes a half a pack of cigarettes per day. She takes Nexium p.r.n. GI problems. Otherwise she is in good health. The primary concern she has is with the mal-relationship of her teeth and jaws. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor hearing loss. She gets occasional vertigo but doesn’t relate that to any jaw problem. No other joints bother her. She has no known allergies, and she can wear any kind of jewelry without any significant problems. She is not sure if she clenches her teeth at night. She has no problems with headaches, although when she was a child, she had problems with some migraine headaches. No TMJ pain and no pain around the head and neck area. She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability all at 0. She has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. She has an audible click in the right joint, but I don’t think it is particularly due to popping of the disc, as the disc is medially displaced and not anteriorly displaced. May be an interrelationship toward the lateral aspect of the joint involving the condyle, rim, etc. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Leslie has fairly good left-to-right symmetry. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much aligned with each other. Inferior border on the right side of the mandible and in the chin area might be just slightly longer than the left side by 1 to 2 mm at the most. 

In profile view, she has fairly good facial balance. Chin appears to be in fairly good AP projection but maybe a little sallowness at the base of the nose. Chin-neckline looks average in length, and chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, Leslie has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has crowns on the first and second molar on the left side and second molar on the right side. Some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. She has some lingual tori present bilaterally. She has adequate attached gingival around the lower anterior teeth.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class III cuspid relationship on the right side of probably 5 mm and on the left side at about 2 mm. She has an end-on incisor relationship. She has some lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. The upper arch appears fairly symmetrical. Transversely, the occlusal plane appears fairly level. She has significantly enlarged tonsils bilaterally. She does get recurrent sore throats. She does get a sore throat approximately once a month, and usually that does involve her tonsils. 

Upper lip length is 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1 mm.

In 1993, she was a victim of an aggravated assault and had her nose broken at that time. Intranasally, her turbinates appear maybe slightly inflamed but are not very large, and the airway appears to be adequate. Septum appears reasonably straight.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses are clear. Nasal airway as best we can see looks okay. She is missing all four third molars. She has a root canal on the mandibular right second molar. She has crowns or extremely large restorations on practically all of her posterior teeth. Condyles look quite large anteroposteriorly, and the condylar necks are quite thick. No evidence of any significant pathology.

Waters view shows that the sinuses have fairly similar translucency. Nasal airway appears okay. Slight vertical asymmetry can be seen with the right side being just a touch longer than the left side throughout most of the mandible. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a decreased posterior joint space but moderate upper joint space. Articular eminence is quite shallow. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a little bit better joint balance. Disc is probably thin as there is a decreased dimension between the condyle and the articular eminence. Condyles on both sides appear slightly large compared to the size of the fossas.

Open views show good translation of the condylar heads. Joint space between the condyle and the articular eminence is greater on the right side in the open view than the left side. 

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class III jaw relationship. May have slight overangulation of the upper incisors and perhaps slightly decreased angulation of the lower incisors. Oropharyneal airway looks good. She has very large tonsils. The vertical difference in the inferior border of the mandible is seen. Has a slight difference in the vertical height of the occlusal surfaces on one side as compared to the other but not as clinically evident. 

Basic Diagnoses

Slight maxillary AP deficiency 
Transverse maxillary excess
Mandibular prognathism
Bilateral TMJ medial displacement of the articular discs
Class III end-on occlusion being worse on the right side as compared to the left side
End-on incisor relationship
Right mandibular cuspid 2 mm anterior to the left cuspid
Overangulation of the maxillary incisors
Slight tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 1.5 mm
Anterior crossbite involving the lower cuspids and maxillary lateral incisors

Recommended Treatment

Dental maintenance with placement of temporary crowns if any crowns are indicated

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch
Align and level mandibular arch. Try to improve lower arch asymmetry by distalizing the posterior teeth and cuspid on the right side. May need to move one tooth at a time but move the teeth back 2 mm on the right compared to the current position. Class III elastic on that side may be helpful as long as the upper arch is rigidly stabilized. Consider stripping lower anterior teeth removing about a millimeter of tooth structure to help compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy 
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward slightly and narrow it transversely to fit the lower arch
Possible bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible backward if the joint surgery ends up being a requirement and/or the orthodontics causes any further protrusion of the lower anterior teeth

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Restorative dentistry to complete the occlusion

