KELLY MEISNER								08/18/2011

Kelly is 17 years old, birth date is 07/29/1994.  Referred by Dr. Ron Groves from Southlake, TX.  

Kelly has had her tonsils and adenoids previously removed.  She has had mononucleosis in the past as well as pneumonia.  She has hypothyroidism.  She currently takes the following medications:

Birth control pills.
Nasacort.
Thyroid 0.88 mg q.d.
An allergy pill.

Primary concerns that Kelly has include the following:

Left side of jaw pops and clicks and catches when opening.
Ear pain.
Sore jaws.
Earaches greater on the left side than the right side.  

Kelly’s TMJ problems began when she was about 16 years old of unknown etiology.  She had previous orthodontics from the age of 11 to 13 and then again from 15 to 17.  She has had upper second bicuspids and lower right second bicuspids, left first bicuspid previously extracted for orthodontic needs.  She has no problems with headaches, but rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 3, diet at 3, disability at 0.  She gets earaches on the left side greater than the right side.  She has no tinnitus, vertigo nor hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her back, but she has been diagnosed with scoliosis.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  She does not snore when she sleeps, has some daytime somnolence, but no sleep apnea.  She believes that she breathes through her mouth particularly at nighttime.

In frontal view, Kelly has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 4.5 mm on the left side and 5 mm on the right side.  The maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline may be about 0.5 mm to the right and chin is about 1 mm or so to the right.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 4 to 5 mm.  Chin is retruded about 12 to 15 mm.  She has a lip incompetence of about 5 mm.  She is fairly close to being a Class I occlusion, although she may be just 1 mm or so Class II on the right side.  She has an anterior deep bite of 2 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy and normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the left TMJ and milder tenderness over the retromandibular areas and the left masseter.  On opening, she has a loud audible pop in the left TMJ at about 25 mm of opening and a reciprocal click at about 15 mm.  The right side is functioning relatively smooth today.  The incisal opening is 48 mm and excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.  Intraorally, she is missing the maxillary second bicuspids and mandibular right second bicuspid, left first bicuspid.  She has a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 to 2 mm lower than the left.  She has a little bit of orbital dystopia with the right eye about 1 to 2 mm higher than the left eye.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  She is missing mandibular right second bicuspid, left first bicuspid and maxillary second bicuspids.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  Difficult to evaluate the joints.  

Coronal view shows that she has a deviated septum with it bending off towards the left side.  The turbinates are fairly good size and appear to block most of the functional airway.  Sinuses appear clear.

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight in this particular cut, but the turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the right side blocking off most of the airway.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good morphology.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  The joint space is decreased vertically and posteriorly.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of anterior beaking developing particularly towards the medial side of the joint.  The joint space appears a little bit better here.  Towards the mesial aspect of the joint, the posterior joint space appears somewhat constricted.  The articular eminence is significantly steeper on this side than on the opposite side where it has almost a 90 degree vertical angulation.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is somewhat more narrow than the opposite side.  The bony architecture is not quite as smooth across the top.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a more normal vertical joint space except at the lateral aspect of the joint where there is decreased joint space between the condyle and the lateral rim of the fossa.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  The condylar head appears a little bit more healthy on this side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  She has a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the soft palate level and difficult to assess the tongue because she may have had some movement and in one area it looks it is about 3.5 mm and in another view it appears like it is more like 7 mm.  
Basic diagnoses for Kelly would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocations.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia, but anterior vertical hyperplasia.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Impacted third molars x4.
Pain.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction.
	d.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	e.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
	f.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.