TARA MEISNER									04-09-04

Tara is 12 years old, her birthday is 08/01/91, and is referred by Dr. Ron Groves, 2001 W. Southlake Blvd., St. 115, Southlake, TX  76092.

Patient History

Tara has had mononucleosis, and she has had her tonsils and adenoids removed. Otherwise she is in good health. The primary concern that Tara has is that the lower jaw is back too far. She apparently had a lot of problems with snoring prior to her tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. Since that time, her snoring has ceased. Apparently she doesn’t have any difficulties breathing through her nose at this time. 

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her knees, and she has patella femoral syndrome. She is not aware of clenching or bruxing. She has no known allergy problems. If she wears cheap earrings, however, it causes some redness to develop around her ears. The only previous surgery she has had is the tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. She had some significant snoring prior to the T&A but since then snoring has not been a problem for her. She has no problems with headaches, no TMJ pain, and no myofascial pain. She rates her jaw function at 2, diet at 1, and disability at 0.

Patient Concerns

Lower jaw is retruded
Bite is off
Popping in the jaw joints

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Tara has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all on the facial midline.

In profile view, Tara has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip. Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale. Maxilla is probably about a good 6 to 8 mm AP deficient. She is probably about 20 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is extremely short. She has significant fullness in the submental area. However, chin-neckline is fairly prominent. She does have a slight head postured forward neck position.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a full Class II cuspid-molar relationship. She has an anterior deep bite of about 6 mm. She has an overjet of about 4 mm. Intraorally, the oropharynx appears clear. 

Intranasally, the turbinates are somewhat hypertrophied with the left side being greater than the right side today. Some bogginess seen in the tissues. Appears to be decreased airway, more so on the left side and not quite as restricted on the right side today. 

No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. Incisal opening is 49 mm. Excursive movements are 10 mm to the right and 9.5 mm to the left. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly today. However, Tara does give a history of clicking and popping in the jaw joints. 
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Septum appears a little bit deviated. She has four developing third molars that are unerupted. Condyles appear a little bit flattened on the front side. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. A little bit of deviation of the nasal septum with the superior aspect going off toward the right side and inferior bony aspect going off to the left side. Turbinates appear moderately enlarged particularly on the right side. Airway seems compromised on both sides. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Increased anterior joint space. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Good probability of displaced disc developing on this side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows the condyle with a little bit of flattening on the anterior head. Joint space is a little bit better balanced compared to the opposite side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle appears more centered in the fossa. 

On opening, there is good translation of both joints with it being slightly greater on the right side than the left side. 

Cephalometric analysis shows that Tara has a high occlusal plane angle and AP maxillary and significant AP mandibular retrusion. A little bit of adenoid tissue is left in the nasopharynx. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5.5 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue. There is a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 3.5 mm in the anterior six teeth.

Basic Diagnoses

Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation (probably compatible with ICR)
AP maxillary deficiency
Anterior vertical maxillary excess
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
AP microgenia
Class II occlusion 
Accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4
High occlusal plane angle
Anterior deep bite of about 6 mm
Over-angulated lower incisors
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3.5 mm
High occlusal plane angle
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Moderately hypertrophied turbinates
Possible nasal airway obstruction
Recommended Treatment

Observe TMJs at six-month intervals

Obtain an MRI when it is deemed appropriate 

Surgery, stage I (only if TMJ problems worsen and are confirmed by MRI)
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up about 0.5 mm of space around each upper lateral incisor using coil springs
Align and level mandibular arch trying to level the accentuated curve of occlusion. Strip lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm worth of tooth structure to help correct for the tooth-size discrepancy as well as decrease the overangulation

Surgery, stage II
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, move the anterior aspect superiorly, and the posterior aspect inferiorly
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
Augmentation genioplasty
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

