JEANINE MELBYE									11/28/2007

Jeanine is 43 years old and is referred by Dr. Bob Hunsucker.  He is a general dentist in Plano, TX.  Jeanine has had clicking in her jaw joints for as long as she can remember.  She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, nor pain around the head and neck area.  She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 0 and disability at 0.  Onset is unknown and etiology is unknown.  She does clench and grind her teeth at nighttime and also during the day.  She has no problems with earaches or tinnitus but gets occasional vertigo.  She has problems with her right knee and she does get sore feet.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime and also during the day.  She has a nightguard that she began wearing in April of 2007.  She has occasions at night when she wakes up unable to catch her breath.  

In frontal view, Jeanine has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The chin may be just slightly to the right side 1 or 2 mm.  Nasal tip is a little bit to the side about 1 to 2 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 to 2 mm to the right side as well.  In profile view, Jeanine has fairly good facial balance and symmetry.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has adequate attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars except she is missing maxillary left lateral incisor.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship being a good 5 to 6 mm Class II on the right side and she is closer to a Class I on the left side.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  The left mandibular cuspid may be about 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  The upper arch appears fairly symmetric.  Oropharyngeal areas look normal and tissues look healthy.  Intranasally, the septum may be deviated just slightly off to the left side.  The turbinates are moderate in size.  She may have an occasional snoring episode but it is not very common.  No daytime somnolence.   She says it is just rarely that she wakes up unable to catch her breath.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:  
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the maxillary left lateral incisor and right central incisor.  The right central incisor has been replaced with a 3-unit bridge pontic.  The left central and right lateral incisors had root canals.  The left sinus appears a little bit cloudy.  The condyles appear to have reasonably good morphology.  

Waters view shows that there may be a little bit of a fluid level in the left sinus.  There is a spur off the right side of the septum.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged and it appears that she could have some nasal airway obstruction although I could not see this on the clinical examination.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a hockey stick shape to it.  There is almost a little knob sticking off the front.  Decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a hockey stick shape to it.  Decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is good translation of both condyles with the left one exhibiting more translation than the right side.  


JEANINE MELBYE				11/28/2007				Page 2

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she is very close to being a Class I skeletal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway is about 7 mm at the soft palate level and maybe about 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  She feels that she clenches but I am not sure how much she clenches.  The teeth do not appear particularly worn so I do not believe she is doing significant bruxing.  She has a splint she has had for about 8 months that shows very minimal wear.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis with articular disc dislocations with reductions. 
Class I cuspid relationship on the left side and Class II cuspid relationship on the right side.
Missing maxillary left lateral incisor and right central incisor (replaced by a pontic on a 3-unit bridge.)
Anterior deep bite of 4 mm. 
Mild crowding in lower anterior arch. 
Accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.
Mandibular dental midline and mandible shifted 1 to 2 mm off to the right side. 
Possible left sinusitis or mucous retention cyst.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Treatment option 1 (occlusion will remain as is.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion and allow the condyles to be repositioned inferiorly to make room for the articular discs within the joint space. 
Application and removal of arch bars.
Restorative dentistry to place an osseointegrated implant and restore the anterior maxillary teeth. 
Treatment option 2.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Be careful as the maxillary left incisor and right lateral incisor could be ankylosed.   Maintain space for the maxillary left lateral incisor. Place pontic on upper archwire to replace the missing left lateral incisor.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth if necessary removing approximately 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward.  Consider using Class II elastics on the right side and Class III elastics on the left to try to improve the lower arch and maxillary arch symmetries. 
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to align the mandible.
Possible maxillary osteotomies if necessary to establish facial and occlusal symmetry. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry including osseointegrated implant to the maxillary left lateral incisor area and if necessary counter bridgework. 