KAY MELTON									03/22/2010

Kay is 67 years old and referred by Dr. Scotty Bolding, 2926 W. Huntsville Avenue, Springdale, Arkansas 72764.  Kay was in Mali, West Africa, as a counselor and she was walking at night, tripped over a rock, fell and hit her chin sustaining a chin laceration and a right mandibular subcondylar fracture.  She went two weeks and then came home.  Dr. Bolding repaired the fracture placing a bone plate.  She has not progressed very well and her primary concerns are:

Limited jaw function.
Pain. 
Difficulties eating and chewing.  

Kay has no problems with headaches.  She rates her TMJ problem at 3, but has no other pain around the head and neck area to speak of.  She rates her jaw function at 7, diet at 8, disability at 7.  She gets right-sided earaches occasionally, but no tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  The only other joint that bothers her is her right knee.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  She takes no medications.  

She initiated orthodontic treatment in November 2009 and braces were placed as part of the overall treatment.  She is having the orthodontics done by Dr. Jesse Gray.  She did TheraBite therapy from January through March 2010 for a total of 8 weeks.  This only seemed to produce more pain and jaw dysfunction and did not seem to improve her situation.  She 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Kay has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm to the left.  The chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, Kay has a good facial balance.  Intraorally, Kay has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  Likewise, in the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship by about 1 mm or so on the left side and slight Class III by about 1 mm on the right side.  She has an anterior vertical overbite of about 2 mm.  To palpation, she has mild tenderness over the right masseter and right TMJ.  She has some crepitus in the right joint on opening, but the left side is fairly smooth and does translate slightly with about 5 mm of excursion movement to the right and 0 to the left.  On opening, her mandible does shift to the right about 3 to 3 mm.  She has pain when she opens wide and she has pain as she closes.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except for the third molars being absent.  She has crowns on all four molars and on the left upper and lower second bicuspids and right mandibular second bicuspid.  There is a bone plate present in the right TMJ area.  It appears that there may be a bone surrounding it. 

Coronal view shows that the septum is reasonably straight and that the turbinates are normal in size. 

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates are moderate in size.  There is a bone plate present on the right mandibular condyle ramus area. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology with good joint spacing and a moderate inclination of the articular eminence.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows the presence of a bone plate supporting the condyle with the presence of a fracture line.  There are significant arthritic changes on the condylar head and degenerative changes in the fossa as well.  There appears to be bony union between the condyle and the fossa.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width.  There is a little extension on the lateral pole of the condyle that causes a decrease in the lateral joint space along the lateral rim of the fossa.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows the presence of a bone plate on the lateral aspect of the condyle ramus area.  There are significant degenerative changes in the fossa with bone deposition and bony ankylosis between the fossa and the condylar head.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal and occlusal Class I jaw relationship.  Oropharyngeal airways look a little bit narrow, but she probably could be postural on how she has her head and neck positioned.  She has no history of snoring, daytime somnolence, or any sleep apnea symptoms, and I do not believe that there is a true airway deficiency.

Basic diagnoses for Kay would be as follows:

Previous mandibular subcondylar fracture treated with open reduction. 
Right TMJ bony ankylosis. 
TMJ pain. 
Presence of bone plate to right ramus condyle.
Severe limited jaw function with an incisal opening of 17 mm.


Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Right TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b. 	Removal of bone plate from right mandibular condyle and ramus.
	c.	Right TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.