OLIVIA JO MERANDI							11/08/2011

smile@austinmoderndenstistry.comJo is 33 years old, birth date 10/18/1978.  She is referred by Dr. Rex Cockrell in San Antonio, TX.  Jo’s orthodontist is Alexis Tessler, DDS, MS, 3601 W. William Cannon Drive, Bldg. 4, Suite 500, Austin, TX 78749, office telephone #512-892-0817, fax #512-899-2111, cell phone #312-399-7422.  Her e-mail address is smile@austinmoderndenstistry.com.  

Jo’s TMJ problems began when she was about 12 years old when she was swimming and doing the backstroke and was shivering and her joints locked up.  She eventually was able to work that out.  She has had clicking and popping since that time.  She had some orthodontics in 2001 for about 6 months to line up her lower teeth before her wedding photos were taken.  In February 2002, she had her third molars removed.  Other treatments she has had for her TMJ include muscle relaxants, but she could not tolerate these very well, and splint therapy beginning in June 2011, but she is not able to tolerate the splint.  The splint made her uncomfortable and also caused some gagging issues for her.  

Primary concerns that Jo has include the following:

TMJ pain.
Headaches.
She feels her lower jaw is becoming more retruded.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Light sensitivity when she gets her headaches.

In frontal view, Jo has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular and chin midlines are all on the facial midline.  In profile view, the maxilla is back probably about 2 mm.  The chin is back about 10 to 12 mm.  The chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, Jo has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild to moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch, but does have good attached gingiva.  Transverse width of the lower arch is narrow.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has a division 2 alignment of the maxillary incisors.  She is about 3 mm Class II.  She is slightly greater Class II on the left side as compared to the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy and she does have some tonsillar tissues present but are not inflamed.  The turbinates appear quite large.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the right TMJ and mild tenderness over the right masseter muscle.  Her condyles extend significantly beyond the lateral rims of the fossae.  For the most part, the joints seem to function reasonably smoothly with some glitches, more so in the right joint than the left side.  As she would open on the right side, she would hear some light clicks that would occur and some crepitus occasionally.  This past summer when she would open she would sometimes hear a loud pop in the right side, but has diminished in occurrence since then.  The maximal incisal opening is 47 mm, but opening without discomfort only 18 mm.  The excursion movements are 10 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  There are some arthritic changes in the joints.  There is some peaking on the right side and the left side the condyle looks just a little sclerotic and it is a little bit smaller in size.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  

Coronal view shows that she has a septal spur off to the left side and the right turbinate is significantly larger, but the left one looks more normal in size.  The sinuses appear clear.  

Axial view shows that the septum has a little waviness to it, but not too bad.  Right turbinate appears enlarged and the left one looks relatively normal.  The sinuses look relatively clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some sclerosis on top and it appears to be a little bit smaller in size.  There is some anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  The joint space looks reasonably good.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows that out laterally the condyle is quite flattened off and there is some decreased joint space in that area.  On the medial side, the condyle appears smaller in size with some anterior beaking, although the joint space looks reasonably good.  The articular eminences of both have a moderate inclination.

Left TMJ coronal view shows that the condyle appears arthritic with perhaps some loss of vertical height.  There is significantly decreased lateral joint space,  but the mid condylar joint space looks reasonably good.  It appears that there is almost bone-on-bone contact at the lateral aspect of the joint with a lateral extension of the lateral pole of the condyle.

Right TMJ coronal view shows significantly more loss of condylar height compared to the opposite site.  The articular eminence curves inferiorly probably about 4 mm.  There appears to bone-on-bone contact with the lateral extension of the condyle against the lateral rim of the fossa.  Towards the medial aspect of the joint, the joint space looks relatively normal, but there is severely decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is probably a moderately high occlusal plane angle and she has maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia and mandibular AP hypoplasia.  Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good. 

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated with severe deformation and degeneration.
Maxillary AP posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class II division 2 occlusion. 
High occlusal plane angle.
Hypertrophied right turbinate. 
Diminished transverse width of the maxillary and mandibular arches.
Crowding upper and lower anterior arches.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they 		are necessary. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to expand the transverse width of 			the lower arch with slow light force expansion mechanics.  
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ 			Concepts total joint prostheses.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and expand it in a 				counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Right partial turbinectomy. 
	d.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

