LUCTRICIA MERRITT								10/15/2007

Lutricia is now 55 years old.   I previously performed surgery on her on July 8, 1998.  Prior to that she had several TMJ surgeries including a left disc claudication but on the right side she had previous proplast Teflon implants placed as well as a Christensen prosthesis that subsequently failed.  Today her primary concerns area as follows:
Right-sided TMJ pain.
Left-sided TMJ pain.
Left side feels it is out of place and it is very painful to talk.
Increased pain on the right side.
Nothing gives her adequate pain relief. 
Headaches.
Difficulties eating and chewing.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Morphine 15 mg 4 per day.
Duragesic patch 100 mcg per hour.
Klonopin 1 mg tablets 2 tablets q.h.s.
Hyzaar for blood pressure.
Lipitor 80 mg daily.
Effexor 150 mg daily.
Lunesta 2 mm occasionally.
Meclizine occasionally.
Tylenol as needed for pain and headaches.

Other joints that bother her include her knees and neck.  She gets right-sided earaches, has tinnitus and has been diagnosed with vertigo.  She had an MRI taken that showed a white lesion in the brain that is in the area but there has been no confirmed diagnosis of MS yet.  Occlusion seems to fit together fairly well in a Class I cuspid relationship.  She is missing mandibular left first molar.  Occlusion does look fairly stable.  There appears to be an overbite relationship of about 2.5 mm.  Lutricia gets headaches in the top of her head at about a level of 7.  She rates her TMJ pain on an average day of 9, average daily pain 7, jaw function 3, diet at 6, and disability at 9.  To palpation, she has severe pain over the right masseter, right TMJ and very high moderate pain over the left TMJ and right styloid area, moderate pain in the temporalis muscles and mild tenderness over the left masseter and left styloid area.  The right joint seems to function reasonably smoothly.  On the left side she hears crepitation kind of noises in the joint.  On opening, she deviates significantly off to the right side shifting 5 to 6 mm to the right.  Incisal opening about 40 mm max but only to about 28 mm without severe pain.  Excursive movement to the right is about 5 mm and to the left is only about 1 mm. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of the TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis on the right side.  The left side shows a second mandibular wire that is likely there from the sagittal split osteotomy.  Missing mandibular left incisor as well as the first molar.  All four third molars are absent.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The left condyle appears arthritic. 

LUCTRICIA MERRITT 			10/15/2007				Page 2

Right TMJ tomogram shows the presence of the TMJ Concepts prosthesis.  There could possibly be some heterotopic bone forming around the prosthesis. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic.  It appears to be flattened anteriorly with a little bit of anterior beaking.  There appears to be posterior decreased joint space.  There is radiolucency in the posterior wall of the auditory canal.  

Lateral cephalogram shows that she has a skeletal Class I jaw position and good oropharyngeal airway.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
Right TMJ heterotopic bone formation around the prosthesis. 
TMJ pain, right side worse than the left.
Headaches on top of the head.
Myofascial pain.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
I-CAT of left and right TMJs.
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Left TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis. 
Replace right TMJ mandibular component to eliminate nickel content. 
Debridement of right TMJ to remove heterotopic bone.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
Application of arch bars.
Physical therapy is necessary to rehabilitate the jaws.
Continue pain management. 