TAMMI MESSERMITH									05-05-03

Tammi is 44 years old and referred by Dr. James Baker, 8301 S. Walker, Ste. 101, Oklahoma City, OK 73116.

Patient History

Tammi smokes probably a couple of packs of cigarettes a week and has done this for about 20 years. She also has hypothyroidism. 

Tammi’s problems began when she was about 12 or 13 years of age. Her father hit her with a backhand and damaged her nose and may have damaged her joints at the same time. She has some clicking and popping in her joints, but it wasn’t until she was in her 20s that the problems got worse. She began having some limited abilities to open her jaws and a lot of pain and headache problems. Dr. Robert Markowitz on 07/22/00 performed bilateral eminectomies and repositioned the left TMJ articular discs. She actually had some improvement following that surgery, but then her granddaughter, age 2-1/2, accidentally hit her with her head underneath Tammi’s mandible, and she heard a loud cracking noise. On 02/07/02, Dr. Markowitz took Tammi back to surgery and performed bilateral meniscectomies and placed ear cartilage. Tammi has not done well since that surgery and feels that her mouth is sort of stuck open now where she can’t open wide and she can’t close. 

She gets headaches on a daily basis, and they are usually at the worst at around noon, when they are about a level of 8. They occur in the posterior head/temporal area and come around to the frontal area at times. The left side occurs more frequently than the right side. She rates her TMJ pain at 10, overall pain on an average day at 9, jaw function at 10, diet at 9, and disability at 8. When she is under stress, it increases her pain levels. She has a 21-year-old son, who got a viral carditis and is going to require a heart transplant. She just found this out in March. She is not aware of nocturnal clenching or bruxism.

Current Medications

Levoxyl 0.15 mg q.d. 
Diazepam 5 mg t.i.d. 
Amitriptyline 50 mg t.i.d.
Neurontin 300 mg q.i.d. 
Lortab 1 to 2 tablets q.d.
Advil approximately 4 tablets per day

Patient Concerns

Basic concerns that Tammi has currently include the following:

Inability to open her mouth
Inability to shift her jaw from side-to-side
Inability to close down
Extremely difficult to eat and chew
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Pain through the jaws, neck, and shoulders
Earaches 
Ringing in the ears

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Tammi has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship measures about 5 mm. Maxillary dental midline is shifted to the left about a millimeter. Mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline, but the chin is just slightly to the right 1 to 2 mm. 

In profile view, the maxilla may be retruded just a little bit, maybe 3 mm or so. The mandible may be just slightly retruded but not more than probably 5 to 8 mm at the most. Chin-neckline is not well-defined.

Intraorally, Tammi has all of her lower teeth back through the first molar on the left side and second molar on the right side. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She does have a lot of dental caries and areas of decalcification. She has just a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side. She has an end-on incisal relationship. She has a Class III cuspid relationship on the left side as well. A little bit more Class III on the left side as compared to the right side. She occludes only on her second molars on the right side and has an open bite from the right second molar all the way around through and including all the left posterior teeth. She has an end-on incisor relationship. 

Maximal incisal opening is 2 mm. Excursive movements in each direction are 0. She has an anterior open bite of about 2 mm, although she can close it down to about 1 mm. 

To palpation, she has high moderate to severe tenderness over the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, styloid areas, SCMs, posterior neck, and moderate tenderness over the shoulders. Her right frontal nerve is nonfunctional, and she may have a little bit of lag in the mandibular branches. She has numbness in the right temporal area. Actually, Tammi is able to open up to about 4 mm, and I was able to get a look at the oropharynx reasonably well, and it appeared relatively clear except the uvula is a little bit large. 

Nasal airway looks fairly good at least on the anterior part. No significant evidence of inflammation and appears to have adequate airway.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the mandibular left second molar. She has root canals on the maxillary left cuspid, first and second bicuspids. A moderate amount of restorations are present. Some carious lesions are seen. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Condylar heads appear large, particularly the left one, and there appears to be perhaps some evidence of significant arthritis and possible ankylosis in the joint areas. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Nasal airway appears clear. Mandible appears elongated on the left side as compared to the right side probably by 4 to 5 mm. Occlusal plane, however, appears relatively level.

Right TMJ tomogram shows there appears to be reactive bone that has formed in the fossa and is going down around the posterior aspect of the condyle. Virtually no joint space present, and it appears that there is evidence of bony ankylosis of this joint. Very significant amount of heterotopic bone that is growing down posterior the head of the condyle. 

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with some significant arthritis changes. The articular eminence is quite shallow. Appears to be bone on bone contact there. There could be possible fibrous or bony ankylosis in the joint area. Condyle appears to be actually postured forward and is not seated into the joint. Significant hockey stick shape curvature to the condylar head.

On opening, there is virtually no transitory movements at all of either joint. Both condyles are sitting forward in the fossa which may explain the Class III occlusion and the end-on incisor relationship. 

Cephalometrically, she has a Class I skeletal jaw relationship, although she has an end-on incisor relationship, and it appears that only her second molars touch and all other teeth are out of occlusion. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm at the base of the tongue and at the base of the soft palate. There is a decreased oropharyngeal airway. Maxillary incisors are in quite significant vertical inclination. Turbinates don’t look excessively enlarged in this x-ray. 

If Tammi opens her jaws at all, it decreases the tinnitus, but when she closes down, it increases it. The tinnitus is greater on the left side as compared to the right side. Tammi has no problems wearing any type of jewelry. She has no reaction at all. In fact, she has really cheap earrings on today and has no problem. 

Tammi had to stop work about three months ago because of her severe pain problems and her debilitation. 

Basic Diagnoses

Based on clinical, radiographic, and MRI analyses, Tammi’s diagnoses are as follows:

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and ankylosis 
Class III occlusal relationship
Anterior open bite extending from right first molar around and including all of the left posterior teeth
Missing mandibular left second molar and all four third molars
Severe TMJ pain
Severe headaches 
Severe myofascial pain
Earaches 
Tinnitus
Vertigo

Recommended Treatment

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, debridement, mandibular posterior repositioning, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)
Application of arch bars

Postsurgical jaw rehabilitation as necessary

Other Systems

Tammi has no problems with any other joints. She had a urinary tract infection about one year ago and was treated for that. She gets polyuria somewhat now, but she feels it may be medication related. She had a total hysterectomy in 1988. The hysterectomy was done because one of the ovaries had attached itself to her colon, and her uterus was enlarged. They did leave one ovary, so she actually had just a partial hysterectomy. When she did have her period, she did have excessive pain. She has had no miscarriages but has two children, ages 21 and 23. She had an abnormal Pap smear x 1. She was treated with antibiotics. She does get vaginal yeast infections when she is on antibiotics. She does have generalized periodontitis. She gets occasional sinus problems. She smokes two packs per week and has done this for 20 years. She gets earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo. She had bronchitis x 1 in December of 2002. She does have some irritable bowel symptoms, and she gets occasional abdominal pain and cramping. She gets occasional diarrhea also. She does have some chronic fatigue problems and has thyroid problems with hypothyroidism and takes Levoxyl for it. She has not been exposed to any birds. She has had cats all of her life and one cat did catch birds. No exposure to dogs. No exposure to hoofed animals. She has no implants in her systems. She has had her gallbladder removed. She has had her appendix removed as well. 