BLAIRE METCALFE							12/27/2011

Blaire is 22 years old, birth date 07/17/1989.  She was referred by Sharon Michie and Claire Logan. 

Primary concerns that Blaire has include the following:

She is a predominant mouth breather particularly at night.
Front teeth do not come together.
Her bite is changing and shifting.
Speech affected.

Blaire has had previous orthodontics from about the age of 12 to 14 by Dr. Jim Compton and Dr. Boren.  She has occasional popping in her joints particularly when she gets under stress and clenches a lot, but otherwise joints apparently function reasonably well.  She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, nor myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function, diet and disability all at 0.  She has no earaches or tinnitus, but she does get vertigo particularly if she stands up quickly.  No hearing loss.  Her shoulders pop out of place and she had surgery about a year ago on her left ankle and this still bothers her some.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and also some during the day.  She may have some mild snoring and some mild daytime somnolence.  She is predominantly a mouth breather at nighttime but also during the day.  The only medication she currently takes is Adderall XR.

In frontal view, Blaire has some slight increased prominence of the right angle of the mandible compared to the left side by probably 3 to 4 mm.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm.  The maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are pretty much on the facial midline.  The chin may be just slightly to the left side probably about 2 or 3 mm.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 3 to 4 mm.  The chin is retruded about 8 mm.  The chin neckline is a little bit short.  The lower third face is somewhat elongated and lip incompetence is about 12 mm.  Intraorally, Blaire has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer.  Teeth appear to be nicely aligned and level.  Roots are prominent through the buccal mucosa.  Attached gingiva is extremely thin around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has some palatal tori.  She has some mandibular tori, although they are quite small at this time.  She is basically a Class I cuspid relationship bilaterally and has about 2 to 2.5 mm anterior open bite.  That open bite begins at the right first bicuspid area and goes around to the left first bicuspid area.  The open bite is just slightly greater on the right side than the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  The tonsils have previously been removed.  Transversely, the occlusal plane appears fairly level.  There is a posterior yaw in the maxilla and mandible with the posterior structures being rotated to the right side about 2 to 3 mm.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  The septum may be deviated a little bit off towards the left side.  To palpation, Blaire has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, she did have a pop on one side initially, but then it smoothed out.  It may have been coming over the articular eminence on the right side.  Otherwise, the joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  The maximal incisal opening is about 55 mm.  The excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that the four third molars are gone, although it appears that there is a little piece of the  maxillary right third molar that may have been left behind.  The turbinates appear enlarged.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  The right mandibular condylar head and neck are larger than the left side.  There is a longer length as well.  The entire head of the condyle is larger on the right side as compared to the left side.  

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  She has a little bit of thickening of the sinus membrane on the floor of the sinus on the right side.  There is sort of a duplicated nasal septum present deviating off towards the right side of the nose.  The superior aspect of the septum is quite wide.  The left sinus looks clear.  

Axial view shows that there appears almost two septums running posterior and in close proximity to the inferior turbinates.  The left sinus looks clear, but the right sinus has thickening of the sinus membrane at the posterior aspect of the sinus wall. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The articular eminence is fairly steep.  The joint space appears fairly well balanced and I suspect the disc is in good position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is larger in anteroposterior width and also appears to have a longer condylar head and neck on this side.  The articular eminence is more shallow on this side as compared to the opposite side.  The joint space appears fairly well balanced.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  There appears to be reasonably good vertical joint space, although slightly decreased at the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width.  The joint space appears fairly well balance except at the lateral aspect of the joint there is decreased joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is anterior vertical maxillary excess and perhaps some mild mandibular vertical excess.  There is a high occlusal plane angle.  The oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 8 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 4 mm.  The occlusal plane is moderately steep.  There is almost a 13 mm lip incompetency present.  The lower teeth are above the lower lip level.  

Basic diagnoses for Blaire would be as follows:

Anterior maxillary vertical hyperplasia, but AP hypoplasia. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Anterior open bite of 2.5 mm.
High occlusal plane angle.
Open bite extending from left first bicuspid through right first bicuspid.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2.5 mm.
Hypertrophied turbinates causing nasal airway obstruction.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Over angulation of the lower incisors.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies (currently 			cuspids are tipped mesially with inadequate room between the lateral 			incisors and cuspids).  Be sure to rotate the mesial of the cuspids labially 			particularly on the right side. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth 			removing 2.5 mm of tooth structure and retract. 
2.	Surgery.  
	a.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior maxilla superiorly 			and advance it slightly as well as level the curve of Spee with 				segmentation of the maxilla.  
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a 				counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Vertical reduction and AP augmentation genioplasty.
	d.	Partial inferior turbinectomies.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.