ALIZA METZNER									10-16-02

Aliza is 48 years old and referred by Dr. Douglas Hudson, 1016 Country Club Drive, Moraga, CA  94595.

Patient History

Aliza first was aware of TMJ problems in the early 1980s. Her first treatment involved splint therapy in 1984. Since that time, she has been in splint therapy constantly since 1984. She has had at least four splints and some that she finally has worn through. She had orthodontics as a teenager but had a crossbite, and this was not corrected. She has seen Dr. Hudson since 1996. She has been in physical therapy for one year. She also has had some biofeedback treatment in the past as well. She also has seen two oral surgeons, Dr. John Dann and Dr. Craig Bloom. 

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her neck, back, left elbow, thumbs, and right big toe. She also has bunions. She has a history of Raynaud syndrome. In the past, she also was diagnosed as having a mild autoimmune disorder for which no specific name has been designated yet. She feels that her head is in a vice all the time and rates her headache level about a level of 5 in the temporal and posterior head area, rates her TMJ pain at 6, overall pain at 5, jaw function at 2, diet at 3, and disability at 2. 

Patient Concerns

TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Pain through the jaws.
Pain through the neck.
Can’t get her jaws into a comfortable position.
Bite and jaws are not lined up properly.
Difficult to close her mouth, and she sometimes has to actually support her lower lip to get her lips to close and keep from drooling.
Snoring.
History of holding her breath when sleeping.

Current Medications

Currently she takes two medications:
Trazodone 100 mg q.h.s. 
Progone B 8 tablets nightly (for menopause).
Fosamax.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Aliza has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 1.5 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Nasal tip is just a little bit off to the left side about 2 mm. Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off towards the left side. Chin is probably about 5 to 6 mm off towards the left side. Left side of the jaw is vertically short by probably about 4 or 5 mm compared to the right side. Right side of the face is more full than the left side by probably 4 or 5 mm. Actually it is the left side that appears somewhat deficient compared to the right side.

In profile view, Aliza has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose. Chin appears retruded. Chin-neckline is not well defined. Chin is probably about 10 to 12 mm AP deficient.

Intraorally, Aliza has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. She appears to have good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. In centric relation, she has a Class II end-on occlusion on the left side by about 3 mm and on the right side by probably about 3 mm as well. Aliza tends towards a buccal crossbite on the right side and a little tendency towards a buccal crossbite particularly posteriorly on the left side. Aliza has a transverse cant in the maxillary occlusion with the left side being 2 to 3 mm higher than the right side and the same is true in the lower arch. AP symmetry of the lower arch is fairly good. AP symmetry of the upper jaw is reasonably good as well. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is of moderate length. Faucial pillars appear to have more of an anterior position. 

Intranasally, the nasal septum is deviated severely off towards the left side and appears to create severe nasal airway obstruction. Left side appears a little bit more open. Holding the right nostril open significantly improved her ability to breathe through the right side of her nose. This is probably due to the decreased sinus nostril on the right side due to the severe deviation of the nasal septum towards the right side. Columella is wide at the base also on the left side and mainly due to the septum being kicked off that way so far. It significantly decreases the functional airway through the nares. She has bilateral TMJ crepitation in the joints with the right side being worse than the left side. To palpation, she has moderate and high moderate pain to palpation around the temporalis, masseters, TMJ areas, moderate pain to palpation in the medial pterygoids, styloid areas, and milder tenderness in the posterior neck area. She has essentially 0 overbite relationship. Maximal incisal opening is 47 mm and opening without significant pain 25 mm. Excursive movement to the right 11 mm and to the left 8 mm. The excursive movements are uncomfortable for her.

Aliza feels that she has nocturnal clenching and bruxism. She at times will wake up feeling as though she was punched in the jaw, particularly on the right side. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Sinuses look clear. Nasal airway looks reasonable, although there may be some obstruction on the right side. Left mandibular condyle appears much smaller than the right side both in anteroposterior dimension as well as vertical dimension. 

Waters view shows that there is a severely deviated nasal septum off towards the right side. Turbinates on the left side appear larger than the right one because of a deviated septum. Sinuses appear clear. Mandibular asymmetry is noted with the left side being shorter in a vertical dimension.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that actually has reasonable morphology. Joint space looks reasonably well balanced. May be a little bit decreased vertically. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have undergone some resorption and appears short vertically. Anterior beaking is present. Increased joint space is present, and the joint space looks much greater than normal. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

On opening, there is reasonably good translation of both joints with it being just a little bit better on the right side as compared to the left side.

Cephalometrically, Aliza has a Class II skeletal, Class II occlusal relationship with an overjet of about 2 to 3 mm and 0 overbite relationship. Oropharyngeal airway actually looks reasonably good, although she does give a history of snoring. Tongue, however, fills what appears to be the entire oral cavity. She has a tooth-size discrepancy of about 2 mm with the lower anterior teeth being larger than the upper anteriors.

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ severe reactive arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe degenerative changes.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with significant degeneration.
AP mandibular deficiency and asymmetry.
Maxillary posterior vertical deficiency and asymmetry.
Class II occlusion.
Buccal crossbite on the right side.
Transverse asymmetry with the left side being 2 to 3 mm higher than the right side.
Increased fullness of the face on the right side as compared to the left side.
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Severely deviated nasal septum.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Severe nasal airway obstruction particularly on the right side.
Snoring.



Recommended Treatment

CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

Consider evaluation at the environmental center to test for hypersensitivities to materials in the prostheses

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure and closing the spacing.

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, meniscectomies, reconstruction, and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to downgraft the posterior aspect and correct any transverse discrepancies and vertical discrepancies that may be present.
Nasal septoplasty.
Partial inferior turbinectomies.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion