JOHN MEYER									11/16/2007

John is 44 years old and is referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich.  He is precancerous growth in his bladder in the past.  He has had his appendix out and he has had some eye surgery.  Otherwise, he is in good health.  He takes Alavert one per day.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Headaches.
Jaw joint pain and jaw pain.
Difficulty swallowing.
Snoring.
Difficulties breathing through the nose.
Bite is off.
Progressive worsening facial asymmetry. 

John believes his problems began when he was about 29 years old when he began developing noises and discomfort in his jaw joints.  As long as John can remember, he has always had some facial asymmetry present.  However, he does feel that that asymmetry has continued to get worse for him.  John was born three months premature.  He is not sure if this has any contributory factor to his current situation.  

John smoked for about 25 years and quit about 1-1/2 years ago.

In frontal view, John has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 28 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is probably y-2.  Maxillary midline may be 1 mm off to the left.  The nasal tip is about 1 mm off to the right.  Mandibular dental midline is probably 6 to 7 mm off to the right side.  Chin is probably about 14 to 15 mm off to the right side.  Maxilla is retruded AP-wise probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Chin is deficient by probably about 15 mm.  Intraorally, John has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  The cuspids are crowded out of the arch.  Some small spacing around the central incisors.  He appears to have good attached gingiva.  Arch is probably fairly symmetric anteroposteriorly if the lower jaw was aligned properly.  In the upper arch, John has his cuspids blocked out of the arch particularly on the left side where it is completely blocked out.  It is just partially blocked out on the right side.  He has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the left side and is a Class III cuspid relationship on the left side.  He has an anterior crossbite and right posterior crossbite.  He has probably about a 2 mm vertical discrepancy with the right cuspid being higher than the left cuspid in the upper arch.  John has an extremely long uvula but the soft palate and faucial pillars all appear relatively normal as do the tonsils.  Turbinates appear relatively moderate in size.  The septum is deviated off towards the right side.  Holding the nostril open particularly on the left side improved his breathing abilities through his nose.  He does have moderate snoring and some moderate daytime somnolence.  Currently he is not aware of any difficulties awakening and unable to breathe but he has had that in the past.  He does wear the Breath Rite strips on his nose to help open his nasal passages at night and this seems to help.  There are times when he does not sleep well.  To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles and moderate over the left TMJ.  Joints for the most part seem to function relatively smooth except when he opens real wide he feels a popping noise in his joints.  
JOHN MEYER				11/16/2007				Page 2

Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm.  Excursive movements to the right 4 mm, left 9 mm.  He can open to 23 mm and be fairly comfortable.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary right first molar and maxillary right second molar.  The third molar is present.  In fact, all the third molars are erupted in place.  There is a root canal in the mandibular right first molar.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  I cannot see the top of the condyle on the left side.  Severe crowding in the lower anterior arch and upper arch.

Waters view shows that the bony septum is quite wide and deviated from side-to-side.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  There appears to be some obstruction particularly on the left side.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic.  Joint space appears decreased vertically and posteriorly.  A little bit of beaking present on the condyle.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit elongated.  Decreased joint space vertically and posteriorly.  Articular eminence is relatively flat.  On opening, there is moderate translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he is a skeletal Class III relationship with relatively high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway actually looks fairly good.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Left mandibular condylar osteochondroma versus osteoma.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation without reduction on the right side and with reduction on the left side. 
Deviated mandibular prognathism off to the right side.
Maxillary hypoplasia and asymmetry. 
Severe Class III occlusal relationship on the left side, Class III end-on relationship on the right side.
High occlusal plane angle. 
Anterior and right posterior crossbite. 
All four bicuspids blocked out of the arch.
Missing maxillary right second molar.
  Retained all four third molars.
  Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm higher than the 
  left side. 
  Maxillary dental midline shifted 1 mm to the left, mandibular dental midline shifted 6 to 
        7 mm to the right and chin shifted 14 to 15 mm to the right.
  Deviated nasal septum. 
  Nasal airway obstruction.
  TMJ pain. 
JOHN MEYER				11/16/2007				Page 3

  Headaches. 
  Severe crowding in lower anterior arch and severe crowding in maxillary anterior arch. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Extract maxillary left third molar and mandibular left and right third molars as  well as the bilateral mandibular first bicuspids and maxillary left first bicuspid. 
Align and level maxillary arch to try to close up the right second molar extraction space distalizing the molars and bicuspids and advancing the third molar forward.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery.
Left mandibular condylar ostectomy.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the occlusal plane transversely and anteroposteriorly as well as correct any transverse deficiencies and advance the maxilla. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition the mandible in a counterclockwise direction as well as shift it towards the left along the facial midline.
Nasoseptoplasty. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.