SHERRY MEYER									02-07-03

Sherry is referred by William R. Currie, DDS, and Fredrick L. Hecht, DMD, 338 Alexander Spring Road, Ste. B, Carlisle, PA  17013.

Current Medications

Depakote 500 mg t.i.d.
Lithobid 300 mg q.d. (for bipolar reaction)
Neurontin 300 mg, 5 per day
Synthroid 0.2 g per day

Patient History

Sherry’s problems began in September of 1994 when she was involved in an MVA and went through the windshield. Her jaw problems got progressively worse. She apparently developed clicking and popping in her jaw joints and associated pain and dysfunction. In 1997, she had bilateral TMJ Christensen total joint prostheses placed by Dr. Robert Beaudry in Camp Hill, Pennsylvania. She was unable to open her mouth after that, so shortly after the first surgery, he took her back and did bilateral coronoidectomies. Since then, she has had numerous IV general anesthesias with forced openings, and this has occurred at least 10 times. She gets earaches bilaterally, tinnitus, vertigo, and she has hearing loss. She is aware of nocturnal clenching and sometimes even during the day that will happen. She has numbness to the right lower lip and chin and a little bit in the upper lip as well on that side. Facial nerve appears to be intact. She gets daily headaches that occur in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area at a level of about 8, although there are some days that it is at a lower level at around 4. She rates her TMJ pain at 8, overall pain on an average day at about 9, jaw function at 7, diet at 6, and disability at 8. 

Patient Concerns

Severe headaches
Severe TMJ pain
Severe limitation in her jaw function
Extreme difficulties eating and chewing
Significant balance problems
Loss of sensory innervation to the lower right lip and chin area
Some facial nerve dysfunction perhaps on the right side
Muscle dystonia around the cheeks and orbital area and up into the temporal areas
Snoring
Apneic episodes witnessed by her husband

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Sherry has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 5 mm. Maxillary dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm to the right. Chin is also shifted just a little bit toward the right.

In profile, upper lip may be retruded maybe 2 to 3 mm. Chin is retruded about 15 mm. Chin-neck angle is absent. 

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth and upper teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class II end-on occlusion on the right side by about 2 mm, and on the left side, it is a little closer to Class I. She has an anterior deep-bite of about 5 mm. Transversely, the occlusal plane is reasonably level. Incisal opening maximally is about 20 mm but only about 10 mm without significant pain. Excursive movements are less than 1 mm in each direction. 

To palpation, she has severe pain over the masseter muscles, TMJs, moderate to severe pain over the styloid areas, SCMs, medial pterygoid areas, and moderate pain over the temporalis, posterior neck, and shoulder areas. 

Sherry states that during the surgery the doctor took hip bone and apparently took some fat to graft. I could only assume he must have put the bone graft above the fossa shell and would presume he may have placed the fat around the prostheses. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses are clear. Turbinates look relatively small, and nasal airway looks good. A lot of scatter involved here. There are bilateral Christensen total joint prostheses present. Right mandibular component appears to have some of its screw holes sitting over the inferior alveolar nerve canal. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows the presence of the Christensen total joint prostheses. Mandibular component may be forward a little bit, and one of the screws may be fairly close to the inferior alveolar canal. Difficult to tell if there is any reactive bone directly around the prosthesis. Evidence of a previous coronoidectomy is also seen. May be some calcifications that have developed in that area. Styloid process is elongated and overlaps the posterior border of the mandible.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a Christensen total joint prosthesis. There does appear to be some bone growing over the posterior aspect of the fossa component on this view. Styloid process is quite elongated and appears to overlap the posterior border of the mandible. 

PA ceph shows good nasal airway. Sinuses appear clear. Screws appear to be in place in the fossa component as well as the mandibular component. No obvious areas of fracture. Appears a little bit cloudy on the medial side of the prosthesis, but difficult to tell if there is reactive bone in that area.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the styloid processes are fairly prominent bilaterally. She has a slight Class II occlusal relationship. Slight vertical difference in the vertical height of the ramus on one side compared to the opposite side. Oropharyngeal airway actually looks reasonably good. However, the head is tilted up quite a ways. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ previously placed Christensen total joint prostheses
Hypersensitivity to materials in the Christensen TMJ prostheses
Severe headaches 
Severe TMJ pain
Severe myofascial pain
Heterotopic and reactive tissue in the TMJ area
Hypertrophied styloid processes
Earaches 
Tinnitus 
Vertigo
Hearing loss

Recommended Treatment

CT scan versus tomograms including coronal and sagittal views to determine if reactive heterotopic bone is present around the prostheses bilaterally 

Testing at the Environmental Center at Dallas for hypersensitivities to the materials in the current prostheses and for the materials in the TMJ Concepts prostheses

Surgery
Bilateral removal of Christensen total joint prostheses
Thorough debridement of the jaw and jaw joint area including removal of reactive/heterotopic bone
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral styloidectomies
Fat graft to bilateral TMJs (harvested from abdomen)
Arch bars to control the occlusion

Postsurgical pain management and physical therapy as necessary

Sherry smokes between one to two packs of cigarettes per day. She has a high sugar intake. She drinks coffee, and carbonated beverages with caffeine in them as well as eats a lot of chocolate. I recommended she stop all of these factors including smoking and intake of caffeine and sugar to see if this will help decrease her muscle reaction and decrease her pain.

She has been to see Dr. David Cottrell at Boston University, and she has also been to Johns Hopkins University for evaluations. 

She has been diagnosed as being bipolar. She says this condition developed after she and some other of her friends went to a party and some teenage kids put some kind of chemicals in their drinks. This episode was believed to cause the onset of her bipolar situation. None of the other women developed this condition. She is on medication to help control it.