SANDRA MICHAEL								06/03/2011

Sandra is 34 years old, birth date 10/16/1976.  Referred by Dr. Devek Frech, 3821 Maplewood Avenue, Wichita Falls, TX 76308.

Sandra began developing jaw problems when she was about 19 years old of unknown etiology.  She had orthodontics from the age of 12 to 15.  She had her third molars removed when she was approximately 18 years of age.  Her primary concerns are:

Jaw joints hurt when she chews tough foods, gum, or smiles too much.
Jaws do not fit together well.  

She gets headaches about 2 a month at about a level of 8 in the right frontal and temporal area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 1, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 1, diet at 3, and disability at 0.  She has no trouble with earaches, hearing loss, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her lower back and her knees.  She has been diagnosed with GERD and depression.  She currently takes the following medications:

Paxil 40 mg q.d.
Wellbutrin SR 150 mg b.i.d. 
Naproxen 500 mg b.i.d. p.r.n. 
Prilosec 20 mg b.i.d. p.r.n. 
Norflex 100 mg b.i.d. p.r.n.  
APAP 1000 mg p.r.n. 
Ibuprofen p.r.n.

She does clench some at nighttime and also in the daytime if she is focused, under stress or angry.  

In frontal view, Sandra has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is 2 mm to the left and the chin is probably about 3 to 4 mm to the left.  In profile, the maxilla is probably retruded about 4 mm.  The mandible and the chin is retruded about 10 to 12 mm.  The chin neckline is somewhat short and the chin neck angle is moderately defined.  If Sandra postures her chin forward, it does give a better projection of the chin.  Intraorally, Sandra has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars with some relatively minimal crowding there.  She has an end-on incisors relationship tendency towards a cross bite at the incisors and a tendency towards a cross bite in the left first molar area.  The maxillary lateral incisors are in lingual inclination.  She has a Class III cuspid relationship being a little bit worse on the right side than the left side.  She is probably 3 mm Class III in the left side and 5 mm in the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderate in size.  There are little spurs off the septum that may cause a little bit of obstruction.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the masseters, TMJs, styloid areas, posterior neck and shoulders.  On opening, at probably about 40 to 45 mm, she has a glitch in the left joint.  On excursion movements, she also has a glitch almost with a little pop kind of noise in the left joint and on wide opening there is almost some crepitus kind of sound.  Maximum jaw opening is 59 mm, opening without any discomfort about 29 mm.  excursion movements are 8 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The bony septum looks reasonably straight.  

Coronal view shows that she has a severely deviated nasal septum off towards the left side and it almost touches against the lateral nasal wall.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The right middle turbinate is enlarged and the left one is quite small and probably due to the significant deviation of the septum.  She has some significant increased thickness of the sinus membrane in the right maxillary sinus that is consistently thickened throughout the sinus.  On the left side, there are some small areas of thickening.  

Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The right sinus has significant thickening of the membrane, although the very center of the sinus is clear.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 4 mm.  The joint space directly over the top of the condyle appears to be more normal. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased lateral joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Straight vertically and medially the joint space looks more appropriate.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology and just some slight anterior beaking towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  Out laterally, there is decreased joint space compared to the middle and medial aspect of the joint.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with decreased joint space out laterally.  The condyle has fairly good morphology.  The mid portion has good joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is probably a Class I skeletal relationship, although the occlusion is Class III.  The occlusal plane angle is moderately steep as is the mandibular plane angle.  The oropharyngeal airway is well within normal limits.  The roots of the lower incisors may be a little bit short in vertical length.  


Basic diagnoses for Sandra would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ medial displacement of the articular discs.
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Class III end-on occlusion. 
End-on incisor relationship.
Mandible deviated towards the left 2 mm at the incisors and 4 mm at the chin.
Deviated nasal septum.
Mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI of left and right TMJs.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the chin forward in a 			counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it and rotate it in a 				counterclockwise direction.
	d.	Nasal septoplasty.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  