DANIEL MICHALOPOLOUS							07/20/2010

Dan is 57 years old and referred by Dr. Scotty Bolding, 2926 West Huntsville Avenue, Springdale, Arkansas 72762.  Dan believes that his jaw joint problems began at about the age of 30 in 1982 of unknown etiology.  He has had no treatment to date.  He has no problems with headaches, but rates the pain in his right TMJ at a level 3.  Average daily pain is 3, jaw function at 4, diet at 2, disability at 2.  He does have clicking and popping that occurs in that right joint.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  The only other joint that bothers him is his right knee that is a result of a sports injury.  He is aware of clenching his teeth at nighttime and also some during the day.  Dr. Scotty Bolding has previously evaluated Dan and diagnosed him with an osteochondroma of the right mandibular condyle.  

In frontal view, Dan has fairly good facial symmetry and balance.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is -3 mm.  The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline and chin.  In profile view, Dan is AP deficient in the maxilla about 6 mm and is about 15 mm AP deficient in the chin area.  The chin neckline is somewhat short and chin neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, Dan has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has adequate attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, Dan has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  Dan has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship and an anterior deep bite of about 5 to 6 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  Uvula is moderately elongated, but soft palate and fascial pillars appear relatively normal.  The maximum incisal opening is 45 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 9 mm, to the left 8 mm.  To palpation, he has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, the right joint functions smoothly most of the time, but he occasionally had a pop at probably about 35 mm of opening.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated significantly off to the left side.  The right turbinate is quite large and the left one is of more normal size.  The right turbinate appears to block most of the nasal airway.  The turbinate almost comes to the left of the midline of the nasal floor.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is level.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of impacted maxillary third molars and mandibular left third molar.  The mandibular left third molar is horizontally impacted.  The nasal septum is deviated off towards the left side.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  The left condyle appears relatively normal.  The right joint has a large osteochondroma present.  There is an expansile lesion that extends quite a ways anterior beyond the articular eminence.  The condylar neck is quite wide and about almost 5 mm wider than the opposite side.  The lesion appears to displace the condyle downwards out of the fossa.  

Coronal radiograph shows that the septum is deviated off towards the left side and the right turbinate is extremely large and appears to cross the midline.  The sinuses appear relatively clear with just some slight thickening of the mucosa in the forward and left maxillary sinus.  Left mandibular condyle appears to have good confirmation.  There is almost excessive joint space present, but the condyle is fairly well centered indicative of probably relatively normal disc position.  The right condyle shows a sclerotic condyle with exophytic growth anterior from the condyle.  The articular eminence is flattened.  There appears to be no joint space between the osteochondroma and the articular eminence.  Posterior there is some joint space.  

Coronal view shows that the left TMJ has good vertical joint space.  There is slight decreased joint space at the lateral rim of the fossa as well as the medial rim of the fossa, but otherwise everything looks pretty much normal.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is quite a bit more sclerotic with some pseudocysts present in the head of the condyle.  There is decreased lateral joint space and it appears as if there is almost bone-on-bone contact there present.  The condyle is excessively wide compared to the opposite side.  There are areas that appear that there is bone-on-bone contact.  

Basic diagnoses for Dan would be as follows:

Right mandibular condylar osteochondroma.
Maxillary AP and vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia. 
Deviated nasal septum.
Hypertrophied right turbinate.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with sleep apnea symptoms.
Impacted third molars including maxillary left and right thirds and mandibular left third.  
TMJ pain. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Increase angulation of the maxillary incisors and 			level the arch. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Right TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total 			joint prostheses.
	b.	Left TMJ mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and down graft it 				posteriorly.
	d.	Right TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).
	e.	Right coronoidotomy.
	f.	Nasal septoplasty.
	g.	Right partial turbinectomy.
	h.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x3.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 