BRIAN MICHIE									04-19-04

Brian is 18 years old and referred by Dr. Jim Compton, 4610 N. Garfield, Ste. A-9, Midland, TX  79705, and Dr. Terry Carpenter, 3300 Haynes, Midland, TX  79705.

Patient History

Brian is in good health, but he does have some allergy problems and some stuffiness of his nose. He apparently has been diagnosed with exercise-induced asthma. The only medication he takes in Concerta 36 mg q.d. Brian has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. He may have some hearing loss. He does have a band, and he plays the drums, and they are fairly loud, so he does say that he does have some ringing in his ears from that, and he has some hearing loss in the left ear. He has sort of a rubber band kind of feeling in his right TMJ area. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Brian has fairly good facial balance in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 1 to 2 mm off to the left. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much aligned with each other. 

In profile view, Brian has some decreased fullness in the upper lip by probably about 4 mm. AP position of the chin actually looks fairly good. Chin-neckline appears relatively normal. 

Intraorally, Brian has all of his teeth back through the second molars present. Has slight lingual inclination of the lower incisors. In the upper arch, he also has all of his teeth back through the second molars present. He is probably about 5 mm Class III on the right side and probably about 4 mm Class III on the left side. Has about a 1-mm anterior open bite. Slight cant in the occlusion with the right cuspid being about 2 mm lower than the left cuspid. The lower arch might be just a little bit less with only 1 mm of vertical difference. 

Brian does give a significant history of seasonal allergies. The oropharynx appears clear. His tonsils are present but are moderate size. Does have a little bit of hyperplasia of the uvula. There is no history of Brian snoring. Turbinates appear relatively moderate in size with the left one being slightly larger, but there still appears to be a passable airway. On the right side, the turbinates are a little bit smaller, and there appears to be good airway. Septum has some curves and bends in it but does not appear to be contributing to any kind of airway problem. 

To palpation, Brian has some mild tenderness at about a level of 4 over the right temporalis muscle. No other tenderness around the head and neck area. TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is about 58 mm. Excursive movements to the left are 5 mm and to the right 8 mm. 

Brian rates headaches at 0, TMJ pain at 0, myofascial pain and headaches at 0, jaw function at 4, diet at 2, and disability at 0.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars. He has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Nasal airway appears relatively clear as best as could be determined. Can’t see the right condylar head, but the left one is difficult to evaluate and seems to be arthritic.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Moderate steepness of the articular eminence. Good joint space around the condyle. The condyle appears to have a little bit of a hockey stick shape to it. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears quite a bit larger than the opposite side. Joint space is not as clearly identified. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle appears considerably larger than the left side anteroposteriorly. Condyle appears to fill most of the fossa area. Joint space seems significantly decreased vertically and anteroposteriorly.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. Styloid processes are seen bilaterally. 

Waters view shows the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size. Airway appears greater on the right side than the left side. Some deviation in the bony septum is noted. Mandible deviated off toward the left side is also noted. Inferior border of the mandible on the right side is lower than the left side by probably about 3 to 4 mm. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows good oropharyngeal airway. Class III skeletal relationship. A slightly high occlusal plane angle. End-on with an anterior crossbite tendency of the incisors. Impacted third molars are noted. Tuberosity appears somewhat large vertically and extends back toward the posterior aspect of the hard palate. Upper incisors appear overangulated. There is a moderately high occlusal plane angle and occlusal plane. Oropharyngeal airway looks exceptionally large. 

Dental model analysis shows that there is about a 1-mm tooth-size discrepancy. Also, there is a significantly increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch. Lower arch seems to have a relatively normal curve of Wilson. Lower incisors appear to be somewhat crowded and lingually inclined. 

Basic Diagnoses

Right TMJ possible osteochondroma/osteoma/condylar hyperplasia.
Mandibular deviate prognathism
AP maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary excess
Class III occlusion 
Anterior crossbite and tendency for crossbite on the left side 
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right maxilla being 2 mm lower than the left side
Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
Accentuated curve of Wilson, upper arch
Impacted third molars x 4

Recommended Treatment

MRI of bilateral TMJs

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch in three segments:
Segment 1:  Left cuspid through first molar
Segment 2:  Left lateral incisor through right lateral incisor
Segment 3:  Right cuspid through right first molar
Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally. Consider placing a compensating step in the upper arch wire to help extrude the cuspids slightly but to allow alignment of the maxillary four incisors at their own occlusal plane level
Removal lower 3 x 3 retainer and align and level lower arch

Consider bone scan to determine if there is growth in the right joint

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, decrease transverse width, and decrease incisor angulation as well as level the transverse occlusal plane
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to align the mandible with the maxilla
Consider right TMJ condylectomy if osteochondroma/osteoma/condylar hyperplasia is determined
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor
Surgical removal of impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
