JOHN MICIOTTO									07/12/2006

John is 47 years old, referred by Dr. James Baker, 10900 Hefner Pointe Dr., Ste. #204, Oklahoma City, OK 73120.  John smokes one pack of cigarettes per week and has done this for about 30 years.  Otherwise, he is in fairly good health.  He takes Adderall 10 mg t.i.d. and Effexor 225 mg per day.  

John's problems began in March of 2006 when he was on a ladder trimming a tree and fell off the ladder striking his jaw on one of the tree branches.  He did fracture the right mandibular first molar, maxillary left first molar.  He gets significant discomfort and numbness to the right sides of his lower lip and chin area.  He went about three weeks without seeing anyone in reference to it.  Then he saw Dr. Garrett Nelson.  He took some x-rays but suggested that John take some muscle relaxers and do some massage therapy etc.  John did this for about a month and had some improvement in his situation.  However, he developed some other problems which include the following:
He began clenching fairly severely at night when he was sleeping.
He developed significant loud crepitus noises in the joints.
He has popping in his joints. 
His bite is off.

He went to see Dr. Jim Baker in Oklahoma City.  Dr. Baker took some x-rays and noted that John actually had a fracture of his mandible.  John has had a deprogramming type of splint that his dentist, Dr. Titensor made for him prior to his injury.  Dr. Nelson recommended that John continue to wear that splint after the injury he felt that this would help take some of the stress off the muscles.  Apparently all of his teeth normally touched on that splint prior to the injury.  Now the bite is off from that position.  

John gets right-sided earaches and right-sided tinnitus.  No vertigo.  His hearing may have been affected as his wife Darcie states that John has to turn the TV up considerably louder than he used to.  

John gets headaches on the right side predominately in the temporal and frontal areas at a level of 9 and these occur daily.  He rates his TMJ pain in the right side at level of 6, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 6, diet at 3, disability at 3.  John does have a severe snoring problem and some mild daytime somnolence but no sleep apnea problems.  

CLINICAL EVALUATION:
In frontal view, John has good left to right facial balance.  Perhaps some slight increased fullness in the right masseter area by probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0.  In profile view, John has some AP maxillary deficiency probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Upper lip is retruded by probably about 4 mm.  Chin is deficient by probably about 12 mm.  Upper lip supralabrale is about 2 to 3 mm posterior to subnasale.  John has all of his lower teeth back to the second molars.  He has crowns on the second bicuspids, first and second molars.  Lots of wear on this teeth.  A little bit of crowding in the lower anterior arch.  He appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  Some roots are somewhat exposed perhaps due to clenching and bruxism.  In the upper arch he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  
JOHN MICIOTTO
July 12, 2006
Page 2


There is a lot of crown bridgework on the anterior teeth.  In fact, all the upper teeth appear to have crowns on them except for the second molars.  John has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  He has about a 1 mm overbite relationship.  When he bites together, he hits first on the right fist and second molars.  The rest of the teeth are out of occlusion.  As he bites down a little bit more he feels around the cuspid area on the right side touch and he does not feel as though the left side touches at all.  Clinically, it looks like when he does bite down the teeth eventually all do come fairly close together.  Oropharyngeal mucoperiosteum looks relatively healthy.  He does have moderate to severe hypertrophied uvula and the soft palate may be just moderately elongated.  Faucial pillars appear relatively normal in width although maybe just a slight constricture there.  The turbinates maybe mild to moderate enlarged but not real significant.  The septum appears relatively normal.  Columella and nostrils appear normal in size but he does have constricture of the luminal valves internasally.  Holding those valves open significantly improved John's ability to breathe through his nose.  To palpation, he has some mild to moderate tenderness over the right TMJ and mild tenderness over the right styloid area.  The left joint seems to function relatively smoothly.  The right side, particularly on excursive movements, he could generate some fairly significant audible crepitations.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars but the presence of all the rest of the teeth.  The root canal and the maxillary left central incisor, right first and second bicuspid.  He has crowns on all maxillary teeth except for the second molars and crowns on the mandibular molars and second bicuspids.  There appears to be evidence of a horizontal ramus fracture and perhaps also there could be some fracture lines through the condylar neck but a little difficult to tell on these films.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  The turbinates appear somewhat enlarged.  

Waters view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side in the bony area.  Right turbinate appears somewhat enlarged and appears almost obstructing against the septum.  Sinuses look relatively clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit of flattening on the head.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space looks well balanced.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows what appears to be a fracture through the body of the ramus of the mandible.  There could be some relatively nondisplaced fractures through the condylar neck, but again difficult to tell with the quality of his x-rays.  The condyles appear to have an increased vertical joint space but appears to be displaced somewhat posteriorly with mildly decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles with them coming clearly out and forward.  In the open view, it appears that there may be a little bit more evidence of a subcondylar fracture that is nondisplaced and also a fracture through the body of the ramus that is probably mildly displaced.

JOHN MICIOTTO
July 12, 2006
Page 3


Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that John does have some AP maxillary and AP mandibular deficiency.  Oropharyngeal airway is probably about 4 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue just below the soft palate it measures about 9, but lower down there is an area that measures about 4 or 5 mm.  Soft palate appears somewhat elongated.  There is increased soft tissue thickness in the chin area of almost 19 mm, whereas the upper lip is about 12 mm thick and the lower lip is similar.  John does have trouble sleeping and sleeps at about 2-hour intervals.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation secondary to trauma. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
High occlusal plane angle.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Severe TMJ pain. 
Severe headaches.
Decreased luminal valves.
  Nasal airway obstruction.
  Severe snoring.
  Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
  Severe clenching and bruxism. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications.
a.  Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s. to control nocturnal bruxism. 
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch. 
Surgery.
Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction to decrease the occlusal plane.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. 
Reconstruction of the luminal valves. 
UPPP procedure may be all that is necessary if the maxilla and mandible are advanced.  
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
