NANCY MIDDLEMAN 								02/28/2006

Nancy is 49 years old, referred by Dr. James Compton, Midland, Texas.  The only previous surgery Nancy has had has been a C-section.  Nancy is in good health except for her jaw problems.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Problems with her right jaw joint.
Arthritis or deterioration may be occurring in her jaw.
Jaws are not aligned.  What she would like to achieve with treatment would be to correct jaw alignment. 

Nancy's problems began when she was about 23 years old.  She had a bicycle accident and landed on her hands and her chin.  She sustained by description what appears to be a right subcondylar fracture.  Her jaws were wired together for 6 weeks.  Her bite has been off since that time.  Nancy does get bilateral earaches and this has just started to develop in the last couple of months when she bit down on something that exacerbated her joint problems.  She has ringing in her ears but no lightheadedness or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her at this time.  She does have an allergy to Amoxicillin.  She is not aware of any problems wearing jewelry.  She does clench her teeth at night and perhaps sometimes during the day.  She has constant headaches at a level of 4 that occur in the left frontal, left temporal and in the posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain bilaterally at 4, overall average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 2, diet at 5, and disability at 2.  

In frontal view, Nancy has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Perhaps a little bit more fullness in the right mandibular angle area with a little masseteric hyperplasia in the right side of the face.  There is about 3 to 4 mm of fullness on that side.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted off to the right side probably a mm or so.  Chin is off to the right side probably about 2 to 3 mm.  In profile view, Nancy has fairly good facial balance between the upper lips, cheeks and nose.  She is somewhat proptotic in the globes.  Chin is AP deficient approximately 10 mm.  Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not real well defined.  When she puts her lips together she does have some mentalis strain.  Intraorally, Nancy has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  The left second bicuspid is rotated 90 degrees.  She has some moderate crowding and overangulation of the lower anteriors.  She seems to have adequate attached gingiva.  Lower incisors are tipped significantly to the left at the incisor tips and roots are rotated towards the right.  In the upper arch, Nancy has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has significant transverse maxillary deficiency.  She is almost a full Class II on the left side and just slight Class II tendency on the right side.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 3 to 4 mm.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right cuspid actually being about almost 3 mm lower than the left cuspid.  The lower arch also is tipped down on the right side but only about 1 mm or 2 and significantly less than the maxillary arch.  Nancy has some crenations along the lateral borders of her tongue probably due to the constricture of the arches.  Oropharynx appears clear and the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars appear normal.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated significantly off towards the right side.  
NANCY MIDDLEMAN			02/28/2006				Page 2


Turbinates, however, are fairly small in size and do not appear to cause any airway obstruction at least as best as I can see from the front.  Nancy reports no problems with snoring, daytime somnolence or sleep apnea symptoms.  Nancy has some different bite relationships.  In her centric relation, her mandibular dental midline is actually shifted off to the left side about 1 to 2 mm and the chin, however, still remains off to the right side 1 to 2 mm.  There are some arch asymmetries with the mandibular left cuspid being 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right and in the upper arch the right cuspid is 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  Nancy has a mild tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows that Nancy is missing the left maxillary and mandibular third molars and the maxillary right third molar.  Mandibular right third molar is in place.  Sinuses look relatively clear as best as can be seen.  The left turbinate appears a little bit enlarged.  She has bilateral arthritis in her TMJs with the right side being worse than the left side.  She appears to have anterior beaking in both condyles with the left side being greater than the right side.  

Waters view shows that she has a severely deviated nasal septum with some bony spurring off the right side with what appears to be fairly significant obstruction in both nasal airways.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have lost some bony volume.  Details are hard to identify but there does appear to be decreased superior and posterior joint spaces.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some significant anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space is fairly well balanced.  No definite arthritic changes present in this joint.  On opening, there is reasonable good translation in both joints.  The right joint may have some slight restriction compared to the left side.  However, on clinical evaluation on opening, the mandible does shift about 3 to 4 mm off towards the right side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiographic shows that she has some AP microgenia.  She has a Class II end-on occlusal relationship.  There are differences in the vertical heights at the inferior border of the mandible.  The upper teeth are actually in reasonably good inclination.  Oropharyngeal airway appears good.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocations with severe deformation and nonreducing, right side worse than the left side.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Slight anterior vertical maxillary excess and posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
Class I occlusion on the right side.  Class II occlusion on the left side. 
Mandibular left cuspid 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. 
Maxillary right cuspid 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. 
NANCY MIDDLEMAN 			02/28/2006				Page 3


Masseteric hyperplasia on the right side. 
Moderate crowding of lower anterior arch. 
Overangulation of lower anteriors.
AP microgenia.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the maxillary right cuspid being about 2 mm lower than the left cuspid.
Slight orbital proptosis of 3 to 4 mm.  
Maxillary mandibular transverse arch deficiency.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.  There are two basic options. 
Sub I:  Maintain occlusion Class I on the right and Class II on the left and align and level the remaining teeth.
Sub II:  Use Class II elastics on the left side and Class III elastics on the right side to try and improve lower arch by getting both cuspids into a slight Class II position.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward.  
Sub III:  Extract maxillary second bicuspids, mandibular left second bicuspid and mandibular right first bicuspid.  Align and level the arches to try and lose posterior anchorage in the upper arch but in the lower arch stabilize the posterior anchorage so that the incisors come back at least 3 to 4 mm.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Consider maxillary osteotomies if extractions are done to maximize the occlusal and functional relationships.
Consider genioplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
