NAOMI MILES								07/18/2011

Naomi is 33 years old, date of birth 05/12/1978.  Referred by Dr. Royce Reese. 

Chief complaint Naomi has is that she has hypersensitivity and partial numbness to the left lower lip and chin area.  On May 6, 2011, she had all 4 third molars extracted.  They were apparently difficult extractions.  Since that time, she has had altered sensation to the lower left lip and chin area.  The sensation has improved some since the injury.  She has significant hypersensitivity to the lower lip and to her teeth and gums.  She feels is closer to having feeling compared to closer to being numb in the involved area.  She feels she has had some improvement since the initial injury.  Dr. Reese told Naomi that the most difficult tooth to take out was the maxillary left third molar.  

I tested the patient with 2-point discrimination where she had a decreased discrimination of two points with the right side being at 4 in the lip area and on the left 10 mm.  In the chin area on the right, 2-point discrimination was at 7 mm whereas on the left it was 14 mm.  She was extremely hypersensitive in the left lip and chin area.  She could tell good directional stimulation using a camel hair brush.  She was extremely hypersensitive in the left lip and chin area.  Testing with Von Frey hairs indicated just a slight elevation in perception in the left lip and chin area compared to the right lower lip and upper lip.  She was extremely hypersensitive in the left lip and chin area.  Sharp stimulation demonstrated extreme hypersensitivity on the left side.  To cold, she had immediate sensation of coldness bilaterally, but with hypersensitivity on the left side.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Post extraction of mandibular left third molar, but likely required resection for removal.
Left inferior alveolar nerve neuropraxia versus axonotemesis with possibility of neuroma formation.  
Paresthesia with significant hypersensitivity to the left lower lip, chin, teeth and gums.  

Treatment plan would be as follows:

Observe for an additional 3 months to determine level of improvement.
If no improvement, obtain an I-CAT to determine if neuroma is present.
Medications:  Neurontin 300 mg one tablet t.i.d. to see if this helps decrease the hypersensitivities to the distribution of the left inferior alveolar nerve.
Consider possible surgical nerve repair.  

I gave Naomi a prescription for Neurontin 300 mg tablets, dispensing 90 tablets, 1 tablet t.i.d., refill x3.  She has not decided yet whether she will use the medication or not and this in part may be financially related.  However, the Neurontin may help decrease her symptoms.  