CHAD MILLARD									12-04-02

Chad is 18 years old and referred by Dr. William Hang, 101 N. Westlake Blvd., Suite 202,
Westlake Village, CA  91362.

Patient History

Chad is concerned about his jaws and what would be involved to get everything straightened up and fixed up. Chad has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, headaches, TMJ pain, TMJ noises, etc. He reports no significant airway problems. 

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Chad has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 
21 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are on the facial  midline. 

In profile view, Chad has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Chin appears retruded. Chin-neckline is short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined. Chin may be about 10 mm AP deficient. 

Intraorally, Chad is missing mandibular right first molar but has the rest of his teeth back through the third molars. Transverse narrowing of the lower jaw is present. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the third molars. Chad has basically a Class I cuspid relationship bilaterally.  Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is a little bit enlarged but not significantly. Good distance between the posterior aspect of the soft palate and the posterior pharyngeal wall and posterior faucial pillars. Some deviation to the nasal septum probably in part due to Chad’s boxing career. Turbinates are only of moderate size. It appears that he has an adequate airway, although there are some areas a little bit more constricted probably due to previous nasal septal injuries.

TMJs have good mobility. There don’t appear to be any discal problems there. He does translate well in the joints and does get a little bit of a noise as it comes out over the articular eminence.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except Chad is missing the mandibular right first molar. He has a mandibular right fourth molar that is impacted down in the bone. Sinuses look relatively clear except he does have a mucocele in the floor of the nasal sinus on the left side. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear to be clear. Nasal septum appears deviated. Turbinate on the right side appears somewhat enlarged compared to the left side, and there seems to be more airway obstruction on the right side as compared to the left side and is probably located more posteriorly in the nose.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Fossa has good morphology. Good joint space superior, posterior, and anterior to the condylar head. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with good morphology. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Good joint space is present superiorly, posteriorly, as well as anteriorly in the condyle.

Open views show good translation of the condyles anterior to the articular eminence. 

Cephalometric evaluation seems to indicate some bimaxillary protrusion. Slightly anterior open-bite is present. Some AP microgenia is present. 

Basic Diagnoses

Moderate bimaxillary protrusion
Slight anterior open-bite tendency
AP microgenia
Missing mandibular right first molar

Recommended Treatment

Orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Coordinate the arches.

Surgery
Consider augmentation genioplasty
Consider placement of osseointegrated implant in mandibular right first molar area (could require bone grafting on the buccal aspect to provide adequate ridge width)

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

Dental reconstruction to replace mandibular right first molar