AMY MILLER									02/22/2008

Amy is 33 years old.  She was referred by Dr. Ron Hammond, 120 E. Heritage Drive, Tyler, TX  75701.  Amy has had previous surgeries for breast biopsy and for endometriosis.  She has also had TMJ surgeries.  Except for the jaw problems, she is in good health.  She takes the following medications:

	1.	OxyContin 10 mg 1 to 2 times per day.
	2.	Baclofen 10 mg 1 to 2 tablets 2 to 3 times per day.
	3.	Percocet 325 mg p.r.n. breakthrough pain. 
	4.	Premarin 0.9 mg daily.

Amy’s TMJ problems began in 1998 at the age of 22.  She was involved in an automobile accident where her car was rear-ended while she was stopped. She was hit by a 1-ton van going approximately 45 to 50 mph.  This dislocated the articular discs in both joints.  She immediately had pain and headaches after the accident.  Since then, she has had significant treatment.  These include the following:

	1.	February 1998 bilateral TMJ arthrocentesis.
	2.	March 1998 right TMJ arthroplasty and left arthroscopy.
	3.	October 2002 right osteotomy.
	4.	January 2003 left osteotomy.
	5.	July 2005 bilateral arthrocentesis.
6.	August 2005 right TMJ discectomy with muscle flap and a left disc placement with suture repair. 
7.	October 2006 bilateral temporalis muscle flaps with left discectomy.
8.	October 2006 splint therapy. 

Additional surgeries she has had involves predominantly laparoscopic surgery for endometriosis in 1997, 1998, and 2002.  She had a hysterectomy in 2003 with left ovary remaining intact.  In 2005, the left ovary was removed.  In 2007, she had a breast biopsy.  Her first TMJ surgery was done in Austin, Texas.  The second surgeries were done by Dr. Lenny Kaben at Mass General Hospital in Boston.  The last two were done by Dr. Saigusa.  Other joints that bother Amy include her neck and her back.  She gets earaches, occasional tinnitus, occasional vertigo and may have some decreased hearing on the right side.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing her teeth.  

She gets constant headaches at a level of 6 in the frontotemporal posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 4, diet at 6, disability at 5.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Amy has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm.  Maxillary and mandibular are midline.  Chin midline is a touch to the right side 1-2 mm.  In profile view, she has just a little bit of AP maxillary deficiency maybe 2-3 mm.  Chin is retruded by probably about 10 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle was not real well defined.  Intraorally, Amy has of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has some  diastemas between the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she also has all of her teeth back to the second molars.  She has some diastemas between her upper teeth as well.  Slight division 2 position.  There is a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the left side by probably 2 mm, but on the right side she is closer to Class I.  On the left side, she has a little bit of space between the cuspid and first bicuspid.  She has an end-on incisor relationship and probably 0.5 mm to 1 mm  anterior open bite.  It is very difficult to evaluate the oropharyngeal tissue because Amy has a supersensitive gag reflex, but the quick look I had shows that the uvula is moderately elongated.  Soft palate looks relatively normal as do the faucial pillars.  Tonsils are present and mildly enlarged.  Intranasally, there is a little spurring off the base of the septum bilaterally.  Turbinates are moderate in size and there did not appear to be any significant airway obstruction.  To 
palpation, she has moderate pain throughout most of the head and neck area.  Maximal incisal opening is 26 mm, but only about 22 mm without significant pain.  Excursion movements are about 3 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Both condyles appear quite arthritic.  Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Nasal airway appears clear.  Right TMJ tomogram shows a joint that appears very arthritic.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow and she may have had an eminectomy performed in both joints.  Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears quite arthritic and with a decreased joint space.  On opening, there is restricted translation.  Waters view shows that she has a skeletal Class II relationship and almost end-on incisor relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway dimension from soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 8 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 8 mm as well.  Lower incisors appear to be over angulated.  Chin appears retruded.  

Basic diagnoses for Amy would be as follows:

1.	Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
2.	AP mandibular hypoplasia.
3.	Maxillary hypoplasia.
4.  	Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
5.	TMJ pain.
6.	Headaches.  
7.	Myofascial pain. 
	8.	Over angulation of lower incisors.
9.	Multiple diastemas between the mandibular anterior teeth.
10.	High occlusal plane angle.
11.	Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 1 mm. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

	1.  	Presurgical orthodontics.
a.  Align and level maxillary arch.  Close the spacing on the left side between the cuspid and first bicuspid.  
b.  Align and level mandibular arch.  Close the anterior spacing and slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 1 to 1.5 mm of tooth structure.
	2.  	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
3.	Surgery.
a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly.  
c.  Bilateral coronoidotomies.  
d.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
4.  	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.