CASSANDRA (SANDY) MILLER							11/18/2008

Sandy is 30 years old.  Referred by Allison McElroy.  For the most part, Sandy is in good health.  She has some allergy and some sinus problems.  Sandy currently takes the following medications:

Premarin 0.625 q.d.
Wellbutrin 300 mg q.d.
Zyrtec q.d.
Multivitamins.
Tylenol Extra Strength for pain.

To the best of Sandy’s knowledge, her joint problems may have begun in 2004 when she became aware of clicking and popping in the joints, but it was not until 2005 that she had developed significant pain symptoms.  Her problems were predominantly on the left side.  From May through November 2006, she had splints and a night guard as therapy without improvement.  On October 31, 2006, she had a left TMJ arthrocentesis by Dr. Howard Cook.  On January 20, 2007, Sandy had a left TMJ arthroplasty with a Mitek anchor by Dr. Pedro Franco.  She has had no surgery in her right joint.  

Sandy gets left-sided earaches, occasional tinnitus, occasional vertigo, but no hearing loss.  She has bulging between C3 and C4, but no other joint issues.  She did have a hysterectomy in November 2002.  She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night time and during the day.  Sandy rates her TMJ at 8, average daily pain at 8, headaches at 8 that occur predominantly on the left side in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area.  She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 7, disability at 7.  Sandy is not aware of any snoring problems, nor sleep apnea issues, however, she is moderately tired during the day, but attributes this to a moderate sleep area disorder.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Sandy has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline and chin may be just about 1 mm off to the right side.  In profile view, Sandy has some maxillary deficiency of about 6 mm and mandibular deficiency of about 12 to 15 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not defined.  Intraorally, Sandy has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Sandy is basically Class I cuspid with an end-on incisor relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  She has a little fibroma on the soft palate off on the right side, but it appears to be only about 2 to 3 mm in diameter and relatively normal tissue.  Intranasally, the septum may be deviated just slightly to the right side, but not too significant.  The turbinates appears relatively normal with the left one being relatively normal and the right one may be just mildly enlarged.  There does not appear to be any significant nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, she has some moderate discomfort over the left TMJ and milder discomfort over the left masseter, left retromandibular area, left SCM, and right TMJ.  On opening, she has crepitus noises in both joints.  Maximal incisal opening is 40 mm, but about 25 without significant pain.  Excursion movement to the right 5 mm, to the left 6 mm.
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has a root canal on the maxillary left first bicuspid.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Nasal airway appears patent.  She has a Mitek anchor in the left condyle.  She has significant arthritis in both temporomandibular joints.  
Waters view shows that she may have a little bit of fluid in the left sinus on the floor, but the other sinuses are all fairly clear.  Nasal septum appears straight.  Turbinates appear relatively normal in size, and she appears to have good nasal airway.  In the right TMJ, she appears to have a little arthritic changes there.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  The condyle appears somewhat enlarged with some anterior beaking.  There does not appear to be much joint space present.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows the presence of a Mitek anchor.  The vertical joint space actually looks decent.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  On opening, she has restricted translation in both joints.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she does have some retrusion of the maxilla and mandible.  Her oropharyngeal airway is only about 5 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue may be 5 mm or less.  

Basic diagnoses for Sandy would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis. 
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
Severe TMJ pain. 
Severe headaches. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 to 5 mm (normal dimension 11 mm).
Mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. 
Nocturnal and daytime clenching. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Medications:  Klonopin 1-mg tablet q.h.s. to control nocturnal clenching.
Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  Consider slenderizing the lower anterior teeth to keep from flaring them any further forward.  Remove no more than 2 mm of tooth structure. 
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol). 
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concept total joint prosthesis. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). 
Bilateral coronoidotomies.
5.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.