CHARLES “CHARLIE” MILLER						04/22/2011

Charlie is 16 years old, birth date 01/18/1995.  Referred by Dr. Michael Naboroski, 1201 W. Army Trail Blvd., Addison, IL 60101-3105.  

Charlie has some significant difficulties breathing through his nose due to allergies.  He broke his collar bone last year and had a ganglion cyst removed from the heel of his left foot.  He has had tubes in his ears, tonsillectomy, and wisdom teeth removed.  Charlie’s basic concerns are as follows:

His jaws lock up every day when he is chewing.
Headaches.
TMJ pain. 
Difficulty chewing.

Charlie has had two phases of orthodontics done.  The last phase began in August- September 2010.  He had his wisdom teeth removed in August 2010.

Charlie’s TMJ problems began be believes when he was about 6 years old of unknown etiology.  He had clicking and popping in his jaw joints even back then.  He has had no other treatment except for the orthodontics to date for his jaw problems.  Charlie gets headaches about five times per week at a level of 7 in the frontal, temporal, and top of his head.  He rates his TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 7, diet at 7, disability at 6.  The only medication he takes routinely is Zyrtec.  He gets some earaches, occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints both him at this time.  He does have a lot of allergies including foods such as most nuts, peaches, bananas, and seafood except for salmon.  He also has seasonal allergies and is allergic to latex.  He believes that he may have some hypersensitivities to the metals in his braces as he tends to break out around his mouth area and get a rash there as well.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxing at nighttime. 

In frontal view, Charlie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 0.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is 1 mm off to the left and the chin is probably about 3 mm off to the left.  Charlie has just a slight increased fullness in his right side of his face as compared to the left side as far as transverse projection.  In profile view, Charlie has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose.  The chin is retruded and he has a very prominent labial mental fold.  The chin is retruded about 15 mm.  The chin neckline and chin neck angle are not defined.  Intraorally, Charlie has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  The lower teeth appear to be tipped outwards.  In the upper arch, Charlie has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  Charlie has an end-on Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by about 4 mm and on the left side he is almost a full Class II.  Transversely, the maxillary arch appears fairly level.  The left eye may be about 2 mm lower than the right eye.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The septum is deviated towards at the left side at the base about 1 cm back inside.  Charlie has a 3 to 4 mm over jet and about a 1 to 2 mm vertical over bite.  To palpation, Charlie has got moderate pain over the masseters, TMJs, styloids, shoulders, and milder pain over the temporalis, SCMs, posterior neck areas.  The maximal incisal opening is 46 mm.  excursion movements are bout 10 mm in each direction.  As he opens and closes, he can elicit popping noises in both joints.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but all the rest of the teeth are present.  Roots of the four maxillary incisors are foreshortened.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints.

Coronal view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left side.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged, particularly on the left side and may cause some airway difficulties.  The sinuses appear relatively clear except for a small mucocele in the left sinus.

Axial view shows that the septum is straight at this particular cut.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged and appears to present with a decreased airway.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have undergone some resorption perhaps as there are some changes.  There is a little sclerosis on the top of the condyle and some anterior beaking.  The condyle is a little bit displaced posterior in the fossa.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. 

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little sclerotic and with a little bit of anterior beaking present.  The condyle appears centered.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination. 

Left TMJ axial view shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow mediolaterally.  There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow mediolaterally.  There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Charlie has got a retruded mandible and has got posterovertical maxillary hypoplasia.  The oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 mm at the base of the tongue and at the soft palate measures about 7 to 8 mm.  The lower teeth appear to be somewhat over angulated.  The tongue appears to fill the majority of the oral cavity.  
Basic diagnoses for Charlie would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction,
Maxillary vertical hypoplasia. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.  
Hypertrophied turbinates.  
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal AP dimension is 11 mm).  
TMJ pain.
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain.  
Multiple hypersensitivities.  
Short roots involving primarily the maxillary incisors. 

Recommended treatments would be as follows:

1.	Testing at the Environmental Center for hypersensitivities to titanium and 	titanium alloy as well as polyester. 
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Continue to align and level maxillary arch.  Keep lateral incisor roots 			tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for 				interdental osteotomies. 
	b.	Continue to align and level mandibular arch. 
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it.
	c.	Bilateral ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward 				approximately 10 to 12 mm at pogonion.
	d.	Graft to anterior mandible to decrease problems with labial mental fold.
	e.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 