DANIEL MILLER									11/10/2006

Daniel is 19 years old and is referred by Dr. Robert Conlon, Suite 12 Center Ave., Lake Geneva, WI 53147.  Daniel has had some previous surgeries which included colon interposition, gastric pull up and other related GI surgeries.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Asacol 3 tablets twice per day.
Prilosec 1 capsule per day.

He has no known allergies to medications.  He has been previously diagnosed as having ulcerative colitis.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Chewing and swallowing difficulties.
Teeth touch only on the very back.  
No side-to-side jaw movement. 
Difficulty in speech.
Drooling.

His primary goals are to be able to get his mouth and jaws aligned and be able to keep his mouth closed as well as to be able to chew and swallow better.  Also, the expected results would be to improve his speech and his appearance.  Daniel has had no treatment of his occlusion or TMJ status.

Daniel tends to breathe through his mouth when he sleeps and also during the day.  No evidence of snoring, daytime tiredness or evidence of sleep apnea.  Relative to his jaw areas, Daniel has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain or pain around the head and neck area.  Daniel rates his jaw function at a level of 9, dietary restrictions at 5 and disability at 7.  Tooth size analysis reveals a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.  

In frontal view, Daniel has some asymmetry in the nose with it being off to the right side probably about 2 or 3 mm.  Maxillary dental midline appears to be about 2 mm off to the left.  Mandibular dental midline appears to be 1 mm off to the right as is the chin.  He appears to have slight increased fullness on the right side of the face of perhaps 2 to 3 mm.  Daniel has fairly good AP balance between the maxilla, cheeks and nose.  Upper lip length is 25 mm and tooth-to-lip relationship is 0.  He has significant lip incompetence and has significant hyperfunction of the mentalis muscle.  He has lip incompetence of probably 8 to 10 mm.  Chin appears AP deficient by probably 15 mm.  Lower lip is everted and actually extends out beyond the upper lip.  Chin-neckline is short although the chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, Daniel has all his lower teeth erupted back through the second molars.  He has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  He does appear to have a reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch.  A little bit of spacing between the lower left cuspid and first bicuspid.  In the upper arch he has all of his teeth erupted back through the second molars although the second molars are elevated some compared to the first molars probably due to hyperfunction.  He has a super Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally.  
DANIEL MILLER				11/10/2006				Page 2

He has an anterior open bite of almost 9 mm.  He has anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites with the right side being worse than the left side.  Daniel's maximum incisal opening is 30 mm.  Excursive movements are 0 in both directions.  To palpation, Daniel has no tenderness around the head and neck area or over the joint areas.  On opening, I felt I could detect crepitus in the right joint at least but Daniel was unaware of it.  Daniel has had previous orthodontic treatment from 2004 to 2005.  Daniel was being prepared for surgery but he continued to have growth and therefore it was delayed.  Daniel has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother him.  He is unaware of clenching.  Daniel appears to have a moderately enlarged uvula.  Soft palate may be mild to moderately elongated.  Faucial pillars appear relatively normal.  As best as I could see tonsils look relatively normal.  Visualization is somewhat difficult.  The septum is deviated off to the left side with a little bit of spurring which seems to decrease the airway on the left side. The right side seems fairly open.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged on the right side.  He has wide nostrils and the luminal valves are enlarged as well.  He possibly could have some mild-to-moderate nasal airway obstruction but difficult to tell as I could not see all the way back.  

By history because of the GI problems, Daniel apparently was unable to eat or chew for his first 7 years.  His feedings were all done through tube feedings.  

Daniel has been intubated numerous times up until 7 years of age.  It is quite probable that some of the joint issues, particularly the lack of TMJ movements could be related to these intubations.  Daniel's birth defect is an esophageal atresia. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of impacted maxillary third molars and erupted mandibular third molars.  He appears to have reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch.  Left sinus appears a little bit cloudy compared to the right side.  Nasal airway is difficult to evaluate.  Condylar heads and necks appear elongated.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  Nasal septum has some deviation and he appears to have large turbinates but that is probable nasal airway obstruction. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that seems to be superiorly and posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Significantly decreased joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  Condylar head and neck appears somewhat elongated. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  It seems to be a little bit abnormally shaped.  Minimal joint space is present.  Relatively shallow articular eminence.  On opening, there appears to be virtually no translation of the condyles. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has Class III occlusion but a Class II skeletal relationship.  He has a significant anterior open bite of almost 9 mm.  Lower teeth are somewhat angulated.  He has a reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch and perhaps a slight accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.  It occludes only on his molars.  
DANIEL MILLER				11/10/2006				Page 3

He has decreased oropharyngeal airway space.  Turbinates appear that they may extend posterior to the hard palate but a little difficult to tell.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Esophageal atresia with multiple surgical interventions.
Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Bilateral TMJ fibrous ankylosis. 
Mandibular prognathism.
Maxillary transverse hypoplasia.
Vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Super Class III malocclusion.
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites being worse on the right side.
Anterior open bite of 9 mm. 
 Impacted maxillary third molars and malaligned mandibular third molars.
 Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 4 mm (normal 11 mm.)
 Slight over angulation of lower incisors.
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.  
 No jaw excursive movements.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Place brackets on all the teeth but place archwire only from first molar to first molar.  Do not incorporate the second molar in the archwire.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.  Place brackets through the second molars but do not engage the second molars with the archwire.  The lower archwires extend only to the first molars.
Surgical option 1.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction using total joint protheses. 
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy.
Consider external rhinoplasty.
Remove all 4 third molars. 
Consider uvulectomy.
Surgical treatment option 2.
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
DANIEL MILLER				11/10/2006				Page 4

Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the occlusion and expand the maxilla.
Remove all 4 third molars. 
Consider external rhinoplasty. 
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.
Consider external rhinoplasty. 
Consider uvulectomy.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Physical therapy only if necessary to help with jaw joint function. 
Consider possible speech therapy if indicated to improve Daniel's speech. 

