KATHERINE MILLER								05/27/2008

Kat is 23 years old.  Kat was actually referred her by Dr. Daniel Dugan.  Kat has had several procedures done on her nose including two septoplasties and cartilage struts placed in the lateral aspect of her nose.  She has had her wisdom teeth removed and she has also had turbinate reduction and tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy have also been performed.  She states she has a good nasal airway at this time.  Kat takes the following medications:

Lyrica 50 mg b.i.d. 
Ambien q.h.s.
Coumadin.  She has a Factor V clotting disorder. 
She takes Ativan 2 mg.  The Ativan she does not take routinely, but p.r.n.  
Zanaflex 4 mg.  The Zanaflex she takes 4 at night and 2 in the morning.  
Hydrocodone p.r.n., and she varies between 7.5 and 10 mg.  She will take anywhere from zero to 5 of those per day depending on the severity of her headaches. 

Upon until Christmas, she was on Celebrex and naproxen for the last 3 years.  Kat was physically attacked in 2004 and ended up with back injuries and injuries on the left side including her leg.  Kat following her physical attack in 2004 developed her TMJ problem about 4 to 5 months after that.  She said that she had a CAT scan and an MRI done within 5 hours of the physical attack, but she was told that there was no problems with the jaw bones or joints.  From that attack, she had two what were termed spiral fractures in the face around the left orbital area.  There were no eye symptoms and no surgery was required.  Basic concerns that Kay has includes the following: 

Popping and clicking in the jaw joints and tightness in the jaw area.
Cannot open very far. 
Tremendous headaches.
Neck and shoulder pain. 
Jaws that lock open, but also can lock shut.
She does have occasional snoring problems and occasionally will grind her teeth.

She has had a series of back injections including the facets in the lumbar area and injections up in the occipital areas.  She has had trigger injections also in her temporalis muscles and masseter muscles.  There was no improvement with the injections.  Other joints that bother Kat include her left knee, her iliosacral area, fingers in both hands of the first joint, and the lumbar area.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Kat has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.   Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, upper lips retrude about 3 mm.  Chin is retruded probably 5-6 mm.  In profile, the vertical height of the lower third of the face appears somewhat short.  Intraorally, Kat has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  There is a scar from previous phrenectomy present.  She had had a lingual phrenectomy, but still has some tethering of the tongue.  Kat has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship by probably 3 mm on the left side. She has an anterior deep bite of about 4-5 mm.  Kat has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with bite being 2 mm off.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Tonsils are gone.  Intranasally, the turbinates look relatively normal in size and the septum looks reasonably straight.  However, anteriorly the septum appears to be deviated off towards the right side and narrows the nostril more on the right side than the left side, though both nostrils are moderately narrow.  She has mild snoring occasionally and moderate daytime somnolence.  She is not aware of any sleep apnea symptoms.  To palpation, Kat has moderate pain over the masseters, TMJs, styloid areas, SCMs, and shoulders with milder tenderness over the temporalis muscles.  She has had nerve blocks in her neck, so she actually has numbness in her posterior neck area, thus does not feel pain back there.  Maximal incisal opening is 54 mm, although she could open to about 48 mm without significant pain problems.  Excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that the absence of all four third molars.  She has a root canal on the maxillary right first bicuspid with a crown on it.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints.  
Waters view shows that she has a good nasal airway.  Bony septum looks reasonably straight.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  There is a decreased posterior joint space and superior posterior joint space.  There is actually an increased anterior joint space indicative of probably an anteriorly displaced disc and a vertical orientation.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of anterior beaking.  Decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal and occlusal Class II occlusal tendency, however, the oropharyngeal airway is surprisingly open with an AP dimension of the soft palate of about 12 mm and at the base of the tongue about 11 mm.  Kat has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 3 mm.  
Basic diagnoses for Katherine would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocations with early reduction.
Relatively mandibular hyperplasia. 
TMJ pain. 
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain. 
Class II end-on occlusion.
Moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch. 
Minor crowding of the upper anterior arch. 
Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm. 

The patient is not interested in having any orthodontic treatment performed.  She understands that I cannot alter her occlusion in a positive way without orthodontic treatment.  Therefore, the treatment plan is designed to keep the occlusion as is.  Therefore, the treatment would be as follows:

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with rigid fixation to maintain current occlusion, but create space within the joints to accommodate the articular discs. 
Application of arch bars.
2.   Removal of arch bars approximately 3-4 weeks post surgery. 

I feel this treatment plan should get her the best possible treatment outcome.  