LAUREN MILLER									03/26/2007

Lauren is 17 years old.  She is referred by her aunt, Allison McLeroy.  Lauren is in good health with no major medical problems.  She takes no medications.  

Lauren states that her lower jaw has always been out in front of the upper jaw as long as she can remember.  In the past years, however, she has developed some symptoms of clicking and popping, TMJ pain and headaches.  Etiology is unknown.  She has been treated orthodontically by Dr. Rick Roblee.  She started orthodontics in 2001.  She had facemask treatment to try and advance the maxilla.  Apparently Dr. Roblee told her that her jaw is growing excessively and even during the past year it has grown more.

She takes no medications currently.  No problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  She gets headaches at least once a week at about a level of 5 and they occur in various places in the head including the frontal, temporal and posterior head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain at 0, jaw function and diet at 2 and disability at 0.  

In frontal view, Lauren has fairly good facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 16 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline may be just slightly off to the right side about 1 mm.  The chin appears to be off of to the left about 2 mm.  The nasal tip is off to the right side about 2 mm.  In profile view, Lauren has fairly good facial balance.  The maxilla may be a little bit AP deficient by maybe 2 to 3 mm.  The chin, however, has fairly good AP balance although it could be just slightly strong.  Chin-neckline is a good length and chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Intraorally, she is missing a second bicuspid on the right side but has the first and second molar forward into a more anterior position.  The right cuspid is about 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch, Lauren has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has about 3 mm Class III on the right side and probably 4 to 5 mm Class III on the left side.  She has almost an anterior crossbite with 0 overbite.  She has a crossbite tendency on the left and anteriorly on the right side is a crossbite.  Tonsils are quite hyperplastic.  The rest of the tissues look relatively normal in the oropharyngeal area.  She is not aware of snoring.  She has some mild daytime somnolence but not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  Turbinates are relatively normal in size.  Septum may be deviated just slightly to the right.  There does not appear to be any nasal airway obstruction.  Luminal valves might be slightly constricted but not too significant.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the TMJs and masseter muscles.  On opening, she has a click in the left joint about 30 mm and closing click of probably around 20.  The right joint seems to function reasonably smooth.  Maximal incisal opening is about 55 mm and she can open to about 40 mm with reasonable comfort.  Excursive movements are 8 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of the impacted mandibular third molars.  Maxillary third molars are absent.  Mandibular right first bicuspids are gone.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  Septum appears deviated at the superior aspect.  Significantly decreased vertical height of the mandibular body in the third molar area.  Condylar head and necks appear quite long in length.  
LAUREN MILLER				03/26/2007				Page 2


Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  Turbinates and septum appear relatively normal.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be fairly good size.  Articular eminence has moderate inclination.  There appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Condylar head and neck looks elongated.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There may be increased posterior joint space at least compared to the opposite side but decreased superior joint space.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class III jaw relationship with moderately high occlusal plane angulation.  Appears to have a Class III occlusal relationship.  Tooth size analysis reveals a Bolton's difference of about 1 mm.  However, Lauren has extremely thin incisor edges and this probably compensates for that because hand holding the models does not demonstrate a difference.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations with the left one being displaced anteromedially and the right one being displaced posteriorly.  
Mandibular prognathism.  
Mandibular arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid secondary to absence of a mandibular right second bicuspid.
Some AP maxillary deficiency.
Impacted mandibular third molars x2.
TMJ pain.
Headaches. 
Class III malocclusion being worse on the left side than the right side.
 Mandibular dental midline shifted 2 mm to the right of the chin midline and 1 mm to the maxillary midline.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Try to improve lower arch asymmetry by advancing the right cuspid forward 1 mm and the left cuspid distal 1 mm to help in establishing lower arch symmetry. (Right cuspid 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid and midline shifted 2 mm to the right of the chin midline. 
Assess previous records to determine if active condylar hyperplasia is present. 



LAUREN MILLER				03/26/2007				Page 3

Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly and open the occlusion.
Surgical removal of impacted mandibular right third molar.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
