MEGHAN MILLER								04/11/2011

Meghan is 38 years old, birth date 01/11/1973, referred by Dr. John Zuniga, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390, telephone #214-648-3527. 

Meghan’s jaw problems began she believes when she was about 33 years old in 2007 of unknown etiology.  As she would open her jaw, it would shift off towards the left side.  She also developed headaches at that time.  Since then, her mandible has become more retruded.  The etiology of her joint problems currently is unknown.  She has worn splints continuously since 2007 until the present time.  She had arthrocentesis x4, the last one being in May 2008.  Dr. Rex Eatmon performed the first two and then Dr. John Zuniga performed the next two.  On March 26, 2008, she had a left TMJ arthroscopy and on July 23, 2008, she had a right TMJ arthroscopy.  On November 20, 2008, she had a left arthroplasty and on July 2, 2009, she had a right TMJ arthroplasty.  These procedures were performed by Dr. Zuniga.  

Primary concerns that Meghan has at this time include the following:

Pain.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Diet is quite restricted.
Difficulties carrying on daily activities and exercising.
Consistent and constant jaw pain.
Headache. 
Back and neck pain.
Severe snoring.

Meghan currently takes the following medications:

Neurontin 600 mg q.6 hours.
Norflex 100 mg p.r.n. 
Ambien 12.5 mg q.h.s.
Tramadol 50 mg q.6 hours.
Hydrocodone 10/325 two to three per day.
Phenergan 25 mg p.r.n. 
Relpax 20 mg p.r.n. migraines (she gets migraines approximately 2 times per week).
Synthroid 0.112 mg (she was diagnosed with hypothyroidism at the age of 19).

Meghan has continuous daily headaches at a level of 5 in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally.  She gets migraines two times per week.  Her migraine headaches are about at a 5 as long as she takes her migraine medication.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 5, diet at 8, disability at 3.  She gets bilateral earaches.  She has continuous tinnitus and moderate vertigo.  She may have some hearing loss.  The only other joint that bothers her is her right knee.  She is allergic to mainly antibiotics such as Bactrim, sulfa, tetracycline, and erythromycin.  She is also allergic to Zofran.  She cannot wear cheap jewelry.  She has to wear hypoallergic makeup.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and she clenches some during the day but can control that most of the time.  

In frontal view, Meghan has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is fairly close and also just slightly to the left and the chin is probably about 2 to 3 mm to the left.  In profile, Meghan has some maxillary retrusion of probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded about 15 to 18 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is moderately defined.  Meghan has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some significant lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being a good 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  In the upper arch, Meghan has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  As Meghan bites into centric relation occlusion, she occludes only on the left second molars.  All other teeth are out of occlusion.  Transversely, the maxilla is fairly level.  The mandible is asymmetric with the right cuspid being 2 mm lower than the left cuspid.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy.  Intranasally, at least anteriorly, the turbinates appear moderate in size.  The septum deviates its anterior base off towards the left side.  The nostrils are narrow.  To palpation, she has moderate to high moderate pain over the masseters, TMJs, styloid areas, right temporalis muscle.  She has milder tenderness over the SCMs, shoulders, and left temporalis muscle.  She has a slight end-on Class II occlusal left.  The maximal opening is about 31 mm and it does not particularly pain her doing that, but it is painful when she closes.  Excursion movements are about 5 mm in each direction.  She does hear a small glitch in the right joint on opening.  The left side seems fairly smooth.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The rest of the teeth are present.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  The sinuses appear clear.  The turbinates appear to be mild to moderately enlarged.  The condyles have undergone severe condylar resorption.  

Coronal view shows that the septum is fairly straight.  The sinuses are clear.  The turbinates are normal in size.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and turbinates are normal size and the septum is fairly straight.  

Left TMJ sagittal views show severe osteoarthritic changes present in the joint.  There is significant flattening of the articular eminence.  The condyle has lost significant volume vertically and anteroposteriorly, although there is some heterotopic bone that appears to be growing off the anterior aspect of the remaining condyle.  There are some areas where it appears that there is bone-on-bone contact.  It appears there may have been a previous eminectomy performed in this joint.  There are degenerative changes in the fossa as well as severe degenerative changes on the condyle.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has lost significant volume, although probably not as much as the opposite side.  There is severe arthritis with erosions in the condylar head.  There is decreased posterior joint space.  The articular eminence appears somewhat flattened.  The joint just shows significant advanced arthritis in the condyle and the fossa also appears to be involved.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has lost some of the mediolateral width.  There is a medial extension and loss of vertical condyle directly over the condylar neck area.  There may be some reactive bone in the joint.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 1 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is severely arthritic.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 2 or 3 mm.  There appears to be small osteophytic projections off the head of the condyle.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia but anterior vertical hyperplasia.  The mandible is AP hypoplasia.  There is a high occlusal plane angle being greater on the mandibular arch than the upper arch.  There is a decreased oropharyngeal airway.  Unfortunately, the patient must have been swallowing between x-rays as the soft palate is somewhat distorted, but projecting its position the oropharyngeal airway is quite constricted with an AP dimension of approximately 3.5 mm at the soft palate level and 5 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnosis would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ severe reactive arthritis. 
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia, but anterior vertical hyperplasia. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Anterior open bite of approximately 3 to 4 mm.  
Transverse cant in the mandibular occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm lower than the left side.  
TMJ pain.
Headaches. 
Myofascial pain.
High occlusal plane angle of 23 degrees (normal 8 degrees).
Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3.5 mm (normal AP dimension 11).
Ear symptoms including earaches, continuous tinnitus and vertigo.
Speech articulation dysfunction.



Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a 				counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a 					counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.

	