MOLLY MILLIGAN									12/29/2010

Molly is 22 years old, birth date 10/01/1988.  Molly got hit on the jaw when she was about 13 to 14 years of age and apparently had a crack or a nondisplaced fracture in the jaw.  She was warned at that time that she may develop TMJ problems.  At approximately 18 years of age is when she began developing some pain.  Also about the same time, she began developing some facial asymmetry that may have started as early as 17.  Her asymmetry has gotten worse in the past few years and her pain has gotten considerably worse in the past 2 years.  Molly rates her headaches that occur about 2 times a week at a level of 3 in the frontal and temporal area.  She gets migraines about 2 times per year.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9 and she has fairly constant TMJ pain but daily it escalates to a 9.  Her average daily pain escalates to a 9.  She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 3, disability at 8.  She has no earaches, tinnitus, hearing loss or other joint problems.  She gets occasional vertigo.  She thinks she may clench sometimes at time and sometimes during the day.  She cannot sleep at night because of her jaw joint pain.  Molly had previous orthodontics from about the fourth grade to the beginning of the eighth grade.  She has had her wisdom teeth removed.  The only medication she takes is Celexa.  

In frontal view, Molly has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face, but she has asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 4 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is 1 mm to the left and chin is about 3 to 4 mm to the right.  The inferior border of the mandible on the left side is about 6 to 8 mm lower than the right side.  In profile, upper lip is retruded by about 3 to 4 mm.  The chin is retruded about 15 mm.  She has about 5 mm of lip incompetence.  Chin neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  Molly has a Class I cuspid relationship and Class II molar relationship.  She is missing upper first bicuspids.  She has all of her lower teeth.  She has some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has thin attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  Molly has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 3 mm higher than the left side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy, although the uvula is just mildly elongated.  The fascial pillars are mildly constricted.  Nasal septum is deviated off towards at the right side at the anterior part of the nose.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged, particularly relative to the transverse narrowness of the nose.  I suspect she may likely have some moderate nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the TMJs and pain over the temporalis, minimal pain over the retromandibular area.  The maximal incisal opening is 55 mm, opening without significant discomfort 25 mm.  The excursion movement to the right is 8 mm, to the left 7 mm.


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the absence of the maxillary probably first bicuspids.  Sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  Left mandibular condylar head and neck appear a little bit longer vertically than the right side.  The ramus of the mandible on the left side is longer than the right side.  Vertical height of the body on the left side is longer than the right side.  

Coronal view shows that turbinates are fairly enlarged.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates are quite large and appear to block most of the airway.  Septal cartilage is tipped off to the right side at the anterior aspect of the nose.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat elongated.  Joint space is narrow.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination and is not very long in length.  

Right TMJ condyle appears deformed with flattening on the anterior head.  Towards the lateral aspect of the joint, the condyle is very narrow anteroposteriorly.  There is increased anterior joint space and slightly decreased posterior joint space.  

Coronal view shows that the left condyle has fairly good morphology, but appears long in vertical height.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm with a decreased lateral joint space.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears smaller in size, as though it may have lost some vertical volume.  The joint space is somewhat decreased.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is AP maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia.  There are two occlusal plane and inferior border plane levels with the right side being shorter than the left side.  The oropharyngeal airway, however, appears reasonably good with an airway dimension of about 8 mm at the soft palate level and 7 mm at the base of the tongue.  The occlusal plane angle is moderately increased.  

Basic diagnoses for Molly would be as follows:

Left TMJ condylar hyperplasia and articular disc dislocation.
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia and vertical asymmetry.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and transverse asymmetry.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 3 mm higher than the left side.
Hypertrophied turbinates creating nasal airway obstruction.
Crowding of the lower anterior arch.
Missing maxillary first bicuspids and all four third molars.
Severe TMJ pain. 
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Severe sleep disorder.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior arch so the teeth 			can be aligned without flaring them forward.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Left TMJ high condylectomy.
	b.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
	c.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward approximately 5 mm at the incisal 			edge, level it transversely, and down graft posterior.  
	d.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 				counterclockwise direction leveling it transversely.
	e.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the chin forward 				approximately 4 mm.
	f.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  