KABRYN MILLS									05/08/2006

Kabryn is 16-1/2 years old and has a birthday coming up in about two weeks.  She is referred by Dr. Devek Frech, DDS MSD, 3621 Maplewood, Wichita Falls, TX.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Her bite is off. 
She gets headaches.
Problems with jaw movements.

Kabryn gets earaches occasionally but has no tinnitus.  She gets daily vertigo but no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her right ankle and her back.  Her mother states that she does clench and grind her teeth at times particularly at night when sleeping.  She gets headaches about one time per week that occur predominately in the temple area and she wakes up with these headaches.  She rates her average TMJ pain of 4, average daily pain of 4, jaw function at 5, diet at 3, disability at 5.  

In frontal view Kabryn has fairly good left to right facial symmetry, maybe slight elongation on the left side of the face.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1.  Maxillary midline is 1 mm off to the left.  Mandibular dental midline is fairly close to the facial midline.  The nasal tip is a little bit off to the right side probably 1 to 2 mm.  Chin is off to the right side probably about 2 to 3 mm.  In profile view, the maxilla appears AP deficient by 3 to 4 mm.  The mandible appears probably 3 to 4 mm.  Chin-neckline is somewhat elongated.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  Lower incisors are a little bit in inclination.  There is some crowding particularly around the cuspids and bicuspids.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva although it is quite thin.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She has bilateral posterior crossbites and anterior crossbites.  She has an anterior open bite of about 3 mm.  Intranasally, she has fairly enlarged turbinates that appear to be causing some airway obstruction.  They appear a bit boggy so at night they probably swell more.  Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear normal.  Turbinates are hyperplastic and cause some significant airway obstruction which probably gets worse at night.  The septum is relatively straight.  She probably has at least moderate nasal airway obstruction.  She has some moderate snoring problems and her mother says she is primarily breathing through her mouth when she is snoring.  She has moderate to severe daytime somnolence but there is no evidence of sleep apnea syndrome per se.  To palpation she has some moderate tenderness over the temporalis muscles and the styloid areas.  She has specific tenderness over the TMJs to light palpation.  Incisal opening is 52 mm and about 34 without significant discomfort.  Excursive movement to the right 3 mm, to the left 4 mm.  Kabryn had orthodontics at about the age of 5 where she had maxillary expansion.  She had full braces put on at about the age of 10 for about a year.  Her bite did not fit together and when the orthodontics was completed, at that time was when Dr. Frech realized there was a growth problem and elected to place her in retainers at that time and let her jaws grow.  Her bite got considerably worse beginning around the age of 13 to 14.  She does report having trauma to the face and jaws at about the age of 11.  Kabryn has a tooth size discrepancy of 1 mm. 


KABRYN MILLS				05/08/2006				Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth and four impacted third molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Turbinates appear quite large particularly on the left side.  Condylar heads are difficult to evaluate in this view.  

Waters view shows that the bony septum is deviated a little bit off to the right side.  There appears to be a large septal spur that blocks a good portion of the left nasal airway.  Turbinates are quite large particularly on the right side.  There may be a spur off to the right side of the nose also blocking the airway back in the posterior aspect of the nose.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that there is significantly decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  The disc is either extremely thin or displaced anteromedially.

Left TMJ tomogram likely shows a joint space that is decreased superiorly and posteriorly.  There is a little bit of flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  The disc may be either extremely thin or anteromedially displaced.  On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyles a little bit more on the left side as compared to the right side.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Kabryn has a mandibular prognathism.  Vertical height of the body appears somewhat short.  She has an anterior open bite.  She has a Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship.  She has an anterior open bite of about 3 mm.  Oropharyngeal airway looks good.  Slight over-angulation of maxillary incisors.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ condylar hyperplasia and articular disc dislocations.
AP maxillary hyperplasia.
Mandibular prognathism.
Class III occlusion.
Anterior open bite.
Bilateral anterior crossbites. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasoseptal spurs.
Nasal airway obstruction.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Impacted third molars x4.





KABRYN MILLS				05/08/2006				Page 3


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Align the maxillary arch at two occlusal plane levels with the four incisors being elevated at a higher occlusal plane level compared to the cuspids and posterior teeth.
Align and level mandibular arch.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and upright the incisors as well as expand.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible posteriorly.
Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
Nasoseptoplasty.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
