THOMAS MILLS									05/07/2008

Tom is 53 years old, referred by Dr. Terence Lau, 8815 Reseda Blvd., North Ridge, CA 91324, phone number (818) 886-3500.  Tom’s TMJ problems began when he was about 47 in 2001 of unknown etiology.  He just became aware as he would go to bite into a sandwich or eat that he would have clicking particularly in the right side.  Over time, he has developed some significant discomfort when trying to open to bite, for instance, a sandwich.  Relative to the tinnitus, which is one of the major problems that is affecting Tom, is that it began shortly after his foot surgery in 2004.  He was on Vicodin at that time and he noticed after he stopped the Vicodin that the tinnitus continued on and did not go away.  He also recognized that during that time he was clenching his teeth quite a bit as well. Tom has been to quite a few places including Emory for tinnitus retraining therapy and that was 2-year program that was ineffective.  He also went to the Shea Hearing Clinic in Memphis where they perforate the tympanic membrane and put lidocaine in the ear and this would be effective, but only temporarily.  He tried orthotics to help with the tinnitus and the TMJ problem and it did not correct either.  Tom also has had Botox injections into his masseter muscles, and this did not relieve the TMJ symptoms nor the tinnitus either.  The first Botox injections were done in Los Angeles.  He then went to San Diego and had multiple injections of Botox around the head and neck area and this also provided no relief for him. 

Primary concerns that Tom has include the following:  

Severe tinnitus.
Sleep apnea.
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints, particularly on the right side.
TMJ pain. 

Tom notes that jaw movements and/or changing head posture or certain neck movements stimulate the tinnitus and make it more severe and louder.  Other concerns that Tom has include the following:

Insomnia. 
Bladder and prostate issues.
Swelling in the legs and feet, probably secondary to plantar fasciitis. 
Moderate neuropathy in the legs and feet area. 

He has had previous surgeries around the head and neck area including endoscopic sinus surgery in 1999, 2006, and 2007.  Uvulectomy was performed in 2006.  He has been treated with a lower orthotic device in 2006 and then again in 2007 through 2008.  He had physical therapy also in the spring of 2006.  

He has had several sleep studies and one of the study showed that his O2 desaturations decreased to about 79%.  He was recommended to have a CPAP and the setting that he was told would be required was 17 cm of pressure.  Tom did receive a variable CPAP machine and he was able to get by on 9 cm of pressure, but was unable to tolerate the device.  He therefore was placed on oral appliances to posture the mandible forward at night to help open up his airway.  The usual night for Tom goes like this.  He takes his medications and puts his device in and is able to go to sleep for about 3 hours, then wakes up, and then he is awake for about an hour and a half.  He takes the device out during his awake time and usually because of comfort factor does not put it back in, but can then usually go back to sleep.  Part of the reason he gets up at 3 hours is to use the restroom.  The tinnitus is then usually so significant that that in itself keeps him awake and makes it difficult for him to get back to sleep.  The tinnitus for Tom is usually worse in the mornings.  Tom used to have significant problems with snoring.  Following the uvulectomy, the snoring has ceased.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Tom has fairly left to right facial symmetry.  He has some dark circles beneath his eyes.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Maxillary midline is slightly off to the left side by about 1 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is on the facial midline.  Nasal tip may be just slightly off to the right side 1 or 2 mm.  In profile view, Tom has got probably about 4 mm AP maxillary deficiency.  The mandible is deficient by probably 8 to 10 mm.  Chin neckline is much shorter and chin neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, Tom has all of his lower teeth back to the second molars.  There is some wear on the anterior teeth.  He has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, he is missing right lateral incisor and left lateral incisor with replacement with pontics, but has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has a basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and just slight Class III molar relationship and the same relationship on the left side.  He has about a 1.5 mm vertical overbite.  Tom had a UPPP procedure performed and not just a uvulectomy.  He has some moderate constricture of the fascial pillars.  The soft palate because of the UPPP procedure is just slightly short.  The tonsils appear relatively normal.  Intranasally, there is evidence of  previous turbinectomies being performed and the nasal airway appears open and patent.  He probably has some moderate daytime somnolence particularly if he cannot get a good night sleep in the second half of his sleep cycle.  He has moderate sleep apnea and a moderate sleep disorder.  To palpation, he has some mild to moderate discomfort of the TMJs and very mild tenderness over the masseter muscles and styloid areas.  On opening, he has an audible click in the right TMJ at probably about 25 mm of opening and 10 mm of closing.  On the left side, he has a much less noticeable click at probably 10 mm of opening and 5 mm of closing.  Maximal incisal opening is about 51 mm and he could open up 40 mm without too much discomfort.  Excursion movement to the right is 12 mm, to the left 10 mm.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the absence of the maxillary lateral incisors, but with replacements with pontics.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  Left TMJ appears quite arthritic.  The right joint looks a little bit better, although there is some anterior beaking present. 
Waters view shows that there is a little bit of cloudiness in the left sinus, but not too significant.  Nasal airway looks clear. 
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears somewhat large.  A little bit of anterior beaking may be present.  There is a decreased vertical joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep. 
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears somewhat arthritic with some anterior beaking and sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  Articular eminence is moderate in inclination.  Joint space appears decreased posteriorly and perhaps a little bit superiorly as well, but not as significant as the opposite side.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Tom has a slight skeletal Class III jaw relationship tendency.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 7 mm and at the base of the tongue measures about 7 to 8 mm.  Down lower in the hardware area, the airway dimension is much more constricted measuring only about 3 to 4 mm.  The soft palate appears a little bit short as a result of the previous UPPP procedure.  Intraorally, there is a little bit of a curtain effect on the soft palate from the previous UPPP procedure.  
Basic diagnoses for Tom would be as follows:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Severe tinnitus.
AP and posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Missing maxillary lateral incisors replaced with pontics.
TMJ pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:	
 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery.  
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward approximately 5 mm.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible approximately 8 mm.  
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.