ISABELA MILMO									04/07/2008

Isabela is 14 years old.  Referred by Dr. Hernan Padilla, Monterey, Mexico.  Within the past year, Isabela and her parents have become aware that her lower jaw was becoming prominent.  There are records of both dental models and radiographs that show that she had a good Class I cuspid molar relationship in 2004.  Now she has a Class III jaw relationship.  She has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain, earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  She takes no medications.  No other joints bother her.  Mother reports that she does some clenching and bruxing at night time.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Isabela has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is difficult to tell where it is because of the significant crowding in the lower arch.  Chin is maybe just slightly to the right 1 or 2 mm.  She has some prominence of the nasal dorsum. Her maxilla appears to be AP deficient by probably about 4 mm.  Chin may be just slightly prominent, but not too significant.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has significant spacing opened between the cuspids and the first bicuspids, more so on the left side than the right side.  She has significant crowding of the lower anterior arch.  The lower right central incisor root is actually protruding through the buccal plate.  She has an anterior crossbite with about 0.5 mm of anterior open bite.  Posteriorly, she is slightly Class II.  She is more a Class II on the left side as compared to the right side.  She does have an accentuated curve of Wilson in the lower arch, particularly in the molar area. She also has an accentuated curve of Wilson in the upper arch.  She has had actually upper first bicuspids extracted.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is level.  Oropharyngeal airways look normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderate in size.  The septum appears to be relatively straight.  There is a structure towards the back that is a little bit prominent in the right side of the nose.  To palpation, she has no pain around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  Maximal opening is 55 mm.  Excursion movements are 7 mm in each direction. 
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  Maxillary first bicuspids are absent.  Cuspid roots are tipped mesially.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Condyles appear relatively normal. 
Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.   
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that looks relatively normal.  Joint space may be a little bit narrow superiorly.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that looks relatively normal in architecture.  Joint space appears a little bit narrow.  Articular eminence is moderate in steepness.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a good oropharyngeal airway.  She appears to AP maxillary deficient and perhaps the mandible appears somewhat elongated.  Lower incisors are tipped forward slightly. She has a Class III cuspid relationship, but a Class II molar relationship.  

Basic diagnoses for Isabela would be as follows:
AP maxillary deficiency.
Mandibular hyperplasia.  
Rule out condylar hyperplasia. 
Class III cuspid relationship, but Class II molar relationship.
Missing maxillary first bicuspids extracted for orthodontic reasons placing the lower anterior arch between the cuspid and first bicuspids.  
Severe crowding lower anterior arch from the cuspids forward.
External nasal deformity. 
Impacted third molars x4.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continued to align and level maxillary arch.  
Remove power chain from anterior six teeth.  Align and level the lower arch closing the spaces created between the cuspids and the first bicuspids.
Following completion of the presurgical orthodontics, reevaluate patient for possible abnormal growth and residual dental facial deformity. 
Surgical considerations.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 4 to 5 mm.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies if necessary to properly align the lower arch.
Bilateral high condylectomies if condylar hyperplasia is confirmed.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.  
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
 