ALLISON MILSTEAD								 06/16/2008

Allie is 18 years old.  She was actually referred by Dr. Brian Stone when he was a resident at Baylor.  Allison had some orthodontic treatment from the age of 9 to 11.  On July 19, 2001, she was involved in a major motor vehicle accident in which three people died.  Her grandmother and Allie survived.  Allie had severe head injuries, leg fractures, left orbital fracture, and bilateral subcondylar fractures and a body fracture that I believe was on the left side.  She also ruptured her spleen and had a splenectomy performed.  She was comatose for almost 1-1/2 months.  She initially had a cervical collar on and the mandibular fractures were not identified until later.  It was approximately 2 weeks after the injury and the wearing of the cervical collar that the mandibular fractures were finally identified.  Later on, from about the age of 12 to 14, she placed back into orthodontics to try to correct the bite prior to having some surgery done.  She was followed by the plastic surgery department at Denver Children's Hospital, but after a couple of years they realized that they were unable to treat her injuries and suggested she see an oral maxillofacial surgeon.  At that time, Allie and her mother were living in Colorado Springs, and they saw some oral surgeons there, but nothing progressed relative to treatment. They then moved to Abilene, Texas, and were referred to the dental school where Dr. Stone saw her.  Currently, the medications that Allie takes are as follows:

Depo Provera injection q. 3 months.
Tylenol or ibuprofen p.r.n. pain. 

She apparently does not have too much difficulty breathing through her nose.  She may have a little bit at night when she sleeps.  She does have some mild snoring and some mild daytime somnolence.  She does smoke 1 to 5 cigarettes per day.  The only joints that bother her are primarily her left knee.  No earaches, occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo.  She may have a little bit of clenching at night.  She says when she wears the clear plastic retainers that cover her teeth at night that she wakes up with significant pain in the morning and, therefore, cannot wear those type retainers.  She gets headaches at about a level of 3 that occur on top of the head and in the right temporal area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 1, jaw function at 7, diet at 5, disability at 4.  On an average day, her pain levels gets to about a level of 4, but she will have episodes that the pain gets quite severe for her.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  The upper lip length is 18 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 6-7 mm.  The dental midlines and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile,  the upper lip may be retruded a couple of millimeters, and the chin is retruded about 10-15 mm.  The chin neckline is extremely short.  There is no definition of the chin neck angle.  She has a head posture forward neck position. Intraorally, Allie has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars present.  In the upper arch, she also has all of her teeth back to the second molars.  She has almost a full Class II cuspid molar relationship bilaterally.  She has an overjet of about 5 to 6 mm.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 to 5 mm.  To palpation, she has moderate tenderness over the right TMJ, milder tenderness over the left TMJ, right medial pterygoid, right masseter, right retromandibular area.  Maximal incisal opening is 22 mm.  Excursion movement to the right about 4-5 mm, to the left 2 mm.  On opening, Allison feels crepitation in the joints with the right side being worse than the left side.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The septum may be deviated just slightly off to the right side.  There is perhaps some mild to moderate obstruction there.
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Turbinates, particularly the left side, look enlarged.  There is definite evidence of previously fractured condyles with severe malalignment of those condylar remnants.
Waters view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off to the right side.  Turbinates are fairly large with the left nasal airway appearing to be pretty much obliterated.  There appears to be a slight airway on the right side.  The sinuses look relatively clear.   
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is actually postured forward in the fossa almost beneath the articular eminence.  The condylar neck is extremely short.  The head is significantly displaced with malunion.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows that condyle is positioned almost beneath the articular eminence with increased joint space vertically.  The condyle is not as readily seen in this view.  On opening, there is restricted translation of the condyles.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Allison has a rather large adenoid mass present in the nasopharyngeal area.  She has a high occlusal plane angle and a significant overjet of probably about 4 mm.  She has a significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway particularly between the soft palate and the adenoid mass with an airway dimension of about 4 mm.  Relative to the turbinates, the airway dimension appears to be about 3 mm.  From the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall, the airway dimension is about 12 mm, but the base of the tongue to the back of the throat is extremely constricted but may be due to tongue posture as there is an airway of only about 2 mm, but the tongue appears to be postured downwards and posterior. 
Basic diagnoses for Allie would be as follows:
Malalignment and malunion of bilateral TMJ subcondylar fractures.  
Mandibular hypoplasia.
Anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Hypertrophied adenoid tissue.
Nasal airway obstruction.
Class II occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.

Recommended treatment would include the following:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).


Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect superiorly and upright the incisors.   
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral coronoidotomies. 
Bilateral nasal partial turbinectomies.  
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.