WILLIAM MINNIE									4/8/05

William is 15 years old and referred by Dr. George Adams, 2845 Parkwood Blvd., Plano, TX 75093.

Patient History

He had a broken arm about 3 years ago and he has had 2 sets of ear tubes.  One at 10 months and one at 2-1/2 years.  William apparently had a fractured skull as an infant.  It was watched and there were no complications.  He apparently occasionally gets pain if he turns his head towards the left side and the pain occurs on the right side.  With this kind of movement of his head off towards the left side, the sensation may last anywhere from seconds to a few minutes.  Primary  concern is that William teeth don’t fit together.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, other joint problems, TMJ pain, clicking involving the joints etc.  In frontal view he has fairly good vertical facial balance.  Slight increased fullness on the right side of the face compared to the left side by probably about 3 to 4 mm.  

Clinical Examination

Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2-1/2 to 3 mm.  On lateral view, William has very good facial balance vertically and anteroposteriorly.  Just a little of AP mandibular deficiency is seen but not too significant.  The facial and dental mid lines are all pretty much aligned with each other.  Intraorally, William has all of his lower teeth back to the second molars.  He has some moderate crowding lower anterior arch.  He has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  Lower incisors appear to be retro-inclined.  There is a little bit of arch asymmetry with the left mandibular cusp being about 1 to 2  mm posterior to the right side.  


William has all of his teeth back to the second molars.  He has a Class-III end-on occlusal relationship by probably about 3 mm on the right side and perhaps a millimeter on the left side.  The incisors are in relationship with the central incisors and show about a millimeter overjet at least with the right tooth and about a 1/2 mm of vertical overbite.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly flat.  Uvula is normal in length.  Soft palate actually appears it might be slightly short.  Faucial pillars are normal in width.  The soft tissues appear good and oropharynx appears normal and clear.  

Intranasally, the turbinates look fine.  Septum looks okay.  No evidence of nasal airway obstruction.  No history of snoring.  
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows presence of 4 developing and unerrupted third molars.  The rest of the teeth are present.  



William Minnie				Page 2 				4/8/05

Waters view show that the sinuses are clear.  Intranasally on the right side,  the turbinate may be quite large and obliterating to the nasal airway, but really difficult to tell.  Right angle of the mandible is more prominent than the left side.  

Right TMJ tomogram is a little bit difficult to evaluate.  Styloid process is quite long on this side.  Anterior eminence is moderately shallow.  It is difficult to determine the joint space.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be a little bit flattened on top.  There appears to be increased superior joint space.  Anterior eminence is relatively shallow.  Styloid process also appears to be somewhat elongated on this side.

Open view shows some restricted translation of the condyles going down towards the articular eminence.  Styloid process is seen to extend beyond the posterior border of the mandible bilaterally.  Both articular eminences are moderately shallows.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph show there is good oropharyngeal airway.  Slight Class-III skeletal relationship.  Lower incisors appear slightly vertical in inclination.  Angulation of upper incisor crown to root appears a little bit over-angulated.  

Basic Diagnoses

The basic diagnoses for William would be:

AP maxillary hyperplasia and asymmetry.
Mandibular prognathism and asymmetry.
Class-III mal-occlusion, much worse on the right side as compared to the left side.
Significant crowding of lower anterior arch.
Mild crowding of upper anterior arch.
High occlusal plane angle.
Right side of the face significantly more full and prominent as compared to the left side.
Jaw and the maxilla and mandible off towards the right side by approximately 2 to 3 mm.
 Severely impacted third molars times 4. 

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch..  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to increase the angulation of the mandibular incisors

Continue to monitor facial growth and development. 

Surgery
William Minnie       				Page 3					4/8/05

 Multiple maxillary osteotomies  to advance it forward, shift it towards the right to correct the yaw and up-right the maxillary incisors
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift it towards the left to correct the transverse yaw and place it in the proper occlusal relationship.
Surgical removal for impacted third molars.

Post surgery orthodontics
            Refine and retain the occlusion




April 8, 2005


George Adams, MD
2845 Parkwood Blvd.
Plano, TX 75093

RE:  William Minnie

Dear George:

Thank you so much for referring William Minnie for consultation.  He is a nice young man and I enjoyed visiting with his mother on April 8, 2005.  William is 15 years 10 months of age.  His primary concerns are that his teeth do not fit together well.  Based on clinical radiographic, dental model and ______ analysis, William's diagnoses is as follows:

_____________________

If you have any other thoughts, suggestions or questions in reference to this treatment and plan, please contact me.  Thank you again so much for referring William and I look forward to working with you in correcting his problems. 

With best regards,



LARRY M. WOLFORD, DMD

LMW:bb
