KATHERINE MIRECKI								02/09/2006

Katherine is 29 years old and is referred by Dr. Steven Fennell, Oglethorpe, Athens, GA, 30606.  Katherine has had longstanding jaw and pain problems.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Constant pain in head and jaw.
Limited opening. 
Difficulty in daily activities because of pain.  

OBJECTIONS:
To have a better quality of life.
Decrease pain.
Increase her jaw function.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: 
Duragesic patch 50 mg.
Oxycodone 7.5 mg 4 times a day.
Cymbalta 60 mg daily.
Flexeril 10 mg 3 times a day.
Ambien 10 mg a day probably at nighttime.
Diazepam 10 mg 1 time per day.
Ibuprofen 800 mg two to three times per day.

Katherine apparently has no airway problems.  She does not sleep well at night and tosses and turns quite a bit and tends to sleep on her sides.  She smokes less than 1 pack of cigarettes per day and has done this for about 9 years. 

PREVIOUS SURGERIES:  Tonsillectomy, wisdom teeth removal, and previous open jaw surgery in the right jaw joint.  

By history she had bruxism since childhood.  She was involved in an MVA in 1997.  Katherine gets daily headaches that occur in the right frontal and bilateral temple and posterior head areas.  They commonly occur in the mornings, evenings and at night and not so bad in the afternoons.  She rates these as severe at about a level of 9.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily facial pain at 7, jaw function at 8, diet at 8, disability at 9.  She gets earaches on the right side.  She has frequent tinnitus and almost continuous vertigo.  No other apparent joint problems.  She is very much aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at nighttime as well as during the day.  Katherine has quite an extensive history in reference to treatments.  To summarize it, clicking begin about 1992.  She began college in 1995 and noticed her headaches were increasing in greater recurrence and severity.  She was involved in an MVA in 1997 and this significantly exacerbated the pain problems.  She has had 14 splints.  These were done by various practitioners.  She had radiofrequency ablation over the auriculotemporal nerve and then had another nerve treated at a later time but she is not sure which nerve.  There was short-term relief with either of these techniques.  The ablations were done by Dr. Wesley Shanklin.  In 2001, she went to see Dr. Marvin Schwartz who gave her botox injections on 14 to 15 separate visits.  
KATHERINE MIRECKI			02/092006				Page 2


In March of 2002 an MRI was taken showing that the right disc was placed.  In October of 2002 Dr. Schwartz did open joint surgery and apparently repaired a perforation that was present.  She had reasonably good relief for about one year and then the pain problems reestablished again.  Since that time she says she has been treated with medications.  She also has had physical therapy and massage therapy.  She has had physical therapy on occasions before she had her surgery and she also had it after.  Then periodically since the surgery she has had it.  Currently, the physical therapy actually exacerbates her pain problems.  She also has had massage therapy and it also can increase her symptomatology so she has backed off seeking those treatments.  

In frontal view, Katherine has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm, upper tooth-to-lip relation is about 3.5 to 4 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted off to the right side about 1 mm.  The chin is off to the right side probably by 3 mm.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusion with right side being about 2 mm higher than the left side.  In profile, Katherine has fairly good facial balance.  A little bit of lip incompetence of probably about 4 mm.  Katherine has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by probably 2 mm and on the left side she is predominately a Class I.  She has about 1.5 mm of vertical overbite.  She has fairly healthy looking gingiva.  She does seem to hit prematurely on the right side.  Intranasally turbinates look fine.  The septum looks reasonably straight.  There does not appear to be any obvious nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation, she has severe pain over the TMJs, styloid areas, high moderate pain over the masseters, shoulders, moderate pain over the posterior neck and temporalis areas.  The joints seem to function relatively smoothly although she gives a history that as early as last October she had significant popping and grinding noises on both sides with the right side more dominant.  Maximal incisal opening is 25 mm.  Opening without severe pain 13 mm.  Excursive movements are about 2 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  All the rest of the teeth are present.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Nasal airway looks reasonably clear.  She has some mild arthritic changes on the left condyle with some flattening and a little sclerosis there.  On the right side she has more advanced arthritic changes with significant anterior beaking and flattening on the end of the condyle.  No other pathology noted.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The septum is reasonably straight although deviated in the bony area a little bit off towards the right side.  Turbinates appear moderate in size though the left one appears larger than the right with perhaps some decreased airway at the posterior aspect of the nasal cavity. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little hard to define the superior aspect of it.  There may be a little pseudocyst in the condyle.  It appears that there is probably decreased superior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle may be somewhat posteriorly displaced in the fossa.  

KATHERINE MIRECKI 			02/09/2006				Page 3


Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes.  There is flattening on the head and some significant anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is more shallow than the opposite side.  There is significantly decreased joint space and it appears that there could be bone-on-bone contact.  On opening, there is very restricted translation in both joints with a little bit greater restriction of translation in the left one as compared to the right one. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she does have a slight Class II occlusal tendency.  Oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal airways look reasonable.  There is some lip incompetence of probably about 6 mm or so.  Slightly increased occlusal plane angulation.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis with the right side worse than the left side.
Severe headaches.
Severe TMJ pain. 
Myofascial pain. 
Major masticatory dysfunction. 
Earaches.
Tinnitus.
Vertigo.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
      1.  Medications.
a. Continue current medications but stop Diazepam.
	b.  Klonopin 2 mg tablet dispensing 30, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x4.
       2.  Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.  Align and level maxillary arch. 
	b.  Align and level mandibular arch. 
       3.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
       4.  Surgery.
	a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
	b.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
       5.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
