MICHAEL MITCHELL								08-16-04

Mike is 20 years old and referred by Dr. Monty Collins and Dr. Al Bishop. 

Patient History

On Wednesday morning at approximately 2 a.m. on 08/11, he was returning home to SMU and was attacked by four other men. He was knocked unconscious at least for a brief time. The motive was apparently just to provide aggravated assault without robbery or any apparent intent. He has no other injuries except around the jaws and face area. Mike feels that his bite has not changed since the injury. 

Clinical Examination

He has good pupillary level. He has good extraocular movements. No evidence of diplopia in a forward gaze or any lateral, superior, or inferior gazes. He has periorbital ecchymosis. The amount of displacement of the orbital floor is downward probably about 3 to 4 mm. He has no infraorbital paresthesia on the left side so the floor fracture is likely medial to the infraorbital nerve. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the mandible appears to be intact as does the maxilla. Difficult to evaluate the infraorbital rims. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the condyles are intact and no evidence of any posterior mandibular subcondylar fractures. Joint space looks good and well-balanced. 

Right TMJ tomograms show likewise that there is no evidence of body, ramus, or subcondylar fractures. Joint space looks well-balanced.

Opening views show good translation of the condyles. 

Waters view shows that there is some cloudiness in the left sinus. A portion of the floor appears to be extruding down into the sinus. Could be some discontinuity of the orbital rim of the fossa on the left side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal and occlusal Class I relationship. Good oropharyngeal airway is present with a little bit of adenoid tissue left in the nasopharynx but that is all. Some fractures are seen through the nasal bones, and at least on this view there does not appear to be significant displacement. 

CT scan shows that there is an air fluid level in the left maxillary sinus. Appears to be a little bit of bone extending down into the sinus. Bone is seen in the sinus cavity likely extending down from the floor of the orbit. The external rim appears for the most part to be intact. However, as we proceed posteriorly, there is a little bit of periorbital tissue and bony structure extending down into the sinus probably about 3 or 4 mm. There is some fluid in the medial ethmoid sinuses. Possibly could be a small component of a medial wall blowout but for the most part it is intact, but there is a defect in the floor of the orbit.

Sagittal view shows a downward reflection of the floor of the orbit with a little associated fatty tissue extruding down into the sinus. Appears pretty much like a trapped door effect. I do not feel that there is any significant involvement of the infraorbital rim. 

The external nose does demonstrate some fractures with minimal displacement. Has a small frontal sinus on the right side but not on the left side. There is relatively minimal displacement of the nasal fractures. There are some fractures of the nasal bone but relatively nondisplaced.

Recommended Treatment

Discussed with him the treatment options and risks and complications of each of the options.

Option 1:  Do nothing

Option 2:   Intraoral repair through a Caldwell-Luc incision and pack the sinus for a few days to elevate up the floor. Consider reducing nasal bones if there are any mobile segments.

Neither Michael nor his mother see any changes at all in the appearance of his nose. He does have a fracture of the nasal tip at this time. I have recommended that we observe Michael to see if any adverse changes occur during the healing process without any intervention. I feel that there would probably not be any significant changes. Discussed the risks of not doing anything which could involve the development of diplopia, unequal heights of the pupillary levels, and enophthalmos on the left side. The potential risks of doing the surgery would include paresthesia to the infraorbital nerve and its branches. Michael does say that when he looks downward he gets a little bit of pain in his eye, and this is probably due to a contusion of one of the EOM ocular muscles. Plan to have Michael return to see me in one month for further assessment. His mother and I also discussed that it would be a good idea for him to get an ophthalmology evaluation and be sure that he has no intraocular injuries such as a retinal detachment, etc. Michael wanted to know if he could wear his contacts, and I told him that it was possible he could have some dryness of his eyes because of the injury and affect on the lacrimal gland. He could certainly try it, but if he has difficulties with lubrication, he may need to go with his glasses for a while. He also asked about sports, and I told him after a few weeks he would have to be hit pretty hard in the eye to create any problems, but that he needs to be acutely aware that playing sports could cause a problem for him. 