BEATRICE MOLLER							02/11/2011

Beatrice is 20 years old, birth date 11/16/1990.  She is referred by Dr. Marc Lemchen, 553 Park Avenue, New York, NY 10021.  

Beatrice is in good health.  To the best of her knowledge, her TMJ problems began when she was about 18 years of age of unknown etiology.  She did have orthodontics in the seventh and eighth grade from approximately the ages of 12 to 15 by Dr. Patrick Grossman in London, England.  She did have splint therapy and an NTI device on August 2009.  In December 2010, she began orthodontic treatment with Dr. Lemchen.  She has headaches that occur predominantly in the frontal and temporal areas at a level of 4.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 6, diet at 5, and disability at 4.  She takes birth control pills, Aleve, and Advil.  She has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus and vertigo.  The only other joint that bothers her is her left knee.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.

In frontal view, Beatrice has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 6 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is a little bit to the right about 1 mm, but the chin is fairly close to being on the midline.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded about only 4 to 5 mm.  The chin is retruded about 20 mm.  The chin neckline and chin neck angle are not well defined.  Beatrice has a lip incompetence of close to 12 mm.  Intraorally, Beatrice has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has braces on all of her teeth except for the lower first molars.  The lower teeth appear over angulated.  There is some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  All of the teeth are bracketed except for the first bicuspids.  As Beatrice postures her mandible, her lower midline is about 2 mm off to the right side.  She has an end-on Class II occlusion being probably about 3 or 4 mm Class II and in that position which is very painful for her, she has a zero overbite relationship.  She probably has about a 4 mm over jet in her centric relation.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, the right turbinate appeared moderately enlarged.  The anterior aspect of the septum appears to be tipped a little bit off towards the left side.  To palpation, Beatrice has severe pain over the TMJs, high moderate pain over the masseters and retromandibular area, and moderate pain over the temporalis muscles, and mild tenderness over the posterior neck muscles.  On opening, she has a click at about 5 mm in the right side and 10 mm in the left side with it being more obvious on the left side.  The closing click is about 5 mm on each side.  The maximum incisal opening is about 52 mm.  Excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged with the right one larger than the left one.  The sinuses appear reasonably clear.  The condyles appear somewhat arthritic.  
Coronal view shows that the bony septum is deviated significantly off to the right side with a bony spur and appears to obliterate most of the functional airway.  On the left side, the turbinates are moderately enlarged, but the airway appears adequate.  The sinuses appear clear.  

Axial view shows that the turbinates are of moderate size with the right one being more obstructed than left one.  Sinuses appear clear.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show that the condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  There is flattening on the anterior head and just slight tendency towards anterior beaking.  There may be a small osteophyte off the head of the condyle.  The posterior joint space is decreased, but the anterior space appears increased.  The articular eminence has a relatively normal inclination and is relatively short in length.  

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows some anterior beaking present and flattening of the anterior head.  The condyle appears a little bit larger than the opposite side.  The articular eminence is a little bit longer in length and slightly steeper.  There appears to be just some slight cupping out of the anterior head of the condyle.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has moderate mediolateral width.  There appears to be good vertical joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly only about 2 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with moderate mediolateral width.  There is reasonable joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly only about 2 mm. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Beatrice has over-angulated maxillary incisors with vertical maxillary excess.  In the mandible, the lower incisors are over-angulated fairly significantly.  Oropharyngeal airway is constricted with an AP airway dimension of about 3 mm at the soft palate and 4 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnoses for Beatrice would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated with reduction.
Maxillary AP and vertical hyperplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
AP microgenia.
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Maxillary and mandibular dental alveolar protrusion.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal dimension 11 mm).
Deviated nasal septum off to the right side. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Impacted third molars x4.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Extract maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch closing the extraction spaces.  Keep lateral 			incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room 		for interdental osteotomies.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch and close the extraction spaces.  				Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 1 mm of tooth structure.  
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction.
	c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly and advance it in a 			counterclockwise direction. 
	d.	Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomies to augment the chin.
	e.	Nasal septoplasty.
	f.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
	g.	Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.  
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 