LAURA MOMOT									11-16-04

Laura is 40 years old and referred by Dr. Peter Crump, Webster Groves, MO.

Patient History

Laura had in 06/2001 bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies and a genioplasty performed by Dr. Ken Rotskoff. Dr. Peter Crump provided the orthodontic treatment for Laura. The primary concern that Laura has is that she has numbness to the lower lip and chin area bilaterally. If she does light tapping on her lower lip area, she can feel a tingling sensation. Also, if she touches the lower lip and chin area, she gets a cold sensation in the area. Occasionally she will get a little shock kind of feeling in the lip and chin area as well. That only occurs every one to two weeks. The problem that she has with this particular situation is that she is very conscious of the numbness. She feels that it affects her speech, her ability to eat somewhat, abilities to kiss, and she cannot tell when something is on her lips particularly when she is eating or at other times. Cold drinks will cause an uncomfortable stimulation to the gums. This affects her in the front and also along the sides of the gums in the lower jaw. In addition, Laura also has noises in her left TMJ that she describes as a stick breaking and at other times like a grindy type of noise, and this is predominantly in the left jaw joint. On the right side, she is not aware of having any significant problems there. Her lower lip is always chapped and dry. 

Laura has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. She does have some problems with a bulging disc in the cervical area, C5-C6. NO KNOWN ALLERGIES. No problems wearing jewelry. Relative to her neck, at times she will get a warm, throbbing kind of feeling down through her right shoulder, arm, and down into her hand area. This could be related to the C5-C6-related factors. She does clench her teeth at night, and she does have a bite splint for that. 

The only medication she takes is Lo-Ovral.

She doesn’t have any trouble with headaches. She rates her TMJ pain on an average day at 3, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 4, diet at 3, and disability at 0. To palpation, she has mild tenderness over the posterior neck area, TMJs, and left masseter area. 

Her TMJ problems began about 20 years ago of unknown etiology. She has had orthodontics x 2. 

Clinical Examination

She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She is missing all four first bicuspids. She has an anterior overbite of about 2 to 3 mm. She has good facial balance and symmetry. Maximum opening is about 42 mm. Opening without significant discomfort is 30 mm. Excursive movements to the right are 6 mm and to the left 10 mm. 

Neurological Evaluation

Two-point discrimination on the left side was greater than 20 mm at the lip and chin area and at 12 mm on the right side at the lip and chin area. On von Frey hairs, upper lip was 1.65, lower right lip was 2.36 at the lip and chin area and 3.22 on the left side at the lip and chin area. To brush stroke, she got about 50% correct on both sides. To sharp, she could feel sharp in the lip and chin area bilaterally, but the sharpness felt like it had to go deeper in order to get the same sharp feeling that she could feel in the upper lip. Relative to cold, she could sense cold in the lip and chin area, but it was a different kind of cold feeling as compared to the upper lip. 
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of three bone screws in each ramus bilaterally. There is evidence of a bony osteotomy for the chin with a wire in, but part of the mandible is blocked out with an interference on the x-ray. Sinuses look relatively clear. Condyles appear a little bit arthritic with the left one particularly being more arthritic than the right side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows significantly decreased joint space. There is some anterior beaking, and there is a pseudocyst in the head of the condyle that fills the entire condylar head. Articular eminence is moderately steep but fairly long in length. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that does appear somewhat arthritic. Appears to be a small pseudocyst in the head of the condyle. May be some decreased superior joint space but difficult to tell. Articular eminence is moderately shallow and slightly elongated but not quite as long as the opposite side. 

Waters view shows that the turbinates appear moderately large. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Nasal septum appears relatively straight. 

Cephalometrically, Laura has a very high mandibular plane angle facial morphology. She has a high occlusal plane angle. She has a fairly significant chin advancement procedure that was performed. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm at the base of the tongue and 5 to 6 mm at the soft palate level. 

Basic Diagnoses

Post bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies and anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy for genioplasty with screw fixation for the ramus osteotomies and wire fixation for the genioplasty
Bilateral inferior alveolar nerve axonotomesis 
Bilateral lower lip, chin, and gingiva dysesthesias/paresthesias
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and a perforation on the left side
Mild TMJ pain
Mild myofascial pain
Reflex sympathetic dystrophy to lower lip 

Recommended Treatment

Surgery
Bilateral inferior alveolar nerve exploration involving mandibular decortication and exploration of the inferior alveolar nerve
Bilateral inferior alveolar nerve repairs with direct anastomosis versus probable nerve graft (Neurotube)

Continue to monitor TMJ

Consider TMJ reconstruction in the future if symptoms escalate