KIMBERLY MONASTERIAL							08/15/2008

Kim is 38 years old, referred by Dr. James Baker from Oklahoma City.  Kim's TMJ problems began in her mid teen years of unknown etiology.  She had orthodontics for 8 years from the 3rd grade to the 10th grade.  She apparently developed a long face morphology.  She was treated with splint therapy x2 by Dr. Robert Talley for 1 year without relief.  He referred her to Tulsa to see a doctor there who treated her with all different kinds of treatment methods that were unsuccessful.  She actually currently wears a retainer that is also an occlusal splint.  She underwent orthodontic treatment with Dr. Mike Stephan from 2003 to 2006.  On July 20, 2005, Dr. Jim Baker performed bilateral TMJ reconstruction with Mitek anchors, maxillary osteotomies, and mandibular osteotomies.  However, since the surgery, her pain has continued to worsen for her.  She had physical therapy from 2005 and 2006.  She had Therabite treatment as well.  She has had massage therapy and she also has had acupuncture which is the only treatment that has really provided at least a little bit of temporary relief for her, but is not a long-term solution.  She has been on lots of medications in the past.  She was treated for 1 year by a headache doctor that felt that she had cluster headaches, but could not help her and wanted to refer her to some other headache specialist.  

Kim rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 9.  She has constant headaches that average about a level of 9 that occur throughout the entire head.  She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 4, disability at 5.  She gets frequent headaches, frequent tinnitus, and frequent vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her knees, hips, shoulders, wrists, hands, and fingers.  She also does have a seizure disorder.  She has severe daytime somnolence and a severe sleep disorder, but no snoring and no apparent sleep apnea symptoms.  She does have difficulties breathing through her nose. 
 
CLINICAL EXAMINATION:  In frontal view, Kim has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, Kim has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Kim is missing the lower first bicuspids and upper first bicuspids.  She has a good Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has about a 2 mm vertical overbite.  She has a very slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being about 1 to 1.5 mm lower than the left side, but not of any appreciable significance.  To palpation, she has severe pain over the TMJs, minor pain over the styloid areas, and milder pain over the masseter muscles.  She has numbness in the right side of her chin.  Left front nerve is somewhat dysfunctional.  She has hypersensitivity in the mandibular right teeth.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy.  Intranasally, she has enlarged turbinates which probably contributes to her significant airway problems.  As best I can tell, the septum looks reasonably straight at least anteriorly.  On the right side, she either has an enlarged middle turbinate or she may have a nasal polyp present.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows evidence of previous surgeries with bone plates in the mandibular ramus area bilaterally with 7 screws on the left side in the bone plate and 8 screws on the right side plus additional bone screws further up in the ramus area.  She has bone plates in the maxilla counting 4 with 15 screws present in those 4 plates.  In addition, she has bilateral Mitek anchors in her joints.  She has severe arthritis in both joints.  
Waters view shows that the septum could be a little bit deviated and perhaps even a spur present back in the bony area.  Turbinates appears enlarged and the airway appears to be blocked fairly well.  Transesophageal sinuses look reasonably clear.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows that she has advanced and severe arthritis in the joint.  Mitek anchor is present, but it appears there has probably been loss of vertical height of the bone.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has severe arthritic changes and apparently significant loss of condylar volume.  A Mitek anchor is at the superior anterior aspect of the condyle.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a fairly good skeletal Class I relationship and Class I occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway appears adequate with just some slight decreased airway at the base of the tongue measuring about 7 mm, but at the soft palate level she measures about 11 to 12 mm.  

Basic diagnoses for Kim would be as follows:    

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis. 
Severe headaches. 
Severe TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. 
Hypertrophied turbinates. 
Nasal airway obstruction.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Place appliances on the maxillary arch. 
Place appliances on the mandibular arch.  
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.  
4.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I did give her a prescription for Klonopin 1-mg tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s.  I told her she could also take a half a tablet twice during the day to see if this would help with her pain and headache problems.  She is to call me in 1 to 2 weeks to let me know how she is progressing with the medication.  

