SHERRY MOODY									11/27/2006

Sherry is 55 years old.  She has the same birthday as me, November 29.  She is referred by Dr. Steven Cutbirth, DDS, 1613 Lake Success, Waco, TX 76710.  She has had previous neck surgery for a herniated disc.  She has had tonsils and adenoids removed and she has had a previous hysterectomy.  The neck surgery consisted of C5-6 laminectomy with fusion.  In addition, she has had previous jaw surgery in October of 2005.  

BASIC CONCERNS:
Bite is off following her previous surgery.
Increased jaw and neck muscle spasms.
Right shoulder drops due to spasms in the left neck.
Neck and back problems with C7 cervical rib irritation. 
Jaw and jaw joint irritates the neck.

MEDICATIONS:
Mobic 7.5 mg daily. 
Soma 350 mg p.r.n.
Darvocet-N 100 p.r.n. 
Nexium 20 mg p.r.n. 
HCTZ 12.5 mg daily.
Cenestin 0.625 mg daily. 
Boniva 1 tablet per month.

ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS:
High blood pressure.
Acid reflux.
Difficulties with swallowing at times.
Herniated disc at C4.
Degenerative disc disease with stenosis at C7.
Right shoulder drop.
Shoulder and neck muscle spasms.

PREVIOUS TREATMENTS:
Orthodontics in 1998.
She has worn splints almost continuously since 1977 for TMJ and jaw spasms.
In 199, she had a new splint to push the lower jaw backward.
Orthodontics were reinitiated in May of 2005 to get ready for jaw surgery.
In October 2005, lower jaw surgery performed to apparently advance the mandible and correct the occlusion.
TMJ splint therapy by Dr. Prehn in Woodland, TX.
TMJ evaluation by Dr. Steve Cutbirth in Waco.




SHERRY MOODY				11/27/2006				Page 2


Sherry's problems began when she was in her early 20s.  She did clench and grind her teeth even back then.  Etiology of her current situation is basically unknown.  The splints and the Mobic seem to be primary factors that help keep her reasonably comfortable.  Without the splints or the Mobic she can have significant pain problems.

She gets headaches in the posterior head area at about a level of 5.  With her splint in place and the Mobic she has no TMJ pain but the pain can become quite severe if she does not wear her splint or if she stops the Mobic.  Average daily pain is 5, jaw function at 3, diet at 4, disability at 4.  She gets left-sided earaches but also gets tinnitus and some vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her neck, back and maybe her shoulders.  She likely has pinched cervical plexus.  She gets pain down through her arms, through her elbows and down into her hands and fingers.  She has seasonal allergies.  She is very much aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime and she has done this for many years.  She does develop debilitating pain when she is without her Mobic and splint treatment.  

In frontal view, Sherry has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 10 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline may be about ½ mm off to the right along with the chin.  In profile view, Sherry has fairly good AP facial balance and vertical facial balance.  Intraorally, Sherry has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has orthodontic appliances on.   The teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and level.  First molars maybe just slightly extruded upwards with a mismatch in the medial marginal ridge of the first molars being a little bit greater on the left side than the right side.  In the upper arch, Sherry has all of her teeth back to the second molars.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally by probably 2 mm on the right, probably 2 to 3 mm on the left as well.  Lateral incisors appear small in size.  There is an overjet of probably 2 mm.  She has about a 0 vertical overbite relationship.  In centric relation, her teeth hit on the left side but the anterior teeth and the teeth on the right side do not appear to be in occlusion.  The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all look relatively normal.  The nasal septum may be deviated just slightly to the left at the base.  Turbinates are relatively normal in size and the nasal airway looks good being a little bit larger on the right side than the left side.  She said she only occasionally snores maybe once a month.  No daytime somnolence and no problems with sleep apnea.  To palpation, she has mild to moderate tenderness over the styloid areas and medial pterygoids.  TMJs are not particularly tender.  On opening and closing, the right joint seems to function relatively smoothly and she has some popping in the left joint on closing and about 15 mm of opening.  On excursive movement, she has noisy joints on both sides.  Maximal incisal opening is about 54 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is about 7 mm, left about 5 mm.  It really bothers to her try to shift to the left side.  She has some limited rotation of her neck towards the left side.  She can flex and extend fairly well.  She also has a little bit of a problem with tipping her head towards her left shoulder.



SHERRY MOODY				11/27/2006				Page 3


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of bone places in the mandible, one on each side with a 5-hole plate and 4 screws in each plate.  Sinuses look clear.  The condyles appear to be positioned in the fossa.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  There is a little septal spur off to the left side of the septum.  Right turbinate appears a little bit enlarged compared to the left side.  There appears to be adequate airway.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is fairly centered in the fossa.   Sclerosis on the top and some anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little flattened on the anterior aspect and there is some anterior beaking present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space seems fairly well balanced.  There is some anterior beaking present.  On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints being more restricted on the left side as compared to the right side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she some vertical imbalance at the inferior border as well as at the occlusal plane level.  Oropharyngeal airway does look constricted with only about 2 to 3 mm of airway space at the base of the tongue and probably 6 mm at the soft palate level.  It is possible the tongue could be positioned somewhat posteriorly when this x-ray was taken.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
AP mandibular deficiency and asymmetry.
Class II end-on occlusion. 
Occluding only on the left posterior teeth.
Anterior and right-sided open bite 1 to 2 mm. 
Posterior headaches and TMJ pain (without a splint in place.)

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Obtain current dental models for assessment.
Obtain i-CAT imaging to assess severity of arthritis.
Check occlusion on the models.  If occlusion is okay then remove braces and place in retainers.  If occlusion not okay then continue on orthodont adjustments as necessary.
Redo MRI at Baylor.
Orthodontics again to finish aligning and leveling the teeth.





SHERRY MOODY				11/27/2006				Page 4


Surgery.  TMJ surgery in one of the following approaches.
Treatment option 1.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to obtain the best occlusal fit.
Treatment option 2.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
 Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.


