ALMA MOON										05-19-03

Alma is 37 years old and referred by David O. Adame, DDS, MS, 210 W. Mahl, Edinburg, TX  78539.

Patient Concerns

The right jaw joint locks open, and she has to actually hit her jaw to get it unlocked
Her jaws pop loudly when she eats and chews
Pain in the jaw joints, right side greater than left side
Pain in the ears, right side greater than left side
Difficulties eating and chewing because of pain created particularly on the right side

Patient History

Alma has had previous surgery that included a tonsillectomy and sinus surgery.  Alma otherwise is in good healthy. She takes no medications currently. She has had a reaction to PENICILLIN and DEMEROL.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much on the facial midline. 

In profile, Alma has fairly good facial balance. 

Intraorally, Alma has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Has a crown on the mandibular left first molar. Has good attached gingiva. Some very minimal crowding, lower anterior arch.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. Upper lateral incisors look a little bit small. Actually she might be just slight Class II by maybe a couple of millimeters. Has an anterior overbite of about 2 mm. Uvula is a little bit hyperplastic. 

She occasionally gives a history of snoring. Nasal airway looks good. She has had a turbinectomy previously performed. 

Alma’s TMJ problems began at about the age of 17 when she noticed that her jaws started to click and pop and to lock. Etiology is unknown. She has really had no treatment. She has had periods where her symptoms have gotten quite bad, but then they would subside. In February 2003, she had her third molars removed, and this made the pain much worse. She had no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor hearing loss but does get occasional vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her back (herniated disc around L5), elbows, fingers, and hands. She is allergic to PENICILLIN and DEMEROL, smoke, animal dander, trees, dust mites, pork, peanuts, etc. Jewelry problems exist with the inability to wear cheap jewelry. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night when she sleeps. She used to get fairly significant headaches that commonly were up at a level of 10 prior to having her sinus surgery and turbinectomies performed. Since that time, she has not had any major headache problems during these past two months. She rates her TMJ pain at about a level of 8, and when it gets locked open, it goes to a level of 10. On an average day, she rates her overall pain at 4. She rates her jaw function 4, diet at 7, and disability at 3. When she bites, she feels that she occludes only on the left first molars and right second molars. She can chew a little bit better on the right side than she can on the left side. She does have numbness in her toes, which is felt to be secondary to the L5 problems. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear relatively small, and the septum appears relatively straight. Missing maxillary and mandibular third molars. Has a root canal in the mandibular left first molar and maxillary left first molar. Condyles actually appear to have reasonably good morphology. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. Turbinates are small, and the nasal airway is very good. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some flattening anteriorly and some sclerosis. Some beaking on the anterior head of the condyle. Decreased posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Appears to be slightly decreased posterior joint space. Could be a little pseudocyst in the head of the condyle.

On opening, there is good translation of both TMJs. Styloid processes are fairly long and moderately thick.

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class I occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is only about 5 to 6 mm and at the base of the tongue is about 10 mm. Bolton’s analysis reveals a tooth-size discrepancy of 3.5 mm primarily due to small upper lateral incisors.

On opening, she has almost an audible type click in the left TMJ at about 15 mm of opening and a closing click at about 10. On the right side, it appears that almost upon immediate opening there was a very soft pop and on closing a little reciprocal pop on that side again at about 5 mm. Click on the left side is much more obvious than the right side. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with reductions
AP mandibular hypoplasia
Class II end-on occlusion by approximately 2 to 3 mm
Significant tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3.5 mm secondary to small upper lateral incisors
Decreased angulation of upper incisors
Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
Hyperplastic soft palate and uvula
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism
Severe snoring
Open lock on the right TMJ

Recommended Treatment

Prescribe Klonopin to eliminate nocturnal clenching and bruxism

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up spacing around each upper lateral incisor of about 1.5 mm to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy. Could consider stripping lower anterior teeth a little bit also to help correct for the difference and to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward
Align and level mandibular arch. Consider stripping lower anterior teeth removing a millimeter or 2 of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward. Be careful not to correct for any more than 3.5 mm of tooth-size discrepancy

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty with lateral inversion flaps

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 