CHARLOTTE MOORE							07/21/2011

Birth date 03/20/1965, age 46 years old.  Referred by Dr. Rockace, Horsebarn Road, Rogers, AK.  

The onset of Charlotte’s problems is that she has had headaches essentially all of her life that occur in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area at about a level of 9.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 9, jaw function, diet and disability at 8.  She believes the onset of her current problems began in October 2010 of unknown etiology.  She has had a long history of her jaws locking open.  She has developed numbness and electric current type sensations through the face since October 2010.  She has some significant problems with eye twitching, but this started even prior to October 2010.  She has no earache problems, has continuous tinnitus, frequent vertigo, but no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her hips left worse than right, shoulders left worse than right, but generalized joint pains.  The rheumatologist felt that she may have fibromyalgia.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime severely and also sometimes during the day.  Previous treatment Charlotte has had includes a night guard that was made in January 2011.  It was of no benefit.  

In frontal view, Charlotte has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry with just some slight increased fullness on the right side by maybe 3 to 4 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  Upper lip length is about 17 mm and tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  In profile, she does have some slight AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency.  Intraorally, Charlotte has all of her lower teeth in both arches back through the second molars.  She is basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship with about a 3 mm anterior deep bite.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  The numbness in her facial area is mainly in her cheeks bilaterally and more through the distribution of the second branch of the trigeminal nerve.  The numbness feeling in the cheeks and also the upper lip area comes and goes, but gets worse during the day and progressively increases.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has root canals in the bilateral mandibular and maxillary left first molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The septum looks straight.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  The sinuses appear relatively clear.  

Coronal view shows that the septum has some deviation in the upper portion and turbinates are just moderate in size.  The sinuses are clear for the most part. 

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight with some deviation of the septum anteriorly off towards the left side and then back towards the right.  The sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear relatively normal in size.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a lytic lesion in the mid portion of the top of the condyle.  There is decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 4 mm.  There is a little bit of an osteophytic buildup at the lateral pole of the condyle.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows that has a little bit better morphology than the opposite side.  There is decreased lateral joint space with the lateral rim curving inferiorly probably a good 4 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows at the mid portion of the condyle there is a crater that has developed indicating a significant area of erosion.  The medial and lateral aspects of the condyles appear to have a more normal confirmation.  The articular eminences are not very long vertically, but have a moderate inclination.  The condyle is somewhat postured posteriorly in the fossa.  Vertical joint space actually looks reasonably good except at the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Right TMJ shows a condyle that is slightly posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  The articular eminence is a little bit longer in length and perhaps just slightly steeper than the opposite side.  At the lateral rim of the fossa, there is a decreased joint space.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that maxilla and mandible may be retruded some, but the oropharyngeal airway looks normal.  

Charlotte has had 3 MRI’s this year.  One was to look for brain tumors and that was ruled out.  She went to see an ENT doctor and the ENT doctor ruled out any sinus or other problems associated with their area of expertise.  The exam for the ENT doctors may have been a CT scan.   Both the MRI and CT scans were done with contrast.

Basic diagnoses for Charlotte would be as follows:

Left TMJ reactive arthritis with articular disc anteriorly displaced without reduction.
Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with early reduction.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Severe myofascial pain.
Chronic recurring open lock.
Patient significantly disabled.  
Earaches, tinnitus and vertigo.  

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	MRI with contrast.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints if total joint prostheses are indicated.
3.	Surgical Option 1.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with total joint prosthesis.
	b.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts. 
	c.	Placement and removal of arch bars. 
4.	Surgical Option 2.
	a.	Bilateral articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral ramus sagittal split osteotomies.
	c.	Placement and removal of arch bars.
