DONNA MOORE									01-28-05

Donna is 39 years old and referred by Dr. Brenda Chockley, 8909 S. Yale, Ste. 210, Tulsa, OK  74137.

Patient History

Donna’s problems began in 11/2003 of unknown etiology. She began developing pain through the jaw muscles and down through the neck. In 01/2004, she had an NTI splint made by Dr. Aaron Harmon in Wagner, Oklahoma. This didn’t improve her situation. She then went and saw Dr. Terry Bennett and from 01/2004 through 03/2004 he constructed a splint for her and did some adjustments on it, but this actually made her pain a lot worse. Apparently it was an anterior jaw repositioning type of splint. Since then she has had chiropractic care that has not helped her. She had a consultation with a physical therapist, and he felt he could not help her. She went to an ENT specialist who could not find anything wrong with her either. She also has been to an acupuncturist, and this did not improve her situation. 

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She has been told that she has neck problems by the chiropractic practitioner, but she is not sure if there are actual anatomical problems or not. She has seasonal allergies and is allergic to LINCOCIN. She has a little bit of problem wearing cheap earrings but not too significant. Her pain is worse in the afternoons. She teaches school and teaches Algebra II and geometry. She has to use a microphone and amplifying system for the students to hear her. She has limited jaw function. She rates her headaches at 0 and TMJ pain at 0. On her usual day at work where she has to lecture, her pain levels are about a level of 7. She rates her jaw function and diet at 7 and disability at 5. 

Donna has noted that her lower anterior teeth are becoming more crowded during the last three to four years. She said her teeth used to be fairly straight. This is the reason she went to see Dr. Chockley. 

Donna continues to wear the DTI device, and she wears it just at night, but she does find that she does bite into it. She feels that some of her bite changes and particularly the open bite factor may be related to that device. Donna has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3.5 mm. 

Current Medications

Orthocycline
BuSpar 5 mg t.i.d. 
Flexeril 10 mg 2 tablets per day
Lortab 5 mg tablets, ½ tablet b.i.d. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Donna has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are all pretty much on the facial midline.

In profile view, she has fairly good facial balance. Some mild weakness in the chin area but not too significant. Chin-neckline is fairly close to being normal, and chin-neckline is fairly well-defined. 	

Intraorally, Donna has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. A little inflammation around the lower left central and lateral incisor at the gingival area. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. In centric occlusion, she appears to hit on the distal of her maxillary first molar and her lower first and upper and lower second molars. On the right side, she could possibly be hitting on her second molars, but the rest of her teeth are out of occlusion. Mandible is retruded back with about a 2-mm over jet relationship and about a 4 to 5-mm Class II cuspid relationship. If she postures forward to an end-on incisor relationship, she is a little bit closer to a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. Appears as though she probably has a tooth-size discrepancy. Maximal incisal opening is 23 mm and opening without significant pain only 18 mm. Excursive movements to the right are about 5 mm and to the left 3 mm. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the TMJs but no other pain around the head and neck area.										

There is a slight transverse cant of the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 to 1.5 mm lower than the left side. 
						
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses appear relatively clear. Difficult to evaluate the nasal airway, but it does appear the left side is blocked compared to the right side. She is missing all four third molars but has the rest of her teeth. She has a crown on the maxillary right second molar. Left TMJ appears as though it has undergone some arthritic changes. Right joint appears a little bit longer vertically in length. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears postured forward in the fossa and appears to be approaching the articular eminence. It is possible that she may have been  holding her lower jaw forward when this radiograph was taken. Styloid process is calcified and quite thick and extends up and overlaps the posterior border of the mandible. Difficult to tell how far forward it comes. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a joint that appears to have a decreased posterior joint space and maybe a little bit decreased vertical joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle may have a little pseudocyst in it but difficult to tell.

On opening, there is restricted translation of both TMJs. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear, although the right side has a thickened sinus membrane. Right nasal airway appears blocked because of a large turbinate on that side. 

Cephalometrically, she appears to have a slight skeletal Class II relationship and a Class II occlusal relationship. There is asymmetry in the arch but don’t know if that is due to head posture. Oropharyngeal airway is good. She has an anterior open bite of probably a couple of millimeters and an anterior over jet of 2 mm. Transversely, the maxillary and mandibular occlusal planes are fairly level, but it appears that on the ceph radiograph that there is significant vertical discrepancy which would tend to make me believe that perhaps the head was tilted some when this radiograph was taken. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocations predominantly in a medial direction with the right side being worse than the left side
AP mandibular deficiency 
Class II end-on cuspid relationship
Anterior open bite
Open bite extending from first molar to first molar
Significant tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3.5 mm
Overangulation of lower incisors
Slight cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 1 mm to 1.5 mm lower than the left side
Myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment

Review MRIs with radiologist

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 3 mm of tooth structure to correct of the tooth-size discrepancy 

Surgery
Possible bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors depending on interpretation of the MRIs by the radiologist
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies versus maxillary osteotomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 