ERIN MOORE									07/23/2010

Erin is 17 years old, birth date March 26, 1993.  Her TMJ problems began at the age of 15 on November 28, 2008.  She was swimming in the ocean, body surfing, and got slammed into the floor by some strong waves and hit her face, neck, and shoulders.  She was aware immediately of injury to her jaws and has had persistent problems since then.  By history, she had orthodontics from 2004 to 2006 by Dr. Larry Levins.  She had some chiropractic treatment in 2008 and some acupuncture in August 2009.  She received physical therapy beginning on October 15, 2009, initially two times for week and then currently she just gets it one time per week.  She has an orthotic that she has worn since October 26, 2009, and she wears it 24/7.  They are performing a lot of adjustments on that device.  She had her wisdom teeth removed in 2008.  She gets occasional earaches, no tinnitus, occasional vertigo, and no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her shoulder, neck (C1-C2).  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  She rates her headaches at a level of 6 on the right side in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area and on the left side in the same areas at a level of 3.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 2, diet at 1, disability at 2.  She does have eczema and she has a history of having GI parasites.  Primary concerns that Erin has include the following:

Dislocated right jaw on November 28, 2008.
Cannot breathe well through the nose and is exclusively a mouth breather. 
Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Neck, shoulder, back pain. 

In frontal view, Erin has reasonably good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face, but some asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 7 mm.  Nasal tip is deviated about 5 mm off to the right side.  The maxillary dental midline is about almost 2 mm off to the right side as is the mandibular dental midline.  The chin is about 5 to 6 mm off to the right side.  In profile view, Erin appears to have some AP maxillary deficiency of about 4 to 6 mm in the maxilla and the chin appears retruded about 6 mm.  Intraorally, Erin has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has an end-on incisor relationship and a Class III end-on occlusion being worse on the right side than the left side.  On the left side, she is probably 2 to 3 mm Class III and on the right side she is probably 4 to 5 mm.  She has a significant transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 4 mm higher than the left side at the cuspid area.  In centric relation, Erin hits only on her four central incisors.  All other teeth are out of occlusion.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and tonsils are moderately enlarged, particularly on the right side.  Intranasally, the nostrils are quite narrow.  The columella is moderately wide.  The septum is deviated off towards the right side and extends almost lateral to the columella.  The turbinates appear at least moderately enlarged.  She probably has moderate to severe nasal airway obstruction.  The left side of the face and mandible are about 6 to 8 mm longer vertically than the right side.  There is slight increased fullness in the face on the left side as compared to the right side.  As Erin shifts her mandible towards the left side about 3 to 4 mm, this significantly improve her facial symmetry, although a little bit full on the left side yet.  To palpation, she has some moderate pain over the TMJs, shoulder areas, and to a slightly lesser degree the retromandibular area.  The incisal opening is 53 mm, but only about 38 mm without discomfort.  The excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.  Joints seem to function reasonably well right now, but earlier this afternoon there was a significant pop that occurred in the left joint.  Since some records from earlier in 2004, since then Erin has developed some significant transverse facial asymmetry and vertical asymmetry.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The left condylar head and neck appear longer than the right side.  The vertical height of the mandibular body is about 2 mm longer vertically than the right side. 

Coronal view shows that the septum is deviated off in the bony area at least to the left side but the cartilage is shifted off to the right side anteriorly.  The turbinates are moderately enlarged.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a little bit of anterior beaking present on the condyle.  The condyle for the most part appears reasonably centered, although a couple of views show decreased posterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately inclined.  

In the right TMJ, the joint space appears to be perhaps a little bit decreased over the opposite side.  There is a little bit of anterior beaking present.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with moderate mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly a good 4 to 5 mm.  The joint space looks adequate compared to the other side.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows there is some vertical asymmetry in the maxillary and mandibular arches.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 9 mm at the base of the tongue.  Oropharyngeal airway and nasopharyngeal area measure about 8 mm.  She does posture the tongue relatively low in the oral cavity.  

Basic diagnoses for Erin would be as follows:

Left mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Right TMJ articular disc dislocated anterior and lateral. 
Maxillary AP hypoplasia but vertical hyperplasia and transverse asymmetry.  
Mandibular AP hypoplasia and transverse asymmetry. 
Class III end-on occlusion being worse on the left side compared to the right side. 
Bilateral posterior open bites.
Occluding only on the four central incisors with all other teeth out of occlusion. 
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side 4 mm lower than the right side.  
TMJ pain being worse on the right side than the left side.
Headaches being worse on the right side compared to the left side. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Deviated nasal septum with septal spur on the left side. 
Narrow nostrils.
External nasal deformity.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
	b.	Left mandibular high condylectomy.
	c.	Maxillary osteotomies to move it superior, advance it and level it transversely.  
	d.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible and level it 			transversely.  
	e.	Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
	f.	Nasal septoplasty.
	g.	External rhinoplasty.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.







