PHYLLIS MOORE								10/10/2011

Phyllis is 77 years old, birth date 08/23/1934.  Referred by Dr. Leslie Broline in Austin, TX.

Phyllis’ TMJ problems began when she was 16 years old following removal of third molars.  She did have orthodontics in 1948.  Since her wisdom teeth were removed, she has had TMJ issues.  During the years, she has had many equilibrations.  Her mouth was wired together in 1958 and she was wired together for about 6 weeks.  After that in 1958, she had a right condylectomy performed.  She did well up until about the last 4 years.  She then began developing pain again in the right side and more recently she has developing pain in the left side as well.  She had physical therapy in 2010.  

Phyllis does have a right total hip prosthesis that was placed a couple of years ago after she fell and fractured her hip.  She also has titanium bone plates in her right wrist area.

She gets headaches at about a level of 3 in the right temporal area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 8, diet at 6, and disability at 5.  She is on numerous medications and the list is attached in the notes.  She gets occasional earaches, continuous tinnitus and frequent vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her hips, knees, ankle, right shoulder, right wrist, neck and back.  She is aware of clenching her teeth at nighttime and also during the day.  Primary concerns that Phyllis has include the following:

Right jaw deterioration.
Left jaw beginning to hurt.
Teeth ache at times from grinding particularly on the right side.
Jaw seems to be dropping.
Saliva leaking out of right side of mouth.

She has been diagnosed with:

Diverticulitis (IBS).
High blood pressure.
Mild anxiety.
Severe reflux.
Arthritis in a number of her joints.  

In frontal view, Phyllis has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midlines are pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile view, she has some fairly good facial balance with some fullness in the submental area.  Intraorally, she is missing mandibular right first molar replaced with a 4-unit bridge.  On the left side, she is missing her molars and has replacement with 2 dental implants.  She has moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has some gingival recession on the 4 incisors.  In the upper arch, she is missing the right first and second bicuspids,  but with the first and second molars drifted forward with some of the roots missing on those teeth.  She has probably a 3-unit bridge on the right side with just one single bicuspid pontic replacing the two missing bicuspids.  On the left side, she is missing the first bicuspid and probably second and third molars.  She has an end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally and probably 3 mm Class II.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 2.5 to 3 mm.  Occlusion seems to fit together reasonably well.  The maximal incisal opening is 32 mm, but she could open to about 50 mm without significant pain.  The excursion movement to the right is 3 mm and the left 4 mm.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the right TMJ but nowhere else.  As she opens her jaws, she has some crepitus in both joints.  She says occasionally opens she will hear a loud noise in the right joint.  As she opens, her mandible deviates to the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  

Radiographic evaluation shows that she is missing the mandibular right first molar and third molar and she is missing the left first bicuspid and all three molars, but there are two implants replacing two teeth.  In the upper left arch, she is missing the first bicuspid which has been replaced with a 4-unit bridge and she is missing the second and third molars.  On the right side, she is missing the right first and second bicuspid and has had root resections and removal with the first molar and second molar.  Occlusion actually looks fairly good on the x-ray.  She has significant arthritic changes in her right TMJ with some significant flattening and significant increased anteroposterior width.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The left condyle is a little bit smaller in size than normal and appears to have lost some vertical volume as well.  The sinuses appear reasonably clear.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  She has huge turbinates that appear to block almost the entire nasal airway.  

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates are quite large and block most of the nasal airway.  

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that has undergone significant changes.  There is significantly decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe changes and significantly decreased joint spaces.  She has advanced arthritis on this side and areas where it appears she has bone-on-bone contact.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 to 5 mm.  

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is small in size.  There is some anterior beaking present.  There is decreased posterior joint space.  The articular eminence is fairly steep.  There is some anterior beaking on the condyle.  At the lateral aspect of the joint, there is some flattening on the condylar head.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant bony changes and arthritis.  There is a significant anterior beaking present and sclerosis on the top of the condyle.  The articular eminence is relatively shallow.  There are several areas where it appears there is bone-on-bone contact.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there does appear to be some airway issues with an oropharyngeal airway of only about 3 mm at the soft palate level and about 3 mm at the base of the tongue.  

Basic diagnoses for Phyllis would be as follows:

Right TMJ severe arthritis with bone-on-bone contact.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with severe deformation, non-reducing and non-salvageable.  
Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Hypertrophied turbinates.  
Probable severe sleep apnea.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Sleep study.
2.	Evaluation at the Environmental Center to rule out hypersensitivities to materials 	in the prostheses. 
3.	CT scan of the jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
4.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a 				counterclockwise direction using TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance in a counterclockwise 				direction.
	c.	Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
	d.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	e.	Bilateral coronoidotomies.
5.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  
6.	Dental reconstruction including possible extraction of some teeth, placement of 	implants with probable requirement for sinus grafting in the right sinus, placement 	of implants and dental reconstruction as necessary.

