TERRY MOORE									06-14-04

Terry referred himself.

Patient History

He has had carpal tunnel surgery and had a previous rhinoplasty and septal repairs in ’77 and again in ’81. He had a UPPP procedure performed with surgery x 2. He has had knee surgery about 10 or 11 years ago. He currently takes Lipitor, niacin, vitamins, aspirin, Propecia, Adderall, and Ritalin.

Terry’s primary concern is severe snoring problems. Even with the UPPP procedure being performed twice, he still has significant problems. 

Clinical Examination

Terry had four first bicuspids extracted. Has the rest of his teeth. Has a Class I cuspid-molar relation and probably about a 3-mm overbite relationship. Evidence present of having previous UPPP procedures. Actually, the result looks very good. The facial pillars are fairly wide. His wife says that he is predominantly a mouth breather when he is snoring. He said he used to have a lot of allergy problems and couldn’t breathe through his nose very well. He has had a septoplasty done twice but nothing done to his turbinates. Turbinates do not look particularly large at this time. However, it is possible they may become more engorged at night when he is lying down and could cause some obstruction. The luminal valves are also somewhat constricted. Holding them open, he felt he could breathe better by perhaps 20%. The distance from the base of his tongue, the posterior pharyngeal wall is within normal limits, but the distance from his soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall is about 5 mm. The transverse width of the posterior faucial pillars is very good, and, in fact, the result is much better than I thought it would be having a laser UPPP procedure. 

Terry has severe snoring.  His wife says the snoring is so bad that she has to sleep in another room. She says the snoring is severe whether he is on his back, side, or on his stomach. Terry is not particularly sleepy during the day except if he does stop and sit down for a while he will fall asleep. Does not feel he get particularly sleepy driving a car. He does wake himself up at night with severe snoring, and he says he feel that it is the sound that disrupts his sleep. 


Recommended Treatment

Mrs. Moore is to record Terry’s snoring so we can determine if it is due to a nasal or oral snoring

CT scan of sinuses and nasal airway; axial and coronal views

Try an anterior mandibular repositioning sleep device to see if this eliminates the snoring. If so, then it could mean that the oropharyngeal airway is becoming further decreased at night when his tongue is relaxed. 
 Potential areas of concern, therefore, include the following:

Hyperplastic turbinates that become engorged when lying down

Decreased oropharyngeal airway particularly at the soft palate level

Constricture of the luminal valves

Probable nasal airway obstruction

Planned treatment to complete a workup would be as follows:

CT scan of the nose and paranasal sinuses

Sleep device to anteriorly position the mandible

Consider partial turbinectomy

Consider reconstruction of the luminal valves

Consider orthognathic surgery if problem is defined by decreased oropharyngeal airway in a supine or prone position

Terry is to get a CAT scan and have the results forwarded to me.