AMANDA MORA									09/01/2006

Amanda is 17 years old and this is a self-referral.  She takes no medications.  She is in good health with no major medical problems.  She had no adverse reactions to medications.  Her mother does report that Amanda comes home after school and usually takes a nap and feels real tired.  Amanda states that she tends to breathe through her mouth when sleeping. 

BASIC CONCERNS:
Early diagnosis of idiopathic condylar resorption.
Teeth and jaws do not fit together. 
Jaws becoming more retruded. 
Difficulty breathing through the nose.
Daytime tiredness.
Difficulty getting her lips together. 

She has no particular TMJ pain problems.  She does get headaches at about a level of 3 on the top of the head.  They occur about once a week.   No problems with earaches or tinnitus but does get occasional vertigo.  She has no particular TMJ pain or myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 1, disability at 0.  She has been tested for rheumatoid factor and it was within normal limits.  Her ANA screen was positive with a 1:80 ratio in a pattern of homogenous.  Other labs essentially within normal limits.  In frontal view, Amanda has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 7 mm.  Maxillary midline is about 2 mm off to the right side, so is the mandibular dental midline and the chin.  Lip incompetence is about 13 mm.  Upper lip balance is actually fairly good with just a slight AP deficiency at point A of about 2 mm.  Chin is retruded by 20 to 25 mm.  Chin-neckline is extremely short though the chin-neck angle is surprisingly moderately well defined.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth appear to be nicely aligned and leveled.  She has orthodontic appliances on.  She has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She also has braces on the upper teeth.  She has about a 5 mm Class II cuspid molar relationship.  She has an overjet of about 5 mm.  In centric relation it appears that she may occlude only on her second molars.  The uvula may be mildly elongated but not too significant.  Soft palate appears a little bit elongated.  Faucial pillars appear mild to moderately constricted.  Tonsils are present but appear normal in size.  Nasal septum is deviated off to the left side.  Right turbinate is moderate in size.  The left turbinate is significantly enlarged.  Seems to have significant decreased nasal airway.  Columella appears wide and the nostrils are narrow.  It appears she has significant nasal airway obstruction.  Amanda has about a 2 mm anterior open bite tendency.  Maximal incisal opening is 42 mm.  Excursive movements are about 9 mm in each direction.  To palpation, she has no pain around the head and neck area.  She does have crepitus in both joints.  Amanda had first round of orthodontics in 1990 to 2001 to create a maxillary expansion and full appliances.  The photographs upon completion of treatment shows at that time she had a retruded mandible though not quite as severe as it is now.  In November of 2005 she began orthodontics again this time with Dr. Robert Walker.  She did have a limited bone scan performed but according to the report there is no clear evidence of asymmetry in the region of the temporomandibular joints.  

AMANDA MORA				09/01/2006				Page 2


She was evaluated by a pain management specialist who said that because of the negative bone scan and that she had no pain, that Dr. Walker could proceed on with her orthodontics.  The evaluation was done by Dr. Joseph Cohen, orofacial pain specialist.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars.  The rest of the teeth are all present.  Sinuses appear clear.  Condyles demonstrate severe condylar resorption.  Anterior open bite appears to be present.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The bony septum appears reasonably straight.  The turbinates are moderate in size but the transverse width of the nose appears quite narrow and constricted.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows that there has been severe condylar resorption that has occurred.  Articular eminence is relatively flat.  There is some joint space present.  However, the posterior joint space appears significantly decreased.  

Right TMJ sagittal view tomogram shows severe condylar resorption.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.  There appears to be slightly greater loss of bone volume on this side with the condyle almost down to the sigmoid notch area.  On opening, there is actually good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows severe retrusion of the mandible.  There is posterior vertical maxillary deficiency and anterior vertical maxillary excess.  Occlusal plane is fairly steep.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 mm at the soft palate level and about 5 to 6 mm at the base of the tongue.  

She reports no history of skin rashes and no problems with dandruff.  She does not appear to have any problems with her nails.  She has reported in the past of having a rash on her tongue that occurs more often than three times a year.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. 
Severe AP mandibular deficiency. 
Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP microgenia.
Class II occlusion.
Anterior open bite.
Occluding only on the second molars in centric relation.
High occlusal plane angle.
 Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
 Hypertrophied turbinates.
AMANDA MORA				09/01/2006				Page 3


 Nasal airway obstruction.
 Impacted maxillary mandibular third molars.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Removal of mandibular impacted third molars.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.
CT scans of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla superiorly and posterior maxilla inferiorly.  
Bilateral TMJ coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen or buttocks.)
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Removal of impacted maxillary third molars.
Implant to anterior mandible. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
