BRENDA MORALES VAZQUEZ							12/07/2007

Brenda is 33 years old and is referred by Dr. Joel Teig and Dr. Ivan Marrero at Santurce Medical Plaza, Santurce, Puerto Rico.  Brenda is in good health with no major medical problems except she has hypothyroidism and takes Synthroid 0.75 mg daily.  She has had an adverse reaction to penicillin.  

Brenda had orthodontics at the age of 12.  She had a retruded mandible and then had upper first bicuspids extracted and maxillary teeth retruded to meet the mandible.  This did not fully correct the bite problem, however.  Orthodontics was initiated again in 2003 and lower first bicuspids were extracted at that time and lower teeth retracted to create more of an overjet problem.  On January 27, 2006, she had bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to advance the mandible.  She continued to have some facial swelling and so in June of 2006 the bilateral bone plates were removed.  She had an esthetic defect at the inferior border of the mandible so on 09/21/2007, bilateral silastic implants to the antegonial notch areas was performed.  However, the left one became infected so both implants were removed on October 4, 2007. 

It is unknown when her TMJ problems began.  She believes that she may have had some noises in her joints before her surgery.  She became more aware of the problems in the joints after the surgery.  She became aware of having some joint problems at about the age of 28 in 2002 where she had some pain and discomfort.  Apparently Brenda has had problems over the years with posturing the lower jaw forward.  A number of her doctors had talked to her about trying to get her to bite more on her back teeth.  At times she still catches herself posturing her lower jaw forward.

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Bone contour in the mandible after her orthognathic surgery.
Bite concerns.
Pain and discomfort predominately in the masseter muscles.
She feels as though she does not have enough room in her mouth for her tongue.

In frontal view, there is fairly good balance in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm.  There is a little bit of orbital dystopia with the right eye being about 2 mm higher than the left eye.  Maxillary and mandibular midlines are about 1 mm to the left and chin is probably 1 to 2 mm to the left.  In profile view, Brenda has some AP maxillary deficiency probably about 3 to 4 mm.  The chin appears somewhat retruded probably about 4 to 5 mm as well.  Chin-neckline is somewhat short although the chin-neck angle is well defined.  Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids.  Spaces are all closed.  Teeth appear to be nicely aligned and level.  In the upper arch she is also missing the first bicuspids.  She has fairly good Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being about 3 mm higher than the right side.  Oropharyngeal area looks good with normal uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderate in size.  The septum is deviated significantly off towards the left side.  At the very anterior aspect of the nose the septum is off to the right side.  To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, however, she has audible crepitation in both her jaw joints.  Chewing bothers her muscles particular her masseters.  
BRENDA MORALES VAZQUEZ		12/07/2007				Page 2

Incisal opening is 40 mm and excursive movements are 8 mm in each direction.  She does have prominent notching in the gonial notch areas as result of the previous surgery.  She has some TADs placed in the lower right cuspid bicuspid area and in the upper left bicuspid cuspid area.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence off all four third molars and all four first bicuspids.  The TAD on the mandibular right side is between the lateral incisor and cuspid.  On the left side it is between the second bicuspid and first molar.  Right sinus appears a little bit full.  Condyles appear arthritic with more bone loss on the left side than the right side.  Some prominence of the gonial notches.  Septum appears deviated with a septal spur present.  

Waters view shows significant deviation of the nasal septum.  Turbinates are moderate in size and the left airway appears somewhat blocked.  Transverse cant in the occlusion is obvious.  Maxillary sinuses look a little bit unusual particularly on the left side.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows significant arthritis present in the joint.  Very minimal joint space.  There appears to be loss of condylar volume.  Articular eminence is moderate in steepness. 

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle with significant arthritic changes and loss of volume.  Condylar head and neck are shorter on the left side as compared to right side and probably is the reason for the transverse cant and facial asymmetry.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows both the maxilla and mandible are retruded.  There is prominence of the gonial notches.  Cant in the occlusal plane.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the soft palate and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and severe degenerative changes. 
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being 3 mm vertically shorter compared to the right side. 
Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars.
Crossbite tendency on the left side in the molar area.
Periodic myofascial pain affecting predominately the masseter muscles.
Nasoseptal deviation. 
Hypertrophied turbinates.
 Nasal airway obstruction. 
 Depressions in the antegonial notch area secondary to previous surgery.
 Loss of transverse dimension of the angles of the mandible.
 Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 

BRENDA MORALES VAZQUEZ 			12/07/2007			Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
1.  Treatment option 1.
Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular reconstruction with Medpor implants in the angles and gonial notch areas.
      Treatment option 2 to address all the concerns and factors.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Continue to align and level arch.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.
2.   CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
3.   Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and expand the maxilla.
Nasoseptoplasty.
Partial nasal turbinectomies. 
Consider augmentation of mandibular gonial notch areas bilaterally. 
4.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

