RICHARD MORAN								01/25/2012

Richard is 39 years old, birth date is 02/06/1972.  He is referred by Dr. Tom Lowder from Springdale, Arkansas.   

Richard is not sure when his jaw joint problems began or the etiology.  He has had no treatment to date for his jaws.  Richard does report clicking and popping in the left TMJ.  He gets headaches about a level of 4 in the left temporal and posterior head area.  He rates his TMJ pain at 2 that is in the left joint.  Average daily pain is at 3, jaw function at 2, diet at 0, and disability at 0.  He has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus, but has had this since he was a kid.  He has no vertigo and is partially tone deaf.  Other joints that bother him include his knees and his back but only occasionally.  He is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and occasionally during the day.  Richard does have a history of severe snoring, but does not claim daytime tiredness.  His wife witnesses him at night with apneic episodes, so he likely has a mild to moderate form of sleep apnea.  He has a mild sleep disorder.  He predominantly breathes through his mouth when he sleeps at night.  

In frontal view, Richard has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm on the left and 3 mm on the right.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin are all pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, he has a good 6 mm AP deficiency in the maxilla.  The mandible may be 15 to 18 mm AP deficient.  Chin neckline and angle are not defined.  Intraorally, he is missing the mandibular right first and second bicuspids with the first second molars in a little bit of a lingual inclination.  On the left side, he is missing mandibular left second bicuspid and first second molars which are tipped lingually. He has a crown on the second molar.  In the upper arch, he is missing second and third molars bilaterally.  Richard has an anterior deep bite of about 5 mm.  He has an end-on Class II cuspid relationship.  The mandibular occlusal plane is fairly level, but the maxillary cuspid on the left side is probably at least 2 mm compared to the right cuspid.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy, although the uvula may be just slightly enlarged.  Intranasally, the septum may be deviated to the left side just a little bit.  The left turbinate appears a little bit enlarged and may block off part of the airway.  The right turbinate appears a little bit normal in size and at least anteriorly there appears to be a reasonable airway.  Intranasally, the septum may be just a little bit off towards the left and anteriorly the septum is deviated a little bit to the left of the columella.  The left turbinate is quite large but the right one is more normal in size.  To palpation, he has some very mild tenderness over the left temporalis muscle and left retromandibular area.  Joints feel as though they function reasonably smoothly, although he felt he could hear a little something in the left joint.  The maximal incisal opening is 45 mm.  Excursion movement to the right is 11 mm and to the left 10 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, mandibular right first and second bicuspids, mandibular left second bicuspid, maxillary left and right second and third molars.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The left turbinate appears somewhat enlarged compared to the right side.  

Coronal view shows that the left turbinate is quite large as is the middle turbinate and appear to block most of the airway in the left side of the nose.  On the right side, turbinates appear normal in size.  The sinuses are clear.

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight with just a little bit of a deviation off towards the left side.  The sinuses are clear.  The left turbinate is quite large and appears to block off most of the airway on that side, but it appears that there is  a reasonable airway. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is a little bit posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  There is an increased anterior joint space.  The articular eminence is fairly steep.  This may indicate a vertical orientation of the articular disc.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  The posterior joint space may be slightly decreased.  Anterior joint space may be slightly increased.  The fossa in some areas bilaterally appears quite thin.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3 or 4 mm.  There may be some decreased lateral joint space.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows decreased vertical and lateral joint space.  The condyle has good transverse width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are retruded.  There is a mild occlusal plane inclination.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 3.5 mm at the soft palate level and about 4.5 mm at the base of the tongue.  There is a Bolton’s difference of almost 3.5 mm.  

Richard had a sleep study done on 11/23/2010.  At that time, his oxygen saturations were at 93% while asleep and desaturated down to 89% in associated with obstructive respiratory events.  He was diagnosed with mild obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome with an apneic hypopnea index of 7.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows: 

Left TMJ articular disc dislocation.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3.5 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).
Sleep apnea.
Missing mandibular left second bicuspid, right first and second bicuspids, maxillary second molars and all four third molars.
Hypertrophied left nasal turbinate.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up 1 mm of space between the 
                         upper laterals and cuspids.  Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and 
                         cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in 
                         case they are necessary.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Open up spacing in missing bicuspid 			area on the left side to equal the size of a bicuspid and on the right side as 			well.  Try to level the accentuated curve of Spee.  Consider slenderizing 			the lower anterior teeth to remove a little bit of tooth structure to keep 			from flaring them too far forward.  
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor. 
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 			counterclockwise direction with pogonion advancing 15 mm.
	c.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise 			direction.
	d.	Left partial nasal turbinectomy.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
4.	Restorative dentistry to replace missing mandibular teeth.  