ANA MORENO									01-24-03

Ana is 28 years old and referred by Dr. Nicholas Gordon.

Patient History

Ana was originally involved in an automobile accident in 1993 and sustained some midfacial fractures, she had periorbital fracture, and she had a fracture through the left mandibular body at that time. 

Ana’s problems began in 1992 when she was involved in the MVA accident, sustaining midfacial fractures, periorbital fractures, nasal fractures, and left mandibular angle fracture. She had her initial surgery by Dr. Wendall Whittaker in Tucson. She then saw Dr. Casey, who did rib graft augmentation to the left cheek, but this resulted in getting an ectropion of the left eyelid. He did an additional surgery for the eyelid, but this certainly worsened the situation. She then had reconstructive surgery by Dr. Norman Ahl, who placed a cartilage graft into the lower eyelid, and this corrected the ectropion. She then saw Dr. Stephen Beals, who did further reconstruction of the left eye socket and also did a nasal bone graft. Then in April of 2000 he did a LeFort I osteotomy to correct her bite problem, and this resulted in relapse. He repeated surgery in September of 2001 and used cranial bone grafts, but this has not yielded a stable result either.

She gets headaches that occur in the frontal area behind her eyes in the temporal and posterior head area that she rates at a level of 10 when they occur.

Ana rates her TMJ pain at 0, overall pain around the head and neck on an average day at about 7, jaw function at 5, diet at 3, and disability at 7. She has some decreased sensation to the left upper lip. 

Patient Concerns

She has significant pain that is there fairly constantly affecting primarily the upper jaw and the palatal area. Some days are worse than others. 
Maxilla is mobile
There is significant tipping of the jaw structures.
Difficulties eating and chewing
Adverse affects on her speech
Headaches 
Dysfunction of left lacrimal apparatus, and this results in fairly constant epiphora 

Current Medications

Medications she takes include Ortho-Tri-Cyclen and also she takes clonazepam 1 mg that she takes sometimes at night and sometimes during the day for anxiety. Additional medications she takes include Zoloft 150 mg, OxyContin 10 mg occasionally, and ibuprofen on a daily basis.

Clinical Examination

Intercanthal distance 34 mm. Interpupillary distance is 58 mm. She does have a scar across the bridge of her nose and into the left eyelid. From medial canthal tendon to lateral canthal tendon measures about 26 mm on the right and 24 mm on the left. She has some retraction inward of her infraorbital scar on the left side. Creates a little bit of fullness just below it in the soft tissues. Transverse pupillary level is actually fairly good. She has a little bit less sclera on the left side both medially and laterally as compared to the right eye. 

Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about –3. Maxillary midline and mandibular dental midline are pretty much on the facial midline. Chin may be just a little bit off to the right side. Right side of the jaw line is up about 3 to 4 mm on the right side as compared to the left side. 

In profile view, may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency. Mandible is actually in pretty good AP position. Chin-neckline is in good balance. She has good nasal dorsal projection. Nasolabial angle is probably about 95 to 100 degrees. 

Intraorally, Ana has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars. She appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. Teeth appear nicely aligned and leveled. In the upper jaw, she appears to have all of her teeth back through the second molars. She actually is missing the right lateral incisor. Apparently that tooth was congenitally missing and not associated with the injury at all. Using the right first bicuspid as a cuspid, she has a Class III end-on occlusion on that side and has a slight tendency toward a posterior crossbite. She has an end-on incisor relationship. On the right side, she is Class I. Oropharyngeal airway looks very good and healthy. Nasal airway looks good with a really large airway on the right side. On the left side, the turbinate is moderately enlarged, and the airway is not as good as the right side. Has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 4 mm higher than the left side in the ______. Again, using the right maxillary first bicuspid as the cuspid, the tooth is positioned 4 mm posterior to the left cuspid. Lower arch anteroposteriorly appears reasonably symmetrical.

To palpation, she has some very mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles, masseter muscles, and styloid areas. She has some mild tenderness over the TMJ. On opening, she has a little bit of noise in the right joint at about 10 mm of opening and closing at about 5 mm. Left joint seems to function relatively smoothly. Incisal opening is about 46 mm. Excursive movements are about 6 mm in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the mandible appears to be intact. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch. Root canal in the mandibular left first molar. Third molars are absent. In the upper arch, she is missing her third molars as well as the left lateral incisor, but all other teeth are present. She has a root canal in the left first molar. She has a lot of bone plates in the maxillary left side with multiple screws placed. She has a large plate going along the left infraorbital rim. She has a huge bone plate on the right maxilla and a smaller bone plate in the same area. There is also some individual bone screws, two on the right side and one on the left side in the infraorbital area. The two on the right side are adjacent to the molar roots. Difficult to assess the sinuses, particularly the left one, but the right one looks reasonably clear. Mandibular condyles appear to be in reasonable condition. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit of flattening on the superior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep and fairly long in length. Significantly decreased joint space vertically indicative of either a displaced disc or a thin disc.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with maybe some slight flattening on the superior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep and somewhat elongated in length. Appears to be decreased joint space vertically and also perhaps posteriorly. Otherwise the condyle appears in fairly good condition.

Translation shows moderate translation with neither condyle ________ anterior to the articular eminence.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear fairly clear except the left one is a little bit cloudy, but this could be due to the grafting done on that side. She has a bone plate in the nasofrontal area. She has a stainless steel wire transversely in the intraorbital areas. Nasal septum appears reasonably straight. Turbinate on the left side appears larger than the right side, although there appears to be adequate airway on both sides.

Cephalometrically, she appears to have vertical maxillary deficiency and AP maxillary deficiency. Mandible appears to be in fairly good position. Numerous bone plates are seen in the upper arch. Maxillary incisors appear slightly overangulated. Oropharyngeal airway looks good. No significant tooth-size discrepancy noted. 

Basic Diagnoses

Vertical maxillary deficiency
AP maxillary deficiency
Vertical maxillary asymmetry with the right side being 4 mm higher than the left side and mandibular asymmetry with the right side being higher than the left side
Class III cuspid relationship on the right side, Class I on the left
Anterior crossbite and end-on incisor relationship
Missing maxillary right lateral incisor with the cuspid in the lateral incisor position and recontoured.
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations
TMJ pain
Severe headaches 
Midfacial and maxillary pain
Previous multiple midfacial fractures and mandibular left body fracture
Previous multiple midfacial surgeries including two previous LeFort I osteotomies

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Place appliances on the upper arch
Place appliances on the lower arch

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, downgraft it, correct asymmetry, level the transverse occlusal plane, and to upright the incisors
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to level the occlusal plane
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion