LINDA MORENO								04/18/2011

Linda is now 50 years old.  On April 2, 1996, I had reconstructed her joints with bilateral TMJ Christensen total joint prostheses.  She is doing fairly well, being well maintained and comfortable on some medications.  On April 12, 2011, she was going in to perform substitute teaching.  She tripped over a post that was cut off but exposed above the ground level.  She lost her balance and stumbled across the sidewalk and went head first into a chain link fence, landed on her right elbow, and then rolled over onto her left side and left hip.  She had to have help getting up by the employees of the school.  Apparently, one of the people was a bus driver.  Since that time, Linda has had some significant escalation of pain around the head and neck area.  She is currently taking the following medications:

Vicodin 10 to 15 mg q.6 hours.
Skelaxin 800 mg t.i.d. 
Ibuprofen 600 mg t.i.d. 
Medrol Dose-Pak.
Prozac 40 mg q.d.
Trazodone 75 mg q.h.s.
Lamictal 50 mg.

Linda was comfortable prior to her fall.  She was taking significantly less medication prior to her fall.  

She currently has headaches at a level of 6 throughout the head area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 7, diet at 7, disability at 8.  She has no earaches nor tinnitus, but does have vertigo but no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her elbows particularly on the right side, hands, fingers, hips, knees, and ankles, particularly the right ankle.  She still has some significant swelling and pain and discomfort associated with her elbows and right hand.  She also has pain down through her neck and shoulders.  Linda can force her jaw into a pretty bite relationship, but when she is relaxed her lower jaw tends to shift off towards the left side when she bites down hitting prematurely on the left maxillary lateral incisor, cuspid lower lateral incisor and cuspid.  She has a deep bite of about 3.5 mm.  She had an end-on Class II cuspid relationship.  

Following her injury and fall, her lower jaw was shifted about one tooth out of alignment.  She does have photographs from the day of the accident and the lower jaw is shifted probably 3 or 4 mm off towards the left side and hitting prematurely on the left cuspids, lateral incisors and being essentially open anteriorly and on the right side.  Linda appears to have maintained her bilateral profile.  As Linda opens her jaws, she gets a sharp pain on the right side that shoots from her chin corner of mouth area up into the jaw joint area.  She also feels increased pressure in the left side of her face cheek area that goes up to her eye-forehead-temple area.  Oropharyngeal tissues as best as I could see them look healthy.  The incisal opening is about 18 mm maximum but with pain.  To palpation, she has high moderate to low severe pain in the temporalis muscles, SCMs, posterior neck and shoulder muscles.  She has moderate pain over the TMJs, medial pterygoid areas and styloid areas.  The maximal incisal opening is about 18 mm.  She could open only about 8 mm without significant pain.  The excursion movement to the right is 0, to the left about 3 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows she is missing mandibular bilateral second bicuspids and all molars.  In the upper arch, she is missing the right second bicuspid, all the molars and on the right side she is missing all of the molars.  Turbinates appear somewhat enlarged.  Difficult to evaluate the sinuses.  She has bilateral Christensen total joint prostheses present.  

Coronal view shows that she has hyperplastic turbinates  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The septum looks reasonably straight.

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight.  The sinuses are clear.  The turbinates are enlarged.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows that she has a Christensen prosthesis present.  Fossa component appears to be intact, but difficult to tell if there is any separation at the lateral aspect of the joint between the phalange that is screwed into the lateral aspect of the zygomatic arch and the horizontal plate running across the joint fossa.  There appears to be soft tissue and perhaps some loss of bone associated with the zygomatic arch in the area of the screws in the prostheses.

Right TMJ coronal view shows the presence of a Christensen prosthesis.  There is a fracture of the fossa component with a free intermediate segment.  There may be some loss of bone around some of the screws. 

Left TMJ sagittal view makes it difficult to determine if the device is intact, particularly the fossa component.  She does have metal on metal articulation.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a metal on metal joint prosthesis.  There is a vertically displaced segment of the fractured prosthesis fossa component that is elevated above the rest.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the presence of the prostheses.  She does have significant snoring problems when she lays on her back where it is the worst or on her side and even sleeping in an upright position she still has some snoring problems.  

Based on clinical and radiographic assessment, Linda‘s diagnoses are as follows:

Fracture through fossa component of right TMJ Christensen total joint prostheses.
Fracture through fossa component of left TMJ Christensen total joint prosthesis.
Bilateral TMJ metallosis and foreign body giant cell reaction.
Severe pain and headaches.
Maxillary AP hypoplasia. 
Mandibular AP hypoplasia. 
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied turbinates causing nasal airway obstruction.
Sleep apnea symptoms. 
Missing mandibular second bicuspids and all molars.  
Missing maxillary left second bicuspid and all molars and maxillary right molars. 
Anterior deep bite.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Sleep apnea study.
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Removal of bilateral failed Christensen total joint prostheses.
	b.	Bilateral TMJ debridement.
	c.	Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ	 		Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	d.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward.
	e.	Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	f.	Arch bars.  
 