MARCO MORETTI									07-28-04

Marco is 14 years old and referred by Dr. Ronald De La Cruz, Sabana Norte, 50 W. Interfin Bank, San Jose, Costa Rica.

Patient History

Marco is in good health. He has had mononucleosis before, and he has pityriasis rosea Gilbert. That particular disease symptom was related to the mononucleosis, and he no longer has either one. He does get migraine headaches. He takes Tofranil for ADHD and for migraine. He has allergies to dust and animal fur. Marco has had migraine headaches since about the age of 7 or 8. They occur on the average of every 15 to 22 days, but he can get them as often as twice in a week. When they get severe, they can cause nausea and vomiting. They even keep medicine at school for him when he gets these headaches.

Patient Concerns

Lower jaw is underdeveloped
Teeth don’t fit together
Back teeth don’t mesh properly

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Marco has good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the right side. Mandibular dental midline may be just slightly to the right of the chin midline. 

In profile, Marco has fairly good balance in the upper lip, cheeks, and nose. Obtuse nasolabial angle. Mandibular appears retruded. Lower third face height appears a little bit short particularly in the lower two thirds of the face. Chin-neckline is a little bit short. Labiomental fold is very prominent. As Marco postures his lower jaw forward into a Class I position, it does improve his overall facial balance and profile. 

Marco has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. He has braces back through the first molars. Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva although a high labial frenulum. Marco had his braces on for approximately three years. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Marco has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship. He has an anterior deep bite of about 5 mm. Intraorally, the soft palate and uvula look pretty much normal. Tonsils, however, are huge and in fact fill up a good portion or the oropharynx. Says he can breathe well through his nose. Has significant problems with snoring. Sometimes he is tired during the day. At times he doesn’t sleep well and attributes this mainly to either nightmares, overexcitement, nervousness, etc. Incisal opening is about 49 mm. Excursive movements are about 7 mm in each direction. No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck areas or over the TMJs.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that there is some cloudiness in the left sinus. Turbinates appear moderate in size. He has impacted maxillary third molars, but the rest of the teeth are erupted in, and he is absent the mandibular third molars. Condyles look a little bit flattened and broad across the top with the right side looking more broad and stumpy-looking as compared to the left side. Apparently they took out the wisdom teeth in the mandible previously.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are all clear. Right turbinate appears enlarged. There may be some deviation of the nasal septum. Maxillary midline is to the left of the mandibular midline. 
Left TMJ tomogram was not taken in centric relation. Condyle is fairly wide anteroposteriorly. Fossa appears relatively normal, and articular eminence is relatively shallow. Teeth were not together when the x-ray was taken. Increased posterior joint space is probably not there in his centric relation position. 

Right TMJ tomogram likewise has the mandible postured forward probably just a little bit. There is increased posterior joint space, and the articular condyle appears flattened on the head and positioned downward and forward in the fossa. 

On opening, there is good translation of the condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he is probably biting anterior to his centric relation occlusion. Transverse occlusal plane is fairly level. In placing the lower model on a flat plane from lower incisor to second molar, there is a significantly accentuated curve of occlusion of almost 3 mm in the second bicuspid area. In the upper arch, there is a reverse curve of occlusion on the flat plane from the incisors to the first molars with the cuspid and all four bicuspids up about a millimeter from the occlusal plane. 

Basic Diagnoses

AP mandibular hypoplasia
Class II end-on occlusion
Anterior deep bite
Masticatory dysfunction
Severely hyperplastic tonsils
Oropharyngeal airway obstruction
Severe snoring
Impacted maxillary third molars x 2
Class II end-on occlusion
Accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch
Reverse curve of occlusion, upper arch
Mandibular asymmetry with the mandibular dental midline shifted about 3 mm to the left of the maxillary midline

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Try to expand maxillary arch an additional 1 to 2 mm
Continue to align and level mandibular arch 

Surgery
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible placing occlusion at the incisors and second molars. Midbuccal dental units will be opened between the upper and lower arch
Surgical removal of maxillary third molars x 2
Bilateral tonsillectomy (by Dr. Lawrence Weprin)
Surgical stabilizing appliance

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
