KELLY MORGAN									09-27-04

Kelly is 26 years old and referred by Dr. Farhad Moshiri. 

Patient History

Kelly has had orthodontics x 3. The first round was from third grade to sixth grade by Dr. George T. Mitchell in Lilburn, Georgia  30047 (phone 770-923-8333). The second time was in the eighth and ninth grades, and the treatment was completed in 1993 by Dr. Wiltshire in Richmond, Virginia (phone 804-740-7287). The third time she had orthodontic treatment was as she was a dental student at Harvard from 2003 to 2004. She had it done through the ortho department at Harvard under the direction of Dr. Ross, who is on the part-time faculty at Harvard. Kelly had her nose broken twice playing basketball in high school and had it set twice. She has had her third molars removed. She was born with bilateral hip dysplasia and does get swelling in those joints. She does have hypermobile joints and can twist her ankles fairly easily. She has a little problem in the left shoulder as she injured that shoulder playing rugby in college. There are no other significant joint problems. 

The only medication she takes is Mircette for birth control. She has no problems with headaches, no TMJ pain, and no myofascial pain. She rates her jaw function at 2, diet at 0, and disability at 1. 

Patient Concerns

Lip incompetence
Gingivitis because of gingival exposure
Cannot breathe through her nose
Right side pops
Difficulty incising food
Bruxism at night particularly when she is under stress

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Kelly has fairly good facial balance in the middle and upper third face. She has some asymmetry in the lower third face. Dorsum of nose particularly at the base of the nose is narrow, and alar bases are narrow. She seems to have constricture in the nasal valve area externally. Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 6 mm. Maxillary midline is probably about a good 3 mm off to the right side of the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is probably a millimeter off to the right. Chin is probably about 6 to 7 mm off to the right. Lip incompetence is about 9 mm. Left side of face is predominantly about 8 to 10 mm longer than the right side.

In profile, Kelly has some prominence of the nasal dorsum. She has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip. Upper lip supralabrale is just slightly posterior to subnasale. Maxilla appears to be probably about 3 to 4 mm AP deficient in the mid part of the upper lip. Chin appears to be AP deficient by probably about 10 to 12 mm. 

Intraorally, Kelly has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has moderate crowding, lower anterior arch. Anteroposteriorly, the arch is fairly symmetric in the cuspid position. She has a little bit more crowding in the lower left side of the arch than the right side. Therefore, if the teeth are lined up properly, the dental midline would probably shift a little bit more toward the right side. In the upper arch, Kelly has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. By history, she has had her third molars removed. Kelly is fairly close to having a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship. A little bit of a crossbite tendency on the right side in the first molar area but not quite into a crossbite. In the upper arch, left cuspid may be a millimeter in front of the right cuspid. Kelly has a transverse cant in the upper arch with the left side being about 2 to 3 mm lower than the right side. Kelly has a yaw in the maxilla and mandible with both posterior aspects being shifted off toward the left side probably between 2 to 3 mm. Oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal. Uvula looks perhaps just mildly elongated but not too bad. Soft palate appears might be mildly elongated as the posterior faucial pillars attach in the posterior aspect of the soft palate. Perhaps a mild transverse narrowing of the faucial pillars but nothing really significant. 

Nasal septum is deviated a little bit off toward the right side. Turbinates are moderately enlarged, but she likely has a transverse deficiency in the width of the nose, therefore, making the turbinates a greater contribution to her nasal airway resistance. She has a wide columella which does significantly narrow her nostrils. Nostrils are quite narrow. Luminal valves appear relatively normal. At night, she does have a restless type of sleep with a lot of tossing and turning. 

Kelly’s teeth on the left side of her anterior mandibular arch are just slightly smaller than the same teeth on the right side. Kelly states that her facial asymmetry was there in high school, and she does not feel that it has gotten any worse since that time. She has gone back and reviewed her previous photographs.

To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Joints function relatively smoothly, except on excursion she would have an occasional pop on the right side. Maximal incisal opening for Kelly is 55 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 8 mm and to the left 8 mm. When she goes to the right, it creates more discomfort in the left joint. 

Radiographic Evaluation

She is missing all four third molars. The rest of the teeth are present. Sinuses look reasonably clear. Condyles look fairly reasonable. Difficult to see the roots of the anterior teeth. The cuspid roots are okay, but the incisor root tips are either resorbed away or just did not show up on the imaging in the upper arch. 

Waters view shows a little deviation of the nasal septum off toward the right side. Sinuses look relatively clear. Turbinates appear to fill up most of the nasal cavity. Particularly on the left side, the turbinate is fairly large. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that may be posteriorly positioned in the fossa. A little bit of flattening on the anterior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Anterior and anterosuperior joint space looks relatively normal. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good shape with just a little bit of flattening on the anterior head. Decreased superior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep but not quite as steep as the opposite side. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles down beneath and slightly forward of the articular eminence. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has anterior vertical maxillary excess. Probably a Class II end-on occlusion. Moderately high occlusal plane angle. Differences in the vertical height of the occlusal surface and the inferior border of the mandible. Oropharyngeal airway looks within normal limits. 

Tomograms taken 09/01/04 show in the right condyle she appears to have flattening on the posterior head and anterior head of the condyle. Condyle appears short in vertical height as compared to the left side. 

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ arrested condylar hyperplasia versus slow-growing osteochondroma/osteoma with anteriorly displaced articular disc
Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
Anterior vertical maxillary excess
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Anterior vertical mandibular excess
AP microgenia
Severe transverse asymmetry of maxilla and mandible with the left side being 8 to 10 mm longer than the right side
Crowding, lower anterior arch
Significant tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm
Narrow nostrils
Wide columella
Hypertrophied turbinates
Deviated nasal septum
Severe nasal airway obstruction
Mouth breather
Gingivitis secondary to vertical maxillary excess
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 3 mm lower than the right side
Maxillary dental midline shifted 3 mm to the right of the facial midline and chin shifted approximately 6 to 7 mm to the right of the facial midline
Overangulation of incisors in both maxillary and mandibular arch
High occlusal plane angle of 18 degrees on the left side and 21 degrees on the right side (normal 8 degrees)
Lip incompetence of 9 mm

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Be sure lateral incisor roots are tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies  
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing 3 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy and also to keep from flaring the lower incisors too far forward

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect upward, posterior aspect downward, level transversely, and correct the occlusal plane
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to align the mandible onto the facial midline, advance it, and correct the transverse asymmetry
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy
Partial turbinectomies
Septoplasty
Reconstruct columella

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
