DAVID MORRIS									04-30-04

David is 54 years old and referred by Dr. Gary Schwarz, 4109 N. 22nd St., McAllen, TX  78504.

Patient History

David is in good health with no major medical problems. By history, David’s problems began in October of 2003. He was talking with his father-in-law, and his left side of his jaw seized up, and then he heard a loud pop, and then had some significant pain associated with it. His bite was off following that incident. In two weeks it hadn’t returned to its normal position, and he saw Dr. Gary Schwarz and also Dr. Roy York. Dr. Schwarz is an oral and maxillofacial surgeon, and he performed arthrocentesis in the left jaw joint. His bite even got a little worse after that. Dr. York constructed a splint for David in October or November of 2003, and he wore this for several months. The bite got worse, although the pain subsided. Then it got to the point that David actually felt better without the splint in, and he has not worn it for the past two months. He has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, and has a slight hearing loss in high frequencies probably due to shooting which he does a lot of. Other joints that are a potential problem include his lower back and also his left hip. He has no allergies that he is aware of. He is not aware of clenching or grinding his teeth at night. He has no trouble with headaches. Rates his TMJ pain at 0, overall pain around the head and neck area at 0, jaw function at 0, diet at 0, and disability at 2. After David’s incident, he could feel a depression in his cheek bone underneath the zygomatic arch just in front of the joint area that was not present on the other side. 

David does have trouble eating and chewing, although he can chew most foods. The left-sided teeth don’t come together at all, but the right side don’t fit together as well as they used to either. It does make it difficult for him to chew, although he can chew most food types. He chews predominantly on his right side, but he says he does try to chew on the left side just to keep those muscles functioning. When he bites down, he hits on his front teeth predominantly on the left side, and he feels that even on the right side his teeth don’t fit together at first, and his main impact point is on his left central incisors.

Current Medications

The only medication he takes his Lipitor 20 mg but is increasing to 40 mg in the immediate future.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, David has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Mandible is deviated a little bit off toward the right side. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about a millimeter to the right, and chin is shifted probably about 2 to 3 mm to the right. The left side of the face appears just slightly longer vertically than the right side. 

In profile view, David has fairly good facial balance. He does have a previous history of a fractured nose x 2 playing football.

Intraorally, David has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. He has a crown on the mandibular left first molar and right first molar. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has relatively small upper lateral incisors and has some spacing between the upper right lateral incisor and cuspid. On the right side, he has a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. On the left side, he has a posterior open-bite and essentially a Class III occlusal tendency by probably 2 mm. has an open-bite of probably 1 to 2 mm on that side. Incisal opening is 52 mm. Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction. Joints function smoothly. No tenderness around the head and neck area to palpation.
 
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses appear to be relatively clear except he has a little mucous retention cyst in the left maxillary sinus. He has all of his third molars except he is missing the maxillary right third molar but has all the rest. Condyles appear large but otherwise appear relatively normal. 

May have a periapical lesion above the maxillary right second bicuspid. He has developed snoring in the last six to eight years. Waters view shows that he has a rather tortuous nasal septum. Turbinates are relatively large particularly on the left side. A mucocele can be seen to some extent in the left maxillary sinus. The rest of the sinuses are relatively clear. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little flattening on top but not too much. Fairly good contour of the fossa and the condyle. Joint space is fairly well-balanced and a little bit thickened vertically. Anteroposterior dimension of the fossa seems a little bit narrow. However, overall the joint looks fairly good.

In the left TMJ closed view, the condyle appears to be postured downward and forward in the fossa. Significantly increased vertical joint space and also at the posterior aspect the joint space appears increased in size. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Anteroposterior dimension of the fossa is a little bit narrow similar to the opposite side. The condyle actually appears to have just a little bit of flattening on the anterior head or maybe just some slight anterior beaking developing but otherwise looks fairly unremarkable except for the increased joint space.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the presence of the mucous retention cyst in the left maxillary sinus. Oropharyngeal airway actually looks reasonably good. The reports of snoring may be due to oral mouth breathing perhaps and probably to the nasal airway obstruction. Appears to have a Class I cuspid-molar relationship, Class I skeletal relationship. He does have a posterior open bite at least on one side. 

Basic Diagnoses

Left TMJ possible posterior displacement of the articular disc versus hypertrophy of the bilaminar tissue
Left mandibular hyperplasia
Class I occlusion on the right, Class III end-on occlusion (2 to 3 mm) on the left
Left lateral open bite
Difficulties eating and chewing particularly on the left side
Mandible shifted 2 to 3 mm to the right of the maxillary and facial midlines
Masticatory dysfunction
Hypertrophied turbinates
Deviated nasal septum
Nasal airway obstruction
Snoring
Chronic mouth breathing particularly when sleeping
External nasal deformity secondary to previous traumatic injuries x 2
Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJs

Consider surgery
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor or lateral stabilizing suture technique
Consider possible left mandibular ramus osteotomy if necessary to correct the bite
Consider nasal septoplasty
Consider nasal turbinectomy
External rhinoplasty