KAI MORRIS										12-04-02

Kai is 37 years old and referred by Dr. William Hang, 101 N. Westlake Blvd., Westlake Village, CA  91362.

Patient History

Kai is in good health with no major medical problems. She takes no medications or any kind and has no known drug allergies.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Kai has good facial symmetry. Upper lip length is approximately 22 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 1 mm on the left central incisor and 1.5 mm on the right central incisor. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are aligned. The roots of the maxillary incisors may be tipped a little bit off towards the left side slightly.

In profile view, she has some fullness in the upper lip. Upper lip appears a little bit forward compared to the cheeks and nose. Lower lip also is somewhat protrusive. Chin may be just slightly retrusive but not too significantly. Chin-neckline has good length to it. Kai does have orthodontic appliances on that have been there for about four months now. 

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the third molars except she is missing the left first molar. She has a small amount of spacing between the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the third molars. Has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side by probably 3 mm and on the left side by probably about 3 mm. Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level. Appears to have good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch although has a little bit of gingival stripping around the lower incisors, particularly the left central. 

Kai reports no TMJ-associated symptoms and no airway problems. Oropharyngeal airway looks good. Uvula is a little bit hyperplastic but not significantly.

Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the left side, but the left turbinate is moderately small. Right turbinate is probably moderate in size but appears to be adequate airway present. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of all teeth except for the missing left first molar, but the space is still there. She has had root canals and crowns on the maxillary central incisors. Sinuses look relatively clear. Condyles look reasonably good. A large dark radiolucent area between the bicuspids. This may be just some trabecular pattern changes and perhaps the mental foramen area there. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with good morphology as well as in the fossa with sort of a moderate slope to the articular eminence. Good superior and posterior joint space is present.
Right TMJ tomogram likewise shows good joint anatomy of the condyle and fossa. Just some increased posterior joint space but good superior joint space.

Open joint views show good translation of the condyles.

Cephalometric radiograph shows the presence of bimaxillary protrusion. Oropharyngeal airway looks very good. Alveolar bone width anteroposteriorly is fairly narrow in the anterior part of the mandible. Upper and lower maxillary incisors are in excessive angulation position.

Basic Diagnoses

Maxillary dental alveolar protrusion
Fairly severe mandibular dental alveolar protrusion
Class II end-on cuspid-molar relationship
Missing mandibular left first molar with atrophy of the dental alveolus

Recommended Treatment

There are basically two surgical treatment options

Option 1
Presurgical orthodontics
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. 

Surgery
Extract mandibular right second bicuspid and maxillary left and right first bicuspids.
Anterior mandibular subapical ostectomy removing the second bicuspid extraction space on the right and removing approximately half of the previous extraction space on the left.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward approximately 4 to 5 mm.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to upright the maxillary incisors, slightly downgraft the posterior maxilla, and eliminate the first bicuspid extraction space.
Consider left mandibular body ostectomy to remove residual spacing on the left side with preservation of the inferior alveolar nerve.
Consider taking out three third molars (maxillary left and right third molars and mandibular right third molar).

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

Option 2
Presurgical orthodontics
Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. 

Surgery
Mandibular anterior subapical osteotomy around the four incisors to upright them by rotating the alveolar base anterior to the chin point.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly approximately 4 mm.
Augmentation genioplasty to reconstruct the chin versus horizontal bony osteotomy.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies with interdental cuts between the laterals and cuspids to upright the incisors and move the entire maxilla posteriorly 6 to 7 mm.
Mandibular left body ostectomy to remove the edentulous space on that side.
Extraction of maxillary left and right third molars and mandibular right third molar.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion