SAM MOSES										12-14-04

Sam is 15 years old and referred by Dr. Rick Roblee, Fayetteville, AR.

Patient History

Sam has had previous ear tubes when he was an infant and has had his wisdom teeth removed. Sam has allergies, and he has reactive to Bermuda grass, molds, and dust mites. Sam is not aware of any food allergies. 

Sam has had previous orthodontics and had appliances on for approximately two years. He got them off about six months ago, and there is already some shifting occurring in the teeth and in Sam’s bite. Sam is aware that his teeth are shifting, and they don’t fit together very well. They actually fit together apparently fairly well after braces but in the last six months there have been some significant changes that have been occurring. Sam doesn’t have any problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joint problems. Not aware of clenching or bruxism at all, in fact, is a mouth breather and sleeps with his mouth open. No headache problems except occasional headache. No TMJ pain or dysfunction and no myofascial pain around the head and neck area. Rates his jaw function at 2, diet at 0, and disability at 0. He has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.

Medications

Clarinex
Flonase
Accutane
Singulair

Clinical Examination

On opening, he has an opening click at about 10 mm in the left TMJ and closing click at about 5 mm. Right joint seems to function relatively smoothly. Incisal opening is 48 mm. Excursive movements are about 7 mm in each direction. 

In frontal view, Sam has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 6 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are aligned with each other but about a millimeter off to the left side. Has lip incompetence of about 11 mm. 

In profile view, Sam has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm. Chin-neckline is short, and chin-neck angle is moderately well-defined. Chin is probably AP deficiency by about 18 to 20 mm. 

Intraorally, Sam has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. Lower arch is fairly well aligned and leveled. A little inflammation around the lower anterior teeth and could improve his tooth brushing a little bit. Appears to be adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, Sam has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Upper lateral incisors appear small in size and could present a tooth-size discrepancy. A little bit of spacing between the upper incisors. Upper incisors have a tapered crown tip and are wider up in the midpart of the tooth as compared to the incisal edge. Sam has just a slight Class III cuspid tendency on the right side by about a millimeter and on the left side by approximately 2 mm. Has an end-on incisor relationship and has crossbite tendencies on the lateral incisor areas. Uvula appears a little bit long. Soft palate may be slightly elongated. Faucial pillars may be slightly constricted but not too significant. Tonsils are present and are relatively normal in size with no evidence of inflammation. 

Intranasally, the turbinates are hyperplastic. Appears to be a boggy, purplish kind of tissue associated with the turbinates. They are quite large and appear inflamed. Sam says that when he lies down he essentially cannot breathe through his nose at all. Septum appears within normal relative to deviation. 

Tooth-size analysis shows a Bolton’s difference of 5 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Sinuses appear relatively clear, although the left one is a little bit more cloudy than the right one. Difficult to see the condyles on this particular radiograph.

Waters view shows a little bit of cloudiness in the left sinus. Turbinates appear enlarged vertically, and the right one is larger than the left one. Ethmoid and frontal sinuses appear clear. Bony septum appears relatively straight.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good shape to it. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space could be a little bit compromised vertically and posteriorly but difficult to tell on these views. 

Left TMJ shows a condyle that appears to have some anterior beaking and a little bit of flattening on the anterior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Appears to be decreased posterior joint space and increased anterior joint space. Articular disc may be sitting in a more vertical position within the fossa with just slight anterior displacement based on radiographic and clinical examination. 

On opening, there is moderately good translation of the left condyle and moderate translation of the right condyle. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he does have vertical maxillary excess. It appears that he may have a moderately high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway looks good, but the nasopharyngeal airway appears to be fairly well blocked off with a fairly good size adenoid mass present, and the turbinates are quite large and almost reach all the way back to the adenoid tissues. AP dimension from soft palate to posterior pharyngeal wall and from the base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall is just about within normal range. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations
Mandibular hyperplasia
Maxillary vertical hyperplasia
Hypertrophied turbinates
Hypertrophied nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue
Nasal airway obstruction
Significant lip incompetence of 11 mm
Class III end-on occlusion 
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 5 mm
Overangulation of lower incisors
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Chronic mouth breathing

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJ

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up some space around the upper lateral incisors of about a millimeter around each tooth
Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure and retract

Reassess growth to determine if condylar hyperplasia is present

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible posteriorly and counterclockwise rotate it
Bilateral partial turbinectomies
Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy with bone screw stabilization

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
