NAT MOSLEY										11-10-03

Nat is 51 years old and referred by Dr. Jimmy Eubank, 2101 Teakwood, Ste. 100, Plano, TX  75075.

Patient History

The only previous surgery Nat has had has been for a deviated nasal septum. He apparently besides the nasal septoplasty may have had some turbinectomies performed. He says his nose is wide open now, and he has to be careful not to let his nose dry out because of infection problems. He continues to have some problems with his sinus draining. He had pneumonia in 2000 which required hospitalization, and he was in the hospital for about three days. He does have arthritis in his right shoulder. He has had kidney stones x three episodes. He currently takes Clarinex 5 mg tablets and Lipitor 10 mg. He apparently has had an allergic reaction to PENICILLIN.

Nat’s problems began about two years ago in January of 2002 when he had dental work done. He went in initially to have his upper anterior crowns redone to make them look wider. After that work was done, he developed significant problems with his jaws. His bite was thrown off, and he developed problems with clenching and bruxism and pain problems. In August/September of 2002, he underwent chiropractic treatment for a while without significant relief. At this time, the pain was mainly in his neck and shoulder areas. Early in 2003, he went and saw Dr. Charles Holt, who made an upper splint for him. With about six months of treatment with Dr. Holt, Nat was deprogrammed, and his muscles significantly improved. It was then suggested that he have some dental work done and particularly to redo the left mandibular posterior bridge because it apparently was out of occlusion. In the process of removing the bridge, the crown on the left first bicuspid apparently was fractured and eventually required root canal therapy. A temporary bridge was put on, but it was too high. Finally his bridge was replaced, and it also remained high and had to be readjusted. Nat finally sought an additional opinion with Dr. Jimmy Eubank. Dr. Eubank has referred him here for evaluation of his bite. 

Nat really doesn’t have any significant problems with headaches and has no TMJ pain. He rates his overall pain at a level of 3 which occurs predominantly in the masseter muscle areas with the left side being much worse than the right side. He rates his pain at a level of 3, his jaw function 0, diet at 3, and disability at 2. 

Other joints that bother Nat include his right shoulder, his back, right wrist, and right foot. He has to lay on the floor a lot in the evenings, and this helps his back feel better. He says he can feel the bones sort of pop in his back. His right foot problem has just developed within the last six weeks. His right wrist problem has just developed within the last month. He does lift weights and run. 

Patient Concerns

Teeth and jaws do not fit together well
Pain in the jaw areas particularly on the left side

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Nat has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 25 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is -2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is probably about a millimeter off to the left side. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much on the facial midline.

In profile view, Nat appears to have fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose. Lower lip and mandible appear to be retruded. Chin-neckline appears a little bit short in length, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, he has quite a narrow transverse width between his teeth. Has all of his lower teeth on the right side except he is missing probably the second molar with the third molar drifted into the second molar position. He has some crowns on some of those teeth. On the right side, he is missing the second bicuspid/first molar. They are replaced with bridgework. He has a lot of attrition and abrasion on his teeth. In the upper arch, Nat is missing the left first bicuspid and appears to have the rest of his teeth present. Has crowns on most all of the upper teeth. He has a Class II end-on occlusion and an anterior deep-bite of probably 5 to 6 mm. Transverse occlusal plane is fairly level. Maximal incisal opening is 63 mm. Excursive movements are 10 mm in each direction. Joints seem to function very smoothly. No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.

Intranasally, he has an extremely wide airway. Turbinates have been pretty much eliminated. A little deviation of the septum but nothing that would cause any obstruction in any way.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses look clear. Septum looks a little bit broad at its base, and turbinates appear moderate in size. His styloid process on the left side is extremely long and calcified. On the right side, there is a more normal length to the styloid process. He has root canals on the two maxillary central incisors, right first molar and left second bicuspid. On the left side, it appears he is missing the second bicuspid, first and second molar with the third molar drifted forward. It appears in the mandibular arch the third molars are drifted forward on both sides, and the second molars may be absent. In the upper arch, both third molars are missing, and he is also missing the maxillary left first bicuspid. Has bridges to replace the maxillary left first bicuspid and mandibular left second bicuspid, first molar, and mandibular right second bicuspid. Has crowns on all the maxillary teeth except for the maxillary left second molar. Condyles look relatively normal in size.

He had his septoplasty and turbinectomies done in Arkansas in the mid ‘80s. He had Dr. Jack Gunter trim off part of the nasal septum or redo the septoplasty in the early ’90s. 

Waters view shows that turbinates are relatively small in size. Still some deviation to the nasal septum but not too severe. Appears to be a good nasal airway. Sinuses appear equal lucency throughout the frontal, ethmoids, and maxillary sinuses. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. The fossa also appears to have reasonable morphology. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Joint space actually looks increased at the posterior aspect of the joint, and it could be that Nat’s jaw may have been postured forward slightly when this radiograph was taken. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with good morphology. Articular eminence is quite steep, almost at a vertical inclination. Joint space seems fairly well balanced throughout and maybe slightly increased indicative of perhaps a slight forward posturing of the mandible. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles where they come actually anterior to the articular eminences.

Cephalometrically, Nat has a fairly good bit relationship with an anterior deep bite of probably about 5 to 6 mm. Oropharyngeal airway at the base of the tongue measures about 11 mm but at the soft palate level measures only about 5 mm. Tongue provides some space between the dorsal surface and the hard palate.

Tooth-size analysis reveals a Bolton’s difference of 4 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

AP mandibular deficiency
Vertical maxillary deficiency
Class II end-on occlusion
Anterior deep bite of 5 to 6 mm
Mandibular incisors occluding into the palate
Missing maxillary left first bicuspid replaced by a crown
Crowns on all maxillary teeth including a pontic for the left first bicuspid
Missing mandibular left second bicuspid, first and second molar, with the third molar in the second molar position
Missing mandibular right second bicuspid and second molar with the third molar in the second molar position
Four unit bridge replacing the missing mandibular left second bicuspid and first molar and a three unit bridge replacing the mandibular right second bicuspid
Myofascial pain affecting predominantly the left side
Significant tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4 mm
Low occlusal plane angle

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch. Open up spaces around the upper lateral incisors to equal at least 1 mm around each lateral incisor. Consider removing the left first bicuspid pontic (only if osseointegrated implants are going to be placed prior to the orthognathic surgery. Otherwise pontic can stay in place)
Align and level mandibular arch. Consider removing mandibular right second bicuspid pontic and mandibular left second bicuspid/first molar pontic if osseointegrated implants are going to be placed prior to the orthognathic surgery

Surgery, Stage I
Placement of osseointegrated implants x 2 to 3 in the mandibular left posterior quadrant and x 1 in the right second bicuspid area as well as in the maxillary left first bicuspid area. Consider placing temporary crowns on the implants if adequate healing is done prior to the orthognathic surgery

Surgery, Stage II
Orthognathic surgery
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a clockwise direction
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to downgraft and slightly advance the maxilla as well as correct any transverse discrepancies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
 
Restorative dentistry to reconstruct the arches

I discussed with Nat after completing our consultation that he says he is tired a lot during the day and can fall asleep with his eyes open. I discussed with him the possibilities of placing him on Klonopin on a trial basis to see if this would improve his sleep quality. He says he does not dream at all and just can’t get into a deep sleep. He said Dr. Holt had suggesting doing a sleep study. However, he doesn’t give any history of apneic episodes, and he doesn’t wake up unable to catch his breath but does relate that he is tired during the day. This could be just because he is not getting a quality night’s sleep. A trial basis of Klonopin might help differentiate as to whether the clenching or bruxism that he has is contributing to his poor sleep. He will call back if he wants to proceed on with that. He says that there is a problem with addiction in his family, and he would prefer not to get on any heavy kinds of medications. 
