REBECCA MOSS									07-11-03

Rebecca is from Kilgore, Texas. She is 35 years old and referred by Dr. John Ross, 815 N. 4th Street, Longview, TX  75601.

Patient History

Becky has had TMJ problems since her teenage years of unknown etiology. She “always” has clicking and popping in the TMJs. At times she gets locked open. When she eats, she has clicking and popping in her jaw joints. She gets earaches, right side greater than left, some tinnitus, but no vertigo. She does have hearing loss, particularly in the right ear. Other joints that bother her include her back. She has no known allergies and no known problems with jewelry. She usually wakes up with headaches. She is aware that she does clench and grind her teeth at night. She is not sleeping well at all and has chronic fatigue problems that she feels may be related to her sleep disorder. Her current problems are having a significant impact on her abilities to carry on normal daily activities.

She had her right side third molars removed 06/14/00. After the surgery, she had numbness in her right lip, chin, side of face, and in her right tongue. Since that time, some sensations have come back. In the lower lip, she has had some return of feeling, and, in fact, is close to having feeling as compared to having numbness. However, the areas in the lower lip and chin area are extremely hypersensitive to the touch. The right side of her tongue feels like there is a battery charger attached to it, and she gets a stinging sensation as though there is a whole bunch of bees stinging her tongue. If she touches her right lower lip, this can also send sensations into her tongue as well. She gets severe headaches on the right side and pain in the right face and head area. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Becky has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 5 mm. 

In profile, she has fairly good facial balance with maybe just slight AP deficiency in the lower jaw projection. Chin-neckline and chin-neck angle are not well defined.

Intraorally, Becky has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. A little bit of crowding, lower anterior arch. Has fairly good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. Has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally and anterior deep bite of probably about 5 to 6 mm.

To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the temporalis and masseters, moderate pain over the TMJs, styloid areas, and SCMs. On opening, she has audible pops in the both joints with the left side being quite loud. On the right side, the click occurs on opening at 10 mm and closing at about 5 mm. On the left side, the opening click occurs at about 30 mm and closing at about 20 mm. Maximal incisal opening is about 36 mm but without significant discomfort only about 18. Excursive movements are about 7 mm to the right and 4 mm to the left, but this is painful and uncomfortable. Her joints didn’t pop on the excursive movements, although they can. The lip and chin area reveals increased two-point discrimination but with hypersensitivity with the touching of the two points on the right side of the lip and chin area. Von Frey hairs showed about equal results as far as detecting the diameter and size, but the right side was significantly more hypersensitive in response. Brush stroke was normal on the left, and on the right side she could not determine directional stroke in the horizontal direction but did accurately determine the vertical strokes and directions. 
Sharp stimulation gave a delayed onset on the right side compared to the normal left side. There was a different kind of feeling with that stimulation with the result being primarily a tingling, itching, hypersensitive kind of feeling. Cold stimulation had delayed onset on the right side, and even with removal of the stimulus she had a residual feeling of coldness on the right lip that extended well beyond the left side. Relative to her tongue, I tried two-point discrimination, and although she could feel the prongs on the left side of the tongue, even at 10 mm she had some difficulties determine two-points. However, on the right side, she had no sensation at all that I was even touching the tongue. With sharp stimulation, she had relatively normal response on the left side. On the right side, she had virtually no response even with significant imprint of the needle. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Cephalometric radiograph shows a slightly skeletal Class II relationship and Class II occlusion. Oropharyngeal airway looks good. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows reasonably good joint morphology. Joint space actually looks good. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also looks like it is in reasonably good position with good joint space. A little flattening on the anterior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Some evidence the third molar area removal shows there may be a little bit of bone down into the canal area. 

Open views show good translation of both joints. Styloid processes are quite long on both sides and extend beyond the posterior border of the mandible.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation with reduction and with mild arthritis
Relative mandibular hyperplasia
Right lingual nerve traumatic neuroma
Painful dysesthesia to right side of tongue
Traumatic neuroma, right inferior alveolar nerve 
Severe hyperesthesia to right inferior alveolar nerve
Class II end-on occlusion 
TMJ pain
Headaches 
Myofascial pain
Earaches 
Tinnitus 

Recommended Treatment

MRI of left and right TMJ

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch


Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to maintain occlusion and make spaces for the articular discs
Right lingual nerve resection of traumatic neuroma and repair with synthetic nerve graft
Right inferior alveolar nerve exploration, debridement, possible nerve resection, and reconstruction by direct anastomosis versus artificial nerve graft

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

I did give her a prescription for Klonopin 1 mg, disp. 30, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x 2.