HAILEY MOUNCE								02/25/2011

Hailey is 23 years old, birth date 08/20/1987.  Referred by Dr. Tom Lowder, 2709 W. Huntsville Avenue, Spingdale, AR 72762.  

Hailey’s problems began when she was 14 years old as a result of a cheerleading accident where she got kicked in the jaw.  It was dislocated and had to be reduced.  Since then she has had pain problems.  Hailey had orthodontics when she was 13 for about 7 months, but the injury occurred after she completed her orthodontic treatment.  Following her injury, she was placed into physical therapy and was given her first splint.  She has had a total of about 5 splints and has been wearing them continuously since about 2002.  She did go for four years from about the age of 15 to 19 where she did not require the splints as much, but since that time she has worn them almost all the time.  She was scheduled to have some TMJ surgery 2 years ago and then again in December 2010, but neither surgeries took place.  Hailey gets headaches in the temporal areas at a level of 8.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 3, diet at 1, disability at 7.  She gets no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo nor hearing loss.  She does have scoliosis and pops her back frequently.  She has anxiety probably related to the ongoing situation.  Her primary concerns at this time include the following:

Headaches.
TMJ pain. 
Muscle and jaw pains.
Chronic clenching.

Hailey is currently taking the following medications:

Cyclobenzaprine (Flexeril) 10 mg q.h.s.
Tramadol 50 mg tablets p.r.n. 
Triazolam 0.25 mg p.r.n. 
Naproxen DR 500 mg 2 times a day.
Lunesta 3 mg p.r.n. sleep.
Wellbutrin 300 mg XL 1 tablet q.d.
Singulair 10 mg q.d.
Advair Diskus 500/50.
Birth control pills.
Percocet 5/325 p.r.n. pain.
Hydrocodone 5/500 mg p.r.n. pain.
Triflex (glucosamine chondroitin and vitamin supplement).
Vitamin D 3 plus B.
Women’s mega vitamin.
Prilosec p.r.n.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Hailey has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  The maxillary midline and chin are pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the right side.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship 3 to 4 mm.  In profile view, Hailey has good facial balance.  Intraorally, Hailey has all of her lower teeth and upper teeth back through the second molars.  She is a slight Class II by 1 to 2 mm on the right side and maybe 1 mm on the left side.  She has about a 1 mm vertical overbite relationship. When she closes down, she hits prematurely on the right side.  Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy.  To palpation, Hailey has high normal to low severe pain to palpation over the left masseter, left TMJ, left retromandibular area, moderate pain over the left temporalis, and mild tenderness basically on the right side in those areas as well as the left SCM and shoulders.  Maximum opening was 29 mm with severe pain.  She could open 5 mm without pain.  The excursion movement to the right was 3 mm, to the left 5 mm.  On opening, she had clicks in her jaw joints at around 15 mm of opening and 10 mm of closing.  

Basic diagnoses for Hailey would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
Mandibular hyperplasia.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchors.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

Telephone conversation with Dr. Tom Lowder.  Discussed with him Hailey’s diagnoses and recommended treatment plan.  He feels he can have her ready for surgery within a week.  He agrees with the treatment plan.  He will contact me if he has any questions or concerns.  