JULIE MOW										9/16/05

Julie is 43 years old, referred by Dr. Gregory Edmonds. Julie has multiple medical problems including:

Von Recklinghausen disease, 
osteogenesis imperfecta, 
Gill-Barres disease (increased bilirubin.)
Osteoporosis.

Julie probably has had longstanding TMJ problems.  She underwent orthognathic surgery on August 29, 2000, which included a 3-piece Le Forte I and bilateral sagittal split osteotomies as well as a genioplasty.  She had postoperative problems including the development of an oroantral fistula.  She had some other minor procedures including placement and removal of suspension wire.  She has had attempts to close the oroantral fistula.  She had a mandibular distractor placed on the left side and a horizontal ramus osteotomy performed.  She has had some sinus surgeries.  On May 20, 2002, the maxilla was redone in 3 segments and the distraction device removed from the left ramus area.  She has had some further sinus surgery.  She had tooth #18 and 19 extracted and bone biopsy done on February 21, 2003.  In March of 2003, a PICC line was placed but she developed venous thrombosis and had to be hospitalized for a week and on Coumadin for 6 months. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Difficulty eating and chewing.
Severe nerve pain that gives a burning type sensation like a "curling iron" feeling, painful to touch on the face and jaw area.  
Right cheek and lower lip have the worst burning sensations.
Teeth and jaws do not fit.
Cannot talk, sing, laugh, smile or kiss without residual pain developing.
Mouth hangs open particularly at night and becomes quite dry.
Drooling.
Inside of mouth does not feel as though it works right. 
Lower jaw falls downward and backwards.
Ringing in the ears.
Lightheadedness and dizziness.
Earaches being worse on the left side.
Esthetically many of her features are worse now than before surgery.


CURRENT MEDICATIONS
OxyContin 20 mg b.i.d.
Oxycodone 5 mg 4 times per day.
Neurontin 1200 mg t.i.d.
Lexapro 25 mg q.d.
Slow-Mag.
JULIE MOW					9/16/05				Page 2

Klonopin 1 mg p.o. q.h.s.
Trazodone q.h.s.
Ambien 10 mg q.h.s.

Other joints that bother Julie include her neck, back, right wrist and knees.  She currently has a fractured right foot for which she wears a supportive boot currently.  She also feels she had fractured her left toe.  Julie states she has difficulties washing her face and showering because these entities all cause significant pain problems.  She has difficulty with drooling practically anytime that she has to lean over mainly due to loss of sensation in her lips.  She gets daily headaches at a level of 8 that occur predominately in the frontal, temple, posterior head and at the top of the head.  Even on pain medications, she rates her TMJ pain at 8, overall daily facial pain at 9 to 10.  She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 7, disability at 8.  

In frontal view, upper lip length is about 20 to 25 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0.  Nasal tip is about 3 mm off to the right side.  Maxillary dental midline is at least 3 mm off to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to right side.  Chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is 2 mm off to the right and maxillary midline is probably 5 mm off towards the right side.  Chin is probably 1 to 2 mm off towards the left side as well.  If Julie shifts her chin a little bit to the left, it improves her facial symmetry.  In profile view, upper lip is probably about 3 mm AP retruded. Chin is 12 to 15 mm AP retruded.  Chin-neckline is not well defined.  Julie does have a head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, Julie has her lower teeth on the right side from the second molar around to the second bicuspid on the left side.  There is some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  There is some mild crowding in the upper anterior arch.  She has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by probably 3 mm and on the left side she is slight Class II by about 2 mm.  She has small upper lateral incisors and probably has a tooth size discrepancy.  She does have a scar band in the left vestibule that goes from her cheek to her alveolar ridge.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the maxillary left cuspid being about 3 mm higher than the right cuspid.  Mandibular cuspids are in very similar position.  The oropharynx appears relatively clear.  Soft palpate appears to be a little posteriorly positioned.  The uvula is normal in size as is the soft palatal length and faucial pillars appear relatively normal.  She does get some pain in the left base of the nose area and maxillary area probably in the area where the bone plate is placed.  Intranasally, the septum looks reasonably straight.  The turbinate on the right side is moderately enlarged and the left side is relatively normal in size.  This does not appear to have any significant nasal airway obstruction.  Her husband says that she does have moderate snoring.  She has moderate daytime somnolence.  She has difficulty sleeping at night.  No evidence of sleep apnea, however.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the masseters, medial pterygoids and mild pain over the temporalis, TMJs and styloid areas.  She has crepitus in the joints being worse on the right side than the left side.  Incisal opening is 29 mm.  Excursive movement to right 5 mm, left 7 mm.  She does have significant difficulties swallowing and has to sort of suck in her saliva before she can swallow.
JULIE MOW					9/16/05				Page 3


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows that she has severe arthritis, severe gonial notch formations bilaterally being worse on the left side than the right side.  She has 3 screws in each ramus.  She has a bone plate in the chin area.  She has 2 bone plates in the maxilla.  The left side has 6 screws and the plate on the right side has 8 screws.  The screws go up by the infraorbital rim area.  On the left side Julie can push there and sometimes she will hear a clicking a noise that sounds as though something was out of place and popped back into place.  It could be that one of the screws could be loose or perhaps even a plate fractured.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows severe arthritis.  The articular eminence is extremely flat.  The angle of the mandible is difficult to discern though it does appear that it is there.  There are 3 bone screws in the ramus area.  There has been severe deformation of the posterior angle and gonial notch area.

Right TMJ tomogram shows severe arthritis though there is more bone left in the condylar head as compared to the opposite side.  Articular eminence is also a bit steeper here.  There appears to be bone-on-bone contact.  Three screws are present in the ramus.  She has a very prominent gonial notch but at least the main portion of the ramus is still intact.  On opening views, there is moderate translation in both joints.

Waters view shows that there is asymmetry with the left side being shorter vertically than the right side.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  The right turbinate is enlarged compared to the left one.  Maxillary midline is off to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline is a little bit to the right but in better position.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Julie appears to have a deficient AP projection of the maxilla and she has posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.  Mandible is anteroposteriorly retruded.  She has a very steep occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway actually looks reasonably good.  She does have a definite head postured forward neck position.  Upper incisors appear quite vertical in orientation.  She does have problems getting food and even sometimes her medications caught between her cheek and teeth.  She has to swirl and swish her mouth around in order to be sure that she gets those things out.  At times, she has to use her finger to actually get the food out.  Julie has a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Osteogenesis imperfecta.
Von Recklinghausen disease.
Gill-Barres disease?
Osteoporosis.
Bilateral TMJ severe resorptive arthritis.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.


JULIE MOW					9/16/05				Page 4


High occlusal plane angle.
Class III end-on cuspid relationship on the right side.
Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side.
Maxillary dental midline shifted 4 to 5 mm to the right.
Mandibular dental midline shifted 1 to 2 mm to the right.
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 3 mm higher than the right side.
TMJ pain.
Myofascial pain. 
Headaches.
Tinnitus.
Vertigo.
Severe inferior bilateral inferior alveolar nerve dysesthesia and paresthesia.
Masticatory dysfunction.
Malunion of the maxilla.
Previously placed hardware including 2 bone plates in the maxilla with 13 screws and 6 bone screws in the rami and bone plate with 4 screws in anterior mandible. 
External nasal deformity. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up space around the upper lateral incisors to equal 1 mm around each tooth.
Align and level mandibular arch.
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol) for fabrication of 3D model for manufacturing TMJ prostheses.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy x24 dives.
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and down graft it posteriorly with bone plates and hydroxyapatite grafting.  
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy.
Remove previously placed hardware of bone plates x2 in the maxilla with 13 screws and removal of 6 screws from the mandibular ramus and bone plate and 4 screws from the anterior mandible.
Augmentation of bony defects of bilateral mandibular body area.
External rhinoplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 