BRIAN MUELLER									03-15-04

Brian is 18 years old and referred by Dr. Jay Sheets, 53 Doctors’ Park, Cape Girardeau, MO  63701 and Dr. David Crowe, 1734 Broadway, Cape Girardeau, MO  63701.

Patient History

Brian is in good health with no major medical problems. He has been aware of his jaw problems for quite a few years. He has undergone extensive previous orthodontic treatment for actually about 12 years’ worth of treatment. This includes the extraction of the mandibular first bicuspids to try to correct his Class III occlusion. On 12/23/03, an attempt was made to do a sagittal split osteotomy on the right mandibular ramus area. The surgeon elected not to proceed on when complications were encountered. Brian may likely have condylar hyperplasia problems bilaterally. He has had lower first bicuspids extracted

Brian has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss, no trouble with headaches, and no TMJ pain. He rates his jaw function at 4, diet at 3, and disability at 2. 

Patient Concerns

Problems eating and chewing
Difficulties breathing through his nose
Facial balance problems and the fact that the teeth and jaws do not line up
Speech problems

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Brian has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. Maxillary midline is off to the left side 2 mm. Mandibular dental midline is off to the right a millimeter. Mandibular midline and chin midline are fairly aligned. 

In profile, Brian has probably about 6 mm of AP maxillary deficiency. Chin actually has fairly good AP projection. Chin-neckline looks fairly normal in length. 

Intraorally, Brian is missing the mandibular first bicuspids but has the rest of the teeth back through the second molars. Significant vertical difference between the level of the first molars and the second bicuspids where there is probably a good 2 mm vertical difference on both sides between the levels of the marginal ridges. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars present. Has small upper lateral incisors. Has a slight Class III occlusion on the right side and on the left side probably has about a 5-mm Class III cuspid relationship. Has an anterior crossbite and crossbite extending back on the right side including almost to the first bicuspid. On the left side, crossbite is corrected at the cuspid area. Mandibular right cuspid is a millimeter posterior to the left cuspid. In the upper arch, the left cuspid is probably 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. Has a transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being a millimeter lower than the left side in the upper arch. Mandibular arch is a little bit more level although slightly elongated on the right side by maybe a millimeter. Oropharynx appears clear. He has a bifid uvula. 

Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged but not too significantly. A little bit better airway on the left side than the right side. Holding the nostrils open did not improve his abilities to breathe through his nose. Septum may be just slightly deviated off toward the right side but not too significantly. 

Vertically has a 0 overbite relationship. No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear as though they are not too enlarged and that there is a good airway. Missing all four third molars. Missing mandibular first bicuspids. Has a little foreshortening of the upper first bicuspid and maybe the left second bicuspid but not too significant. Condyles look relatively normal in shape.

Waters view shows that the left turbinate is enlarged and seems to block some of the airway on that side. On the left side, the turbinate is moderately enlarged, but there appears to be some airway. Sinuses appear relatively clear for the most part. Vertical asymmetry is seen with the left side being shorter vertically in both the maxilla and mandible as compared to the right side. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Difficult to identify the cortical bone on top of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep but not too long on length. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle of fairly normal size, but the condyle appears to be posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Joint space is quite thin superiorly to the condyle. It is possible the disc is either extremely thin or displaced medially or anteriorly. The same is true for the opposite side. 

On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyles. 

Cephalometrically, Brian has a Class III skeletal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway looks good. Has a skeletal and occlusal Class III jaw relationship. Extremely thin bone along the point A region of the maxilla. Slight vertical discrepancy at the occlusal level as well as at the inferior border of the mandible. Brian has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Mandibular prognathism
Class III occlusion on the left and slight Class III occlusion on the right side
Anterior crossbite
Missing mandibular first bicuspids and all four third molars
Rule out condylar hyperplasia
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm
Difference in marginal ridge alignment in the lower arch between the first molars and the second bicuspids with about a 2-mm vertical difference
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1.5 to 2 mm lower than the left side
Maxillary midline shifted 2 mm to the left, mandibular dental midline and chin shifted 1 mm to the right 

Recommended Treatment

Obtain new lateral cephalometric radiograph and analyze to rule out for condylar hyperplasia

Presurgical orthodontics 
Open up a millimeter of space around each upper lateral incisor to help correct for the tooth-size discrepancy and close spacing between the bicuspids and molars
Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Adjust brackets on the mandibular first molars and on the second bicuspids to level the marginal ridges

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and correct the asymmetry
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back on the facial midline and set it posteriorly slightly

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
 
Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors