CARA MUELLER									03-15-04

Cara is 16 years old and referred by Dr. Jay Sheets, 53 Doctors’ Park, Cape Girardeau, MO  63701 and Dr. David Crowe, 1734 Broadway, Cape Girardeau, MO  63701.

Patient History

Cara does have some problems with depression and possible bipolar problems. She has had tubes in her ears in 1990 and a palatal split procedure done in 04/2003. Cara is in good health with no major medical problems. 

Approximately a year ago was the first that Cara became aware of having some of the TMJ-related symptoms. Two years ago, she became aware of the lower jaw growing off toward the left side. 

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her lower back and her right middle finger. She is not aware of clenching and bruxism, although her mother states that last night she could hear her grind her teeth a little bit. The mother also states that when Cara was born that she was diagnosed with low muscle tone and had to do some exercise to try to improve her muscle strength. She has no problems with headaches. She rates her TMJ pain at about a level of 4. Cara rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 7, and disability and how it affects her life at a level of 8.

Current Medications

Effexor 225 mg q.d.
Lamictal 75 mg q.d. 
Risperdal 0.5 mg q.d. 

Allergies

She doesn’t tolerate amoxicillin very well as it causes significant stomach problems.

Patient Concerns

Facial asymmetry
Underbite
Slant in the jaws
Doesn’t like appearance
Pain after eating
Difficulty breathing through the nose
Predominantly a mouth breather
Pops in the joints
Doesn’t like her appearance
Speech problems

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Cara has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Nasal dorsum is a little bit wide and nasal tip is wide. She has some asymmetry in the mandible. Upper lip length is 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm on the left and 2 mm on the right. Nasal tip is shifted to the left by probably 1 to 2 mm. She does have some slight orbital dystopia with the right side 2 mm higher than the left side. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are shifted off toward the left side about 7 mm, 5 mm from the maxillary dental midline, but 7 mm from facial midline. As Cara shifts her mandible to the right approximately 6 or 7 mm, it significantly improves her facial symmetry, and the asymmetry in the maxillary dental midline is appreciated with it being shifted off toward the left side a couple of millimeters.

In profile view, the AP position of the maxilla is actually fairly good. The AP position of the chin actually is perhaps just a little bit strong but actually not too bad. Chin might be a couple of millimeters more anterior than ideal. Chin-neckline may be just slightly long, and chin-neck angle is well-defined. She does have a little prominence in the nasal dorsum. There is a slight acute nasaolabial angle. 

Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a submerged mandibular left first molar. Contacts on the lower anterior teeth are positioned a little bit gingivally. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a permanent retainer on currently providing transverse arch stability. She has a significantly increased curve of Wilson present. She has what appear to be small upper lateral incisors particularly on the left side. Cara  has a full Class III occlusion on the right side and a little bit closer to a Class I on the left side, although a little bit Class III-ish. She has a complete crossbite on the left side anteriorly. The right side is out of crossbite from the right lateral incisor through the second molar, and, in fact, she has a tendency toward a buccal crossbite on that side. When she shifts her mandible over toward the right side 6 or 7 mm, she goes into a crossbite at the cuspid area on that side. On the left side, she may be slightly overexpanded. She may be overexpanded in the maxilla if she is placed in a Class I occlusion. Appears to have an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch particularly on the left side. She has an open bite on the left side when her jaw is postured toward the right. 

Transversely, she is fairly symmetrical in the upper arch. May have just a slight cant in the lower arch with the left side being a little bit lower than the right side by probably 1 to 2 mm. In her centric occlusion in centric relation, she has an open bite on the left side involving the lateral incisor back through the first molar. On both sides, the upper bicuspids are not included in the arch wire yet. Oropharynx looks relatively healthy. She does have moderately enlarged tonsils with the right one being a little bit larger than the left one. 

Intranasally, she has hypertrophied turbinates bilaterally. The right side is much larger and almost touches against the nasal septum. Left side is large, but there is a little bit of airway space on that side. 

To palpation, she has moderate pain over the temporalis muscles, shoulders, and right styloid area. She has milder tenderness over the posterior neck, masseters, TMJs, and mild tenderness over the SCMs. TMJS seem to function reasonably smoothly, although she can easily dislocate the right condyle anterior to the articular eminence. Maximal incisal opening is 60 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 12 mm and to the left 6 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that she has moderately large turbinates. Sinuses look relatively clear. Condylar head and neck on the right side appears longer than the left side. Mandibular left first molar appears to be submerged and probably ankylosed. All four third molars are missing. She has decreased vertical height of the mandibular bodies particularly on the left side, and this is likely due to the ankylosed tooth that may have interfered with some of the vertical growth of the alveolus on that side. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear enlarged, and there appears to be decreased nasal airway. Mandibular dental midline is shifted significantly off toward the left side, and the maxillary midline is shifted at least a couple of millimeters off to the left. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a long condylar head and neck on this side. Joint space actually looks reasonably good. Articular eminence is moderately steep and actually a little bit toward the shallow side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also exhibits a fairly long condylar head and neck. There may be a little bit decreased joint space vertically on this side. Condyle appears to have a little bit of peaking toward the anterior part in one of the cuts. The articular eminence is a little toward the shallow side. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles with actually the left one translating a little bit more than the right one, although the right one is the one that definitely exhibits a clinical pop in wide opening.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph demonstrates a skeletal and occlusal Class III jaw relationship. Inferior borders, however, and the occlusal surface appear fairly level. Oropharyngeal airway looks very good. 

Tooth-size analysis reveals a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ condylar hyperplasia with the right side being much worse than the left side
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations
Deviate mandibular prognathism
Maxillary transverse hyperplasia and asymmetry
Full Class III occlusion on the right side, slight Class II occlusion on the left side
Left crossbite
Right tendency toward buccal crossbite
Maxillary midline shifted 2 mm to the left, and mandibular dental midline shifted 7 mm to the left of the facial midline
Ankylosed submerged mandibular left first molar
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of approximately 2 mm
Accentuated curve of Wilson in the upper arch
TMJ pain
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction
Myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Remove transpalatal arch bar. Allow some transverse maxillary relapse to occur. Place brackets on the bicuspids and align them appropriately in the arch
Continue to align and level mandibular arch and close spacing. Do not attach arch wire to the submerged ankylosed mandibular left first molar but try to level off the adjacent teeth

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to align the mandible onto the facial midline
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to correct transverse problems and correct the asymmetry
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

Build up mandibular left first molar with composite, crown, etc., to get it back into a functional occlusal relationship
