KATHY MULLINS									02-03-03

Kathy is 50 years old and referred by Dr. Duane Keller, 3929 Bayless Ave., St. Louis, MO  63125-1437.

Patient History

Kathy has been diagnosed with fibromyalgia and aortic insufficiency. She had a hysterectomy in 1980. She had tonsils and adenoids removed as a child, and she has had abdominal muscle repair. She has had headaches for years, and she also has some high blood pressure, but she feels that perhaps the headaches may have caused some of the high blood pressure problems because of the chronic headache factors. She does have some anemia problems and has a low ferritin level currently. 

She has had adverse reactions to tetracycline and to Reglan. 

Kathy gets earaches particularly on the right side five to seven times per day. She has bilateral tinnitus, and she has vertigo that comes and goes but can last for several days. She has a hearing loss as well. No other joint problems. No food allergies. She cannot wear cheap jewelry. She has nocturnal clenching and bruxism to the point that it wakes her husband up. She also has clenching during the day. She has been diagnosed as having fibromyalgia. She has lost her job and is unable to work because of her significant pain problems.

Her TMJ problems began in about 1980 (22 to 23 years ago) when she was involved in a sledding accident and hit her head on some ice. The TMJ problems began shortly after that. They have just gotten progressively worse, and particularly in the last year or so, they have gotten extremely bad for her. She has had splint therapy performed by Dr. Todd Morton under the direction of Dr. Duane Keller. She does use moist heat packs on the face, but this doesn’t seem to help very much. She has times when her face feels numb, and she is beginning to develop that again, and she has had some significant problems with that in the past. 

She rates her headaches at a level of 9 that occur in the frontal and temporal areas, and these occur five to seven days per week. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, overall pain at 8, jaw function at 8, diet at 7, and disability at 8. She has a lot of pain in her neck and shoulders currently as well.

Current Medications

Premarin 0.9 mg per day
Norvasc 5 mg per day
Miralax
Effexor XR
She also takes supplemental iron over-the-counter

Clinical Examination

Kathy has good facial symmetry and balance. 
In profile, she also has good vertical and AP facial balance.

Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular left and right (all) bicuspids and all molars. She has a splint in the bottom replacing those teeth. In the upper arch, Kathy is missing the right second bicuspid and all molars and on the left side both bicuspids and all the molars. It is sort of tough to get a centric relation on Kathy, but mandibular dental midline may be just about a millimeter off to the right side. She has small upper lateral incisors and a large crown on the mandibular cuspids, and so she is Class II end-on on the right side and basically pretty close to Class I on the left side. Oropharynx appears relatively clear except she has a fairly significantly hypertrophied uvula. She does have a history of snoring at night. 

Nasally, Kathy has a wide columella and extremely narrow nostrils. Intranasally, turbinates are sort of moderate in size, and there is a deviation of the septum, but it appears that the airway is okay there. Holding the nostrils open made a significant improvement in her abilities to breathe through her nose. She only has about a millimeter of overbite relationship, but this in part is due to the buildup of the splints that she has. She does have an upper partial replacing her missing posterior teeth.

On opening the jaws, the mandible deviates 7 mm off toward the right side. Incisal opening is 21 mm. Excursive movements to the left are 4 mm and to the right 8 mm. 

Both TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly. As she tries to shift her mandible towards the left, she has significant pain on the right side. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses look relatively clear. Left turbinate appears enlarged. It appears to block most of the airway. Missing all the mandibular teeth except for cuspid to cuspid, and she has large crowns on the cuspids. In the upper arch, the remaining teeth include the left cuspid through the right first bicuspid with all the posterior teeth absent. She may have a retained root in the right maxillary arch. Condyles actually don’t look too bad on this view. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some significant anterior beaking. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. Increased superior and posterior joint space most likely as a result of the long-term splint therapy.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is very narrow anteroposteriorly and appears somewhat deformed. Could be this cut is probably more medial. Increased superior and posterior joint space to a certain extent. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

On opening, there is severely restricted translation of the right TMJ. Left joint does show some translation with the condyle coming out toward the articular eminence but not beneath it. 

Cephalometrically, she appears to be in a relatively normal incisor relationship without the splints in and has about a 2-mm overbite. Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good.

Waters view shows that there is significant deviation of the nasal septum. Turbinates appear moderately large, and the airway doesn’t appear really clear. Sinuses appear clear. Jaw structures appear relatively symmetric. 

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with severe deformation
Severe headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Hyperplastic uvula
Snoring
Wide columella base with narrow nostrils
Nasal airway obstruction
Sleep apnea symptoms
Missing maxillary right second bicuspid through third molar and left first bicuspid through third molar
Missing mandibular left and right first bicuspids through third molars

Recommended Treatment

Testing at the Environmental Center for Hypersensitivities to Materials Used in the Prostheses

Medications to Help Control Pain (i.e. Klonopin, Midrin, etc.)

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ condylectomy, meniscectomy, and reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from abdomen)
Uvulectomy
Reconstruction of columella
Arch bars and skeletal fixation

Dental Reconstruction