KATHLEEN MUNGER-FISK							08/23/2006

Kathleen is 43 years old and is referred by Dr. Odell Marshall.  She has two boys, ages 3-1/2 and 1-1/2 boys.  She has had one miscarriage.  She has had previous TMJ surgery.  Kathleen has endometriosis and had surgery three times by Dr. Godat to remove tumors.  She has had one D&C and she has had two C-sections.  She does have some diarrhea problems that she feels are related to stress.  She is going through some difficult personal times right now.  She currently takes vitamins and occasionally Advil.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Muscle pain. 
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Difficulties opening the mouth. 
Bite has shifted some.
Earaches. 
Severe tinnitus.
Vertigo.

Kathleen does experience problems with her equilibrium.  Kathleen's TMJ problems began back in her teenage years.  Her problems got fairly severe and she then underwent surgery in about 1989 with Dr. R.V. Walker for bilateral TMJ reconstruction.  She has done fairly well for a number of years.  The reoccurrence of her pain and dysfunction problems began about four years ago.  Apparently, some family factors have caused significant increased stress for her. 

In frontal view, Kathleen has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm.  Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline may be just about 1 mm off to the right.  Chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  In profile view, Kathleen has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  Chin appears a little bit retruded.  Chin-neckline is not well defined.  Chin may be retruded perhaps 6 to 8 mm.  Intraorally, Kathleen has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  It appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has division II alignment of her incisors.  She actually has a Class II division II malocclusion.  There is an anterior deep bite of probably close to 7 mm.  She has a significant reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side.  Left turbinate appears enlarged and a little bit boggy in nature.  Right turbinate appears relatively normal and the right airway looks fairly good but there seems to be some decreased airway in the left side.  To palpation, she has high moderate to severe pain in the temporalis, masseters, medial pterygoids, TMJs, styloid areas, SCMs, posterior neck and shoulders.  Kathleen has severe loud audible crepitus in the left TMJ.  On the right side she likely has some crepitus but it is so overwhelming the left side is difficult to detect on the right side.  However, her pain is much more severe on the right side than the left side.  Maximal opening is 39 mm.  She can open to about 29 mm without severe pain.  Excursive movements are about 7 mm in each direction.  

KATHLEEN MUNGER-FISK 		08/23/2006 				Page 2


However, going into excursive movements created muscle cramping for her around the right anterior aspect of the masseter muscle up into the cheek area. Transverse occlusal plane appears relatively level. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: 
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  A little calcification around the bicuspids on the right mandible.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Left turbinate appears enlarged.  Joints appear arthritic with the right side appearing worse than the left side.

Waters view shows that there is a nasal spur coming off the right side of the septum and left side of the nose appears fairly well blocked with the turbinate as well as with septal deviation.  The sinuses, however, appear relatively clear.  She has quite a large frontal sinus but it is clear as well. 

Left TMJ sagittal view is hard to read but it appears that there are some severe degenerative changes within the joint.

Right TMJ tomogram likewise shows severe arthritic changes within the joint.  Articular eminences on both sides are moderate.  There appears to be decreased superior and anterior joint space.  On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a slight skeletal Class II relationship with a division II occlusion.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level appears to be about 8 mm and at the base of the tongue is closer to about 6 mm down to 4 mm at the lower aspect of the tongue base. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
AP mandibular deficiency. 
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Posterior maxillary deficiency. 
Class II division II malocclusion. 
Anterior deep bite of 7 mm. 
Severe TMJ pain. 
Severe headaches.
Myofascial pain. 
 Severe earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo.
 Nocturnal clenching and bruxism.
 Left nasal turbinate hyperplasia. 
 Left nasal airway obstruction.  



KATHLEEN MUNGER-FISK		08/23/2006 				Page 3


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Medications.
a.  Klonopin to control nocturnal clenching and bruxism. 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. 
Align and level mandibular arch.
CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly. 
Bilateral coronoidectomies. 
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Left partial turbinectomy. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
