STEPHEN MURPHY									5/4/05

Stephen is 34 years old, referred by Dr. Ron Groves 2105 W. Southlake Blvd., Suite 245, Southlake TX 76092.  He still takes Zestril 10 mg for high blood pressure and he has asthma and takes 2 medications, Tilade 2 puffs in the morning and at night and Ventolin before exercise.  He has no trouble with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain etc.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Teeth do not fit together.
Jaws do not fit together.
The teeth are crooked.

Stephen is not aware of any problems with his snoring.  He thinks he breathes some through his mouth and nose.  He has no problems with daytime somnolence and is not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  

In frontal view, Stephen has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 24 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1 to 2 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Nasal tips about 2 mm off to the right side.  Actually, maxillary midline may be about a mm to the left.  Chin is pretty much on the facial midline.  In the profile view, Stephen has problems with the nasal dorsum.  He has a 90-degree nasal labial angle.  Axilla appears to be in fairly good AP position.  It could be maybe just slightly AP deficient at the upper lip supralabial  by maybe 2 to 3 mm.  Chin appears to be retruded by probably about 18 mm.  Chin-neckline is short although the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  If Stephen postures his mandible forward it does improve his overall facial balance.  Intraorally, Stephen has all his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has some crowns on his bicuspids.  He has some significant crowding over the lower anterior arch.  He has adequate attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch he has quite a constricted arch.  Lateral incisors are blocked a little bit lingually.  He has a Class II cuspid relationship bilaterally being probably about 3 to 3.5 mm Class II on the left side and probably 4 to 5 mm Class II on the right side.  He has an overjet of probably about 5 mm.  He has a vertical overbite of about 2 mm.  Tissues look healthy.  He has fairly significant hyperplasia of the uvula.  Soft palate appears relatively normal in length.  Faucial pillars appear relatively normal.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the left side at least in the cartilaginous portion.  Turbinates are fairly normal size and do not appear to be causing any airway obstruction at least in the anterior aspect of the nose.  Visual examination shows that there is probably not any significant nasal airway obstruction.  The columella and nostrils are relatively normal.  No apparent significant stricture of the luminal valves.  Incisal opening, 65 mm.  Excursion movement to the right about 12 mm, to the left about 5 mm but it seems there may be factors concerning perception of how he moves the jaw from side-to-side due to the effect to the left movement as he does have good translation bilaterally.  When he protrudes, he has fairly symmetric movement with actually a little bit of shift of towards the right side slightly.  
STEPHEN MURPHY				5/4/05					Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of a lot of root canals particularly on the right side in the maxillary right second bicuspid, first and second molar, mandibular right second bicuspid first molar.  There are lots of crowns on his posterior teeth.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Condyles on the left looks okay, the right side is cut off.  It is difficult to evaluate the nasal airway.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows the condyle has fairly good morphology.  A little bit of flattening on the anterior head.  Articular eminence is quite steep and actually almost angles posteriorly slightly.  Joint space looks fairly good.  There appears to be a little osteophyte at the posterior head of the condyle.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  There may be a little bit of flattening on the posterior head and a little bit on the superior head.  Articular eminence is quite steep on this side as well.  Joint space looks fairly well balanced.  On opening, there is good translation on both condyles and in fact, probably some hyperfunction.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear fairly clear.  Frontal sinuses are quite large.  Bony septum shows deviation.  Turbinates appear relatively mild in size and appears that there is probably an adequate airway with the right side being better than the left side as also observed clinically.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Stephen has a Class II occlusal and skeletal relationship.  The oropharyngeal dimensions look relatively normal from the soft palate and from the base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall.  Lower incisors appear slightly over-angulated although the upper incisors appear almost to be a slight vertical orientation.  A little unusual angulation of the maxillary central incisor crown off of the root.  

DENTAL MODEL ANALYSIS:  He has tooth size discrepancy of 2 mm.  When the models are shifted into a Class I cuspid relationship, he develops bilateral posterior crossbites.  The right mandibular cuspid is almost 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  In the upper arch, the anteroposterior position of the cuspids is fairly symmetric.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency. 
Class II occlusion.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.  
Severe crowding of the lower anterior arch.
Significant transverse deficiency of the maxillary arch.
Significant transverse deficiency of the mandibular arch. 
High-occlusal plane angulation. 

STEPHEN MURPHY					5/4/05				Page 3


TREATMENT OPTION I:

Pretreatment orthodontics.
Place brackets on mandibular central incisors with mesial aspect of the brackets slightly higher than the distal aspect.  Place short straight wire on brackets.  This will tip root apices apart from each other creating space for the vertical  interdental osteotomy. 

Surgery stage I.
Place osteogenesis distraction device.
Anterior mandibular midline osteotomy.

Orthodontics stage I.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.

Surgery stage II.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla, downgraft it posteriorly to level the occlusal pain and advance it slightly. 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.

Orthodontics stage II.
Finish and retain occlusion. 

TREATMENT OPTION II:

Extractions.
Extract mandibular first and second bicuspids and extract maxillary second bicuspids. (In the lower arch it may be of advantage to extract the second bicuspids so the lower incisors are not overly retracted as they are in reasonably good angulation currently and would not want them retracted more than a mm or 2 at the most.  In the upper arch we will want to try to lose posterior anchorage as much as possible.)

Surgery.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to downgraft the posterior aspect of the maxilla, expand the maxilla, and advance it slightly.
Bilateral ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 