RYAN MURRAY									03/13/2009

Ryan is 24 years old and is a self-referral from his online research.  Ryan’s TMJ problems began when he was approximately 14 years of age when his joints started to click and pop.  He began noting facial asymmetry around the age of 17 to 18, although of unknown etiology.  He had a bone scan done in 2007 that showed no mandibular growth.  He had orthodontics as a teenager and then orthodontics again from 2006 through 2008.  His bite continues to shift and move and the bite tends to open on the right side.  He has had equilibrations done and has also had some splint therapy.  Other treatment that Ryan has had includes splint therapy x4 and they provide, however, only temporary relief and then problems get worse.  In addition to equilibration, he has also had physical therapy which has been of no benefit.  He has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo.  No other joints bother him.  He is aware of clenching and bruxing at night and currently has an NTI splint to help relieve that.  He has moderate snoring at night, but no daytime somnolence and no sleep apnea symptoms.  He believes that he breathes predominantly through his nose at night. 

He gets daily headaches at about a level of 6 predominantly in the temple areas.  He rates his TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 4, jaw function 7, diet at 0, and disability at 6.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Ryan has increased fullness on the right side of the face compared to the left side.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 to 3 mm.  The maxillary midline is shifted almost 2 mm to the left side.  Mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm to the left.  Chin is about 5 to 6 mm to the left.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded about 2 mm and the chin is retruded about 10 to 12 mm.  Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is moderately well defined.  There is some fullness in the submental area.  Transversely, Ryan has facial asymmetry with the right side of the face being probably 4 to 5 mm wider than the left side in transverse dimension.  Intraorally, Ryan has all of his teeth back to the second molars.  The teeth are fairly well aligned and level.  He has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, Ryan has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  Upper lateral incisors appears a little bit small in size.  Ryan has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side by probably 2 mm, but on the left side it is closer to Class I occlusion.  On the right side, it could be just slightly open in the molar area possibly.  He has some flattening of the teeth in the molar area, particularly on the left side, likely due in part to the equilibrations.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the maxillary left cuspid being 2 to 2.5 mm higher than the right side.  The mandibular right cuspid is about 3 mm lower than the left cuspid.  There is slightly greater transverse discrepancy in the mandible compared to the maxilla.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal in architecture and morphology.  Posterior faucial pillars are slightly posteriorly positioned, but not too significant.  Tonsils are normal.  Turbinates appears moderately enlarged anteriorly.  The septum is reasonably straight.  There is probably moderate nasal airway obstruction.  Maximum incisal opening is about 48 mm, and he can get to about 35 mm with reasonable comfort.  Excursion movement to the right was 9 mm, to the left 5 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  I-CAT evaluation shows in the Panorex he is missing all four third molars.  All of the rest of the teeth are present.  He has crowns or large restorations in most of the posterior teeth.  The turbinates appear quite large.  Right condyle appears significantly larger than the left side.  Bony septum appears reasonably straight.  
Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  
Coronal view shows again that the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  There may be some significantly increased thickness of the sinus membrane in the left sinus.  
Right TMJ coronal view shows condyle that has fairly good width.  There appears to be decrease lateral joint space, although the vertical joint space appears fairly reasonable.  
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is smaller in size compared to the right side.  Joint space appears a little bit better balanced.  
Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with elongated head and neck.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that likewise is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is increased anterior joint space.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Ryan has a high occlusal plane angle and a skeletal Class II relationship.  He appears to be fairly close to a Class I occlusion.  Oropharyngeal airway, however, measures 6 mm at the soft palate level and probably 8 mm at the base of the tongue (normal dimension 11 mm). 

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:    

Right mandibular condylar hyperplasia versus osteoma. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia and asymmetry. 
Maxillary AP hypoplasia and asymmetry.
Class II end-on occlusion on the right side, Class I on the left.
Slight posterior open bite on the right side.
Transverse yaw in the maxilla and mandible with both jaws being shifted to the right approximately 3 mm. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations with reduction.
TMJ pain. 
Headaches.  
Myofascial pain. 
Slight tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of approximately 2 mm.
Bilateral turbinate hyperplasia. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Presurgical orthodontics.  
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisors mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. 
Align and level mandibular arch.  
Surgery. 
Right TMJ high condylectomy. 
Bilateral TMJ disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Maxillary osteotomies to level the maxilla and advance it forward.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible forward in a counterclockwise direction and level it transversely.
Bilateral partial turbinectomies. 
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
