JESSICA MYERS									05/30/2007

Jessica is 18 years old, referred by Dr. Max Buckwald.  Jessica has had previous tonsils and adenoids removed.  She is planning on having some nasal work done on June 4, 2007.  Dr. Patrick Hodges will be performing that surgery.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
Jaw pain causes migraine headaches.
Jaw does not open very wide.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Lower jaw is retruded and this has developed over the last 3 to 4 years.
Bite is continuing to change.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Naproxen.
Flexeril.
"Gatapen."

Jessica rates her average daily TMJ pain at a level of 7 but can escalate to 10.  Average daily pain 7, jaw function, diet and disability are 7.  She gets headaches predominately on the left side and they are usually in the morning at about a level of 4 in the temporal and posterior head area and on the right side about a level of 2 in the same area.  About once a month the headaches do escalate to a level of 10.

PREVIOUS HISTORY:
Jessica's problem began about 4 years ago of unknown etiology.  She had orthodontics at the age of 15 to 16.  Just this past year her pain actually became increased in severity.  She has had injections done and also has had acupuncture.  She has worn splints but this actually made her pain worse so she was told not to continue with them.  Dr. Steve Linder is the neurologist.  She has also been to see Dr. Rick Riggs and Dr. Hilton Goldreich. They have also seen Dr. Odell Marshall.  Treatment-wise, she also has been on a number of different medications.  She has had some physical therapy from Dr. Riggs which has not seemed to have helped.  She has had a rheumatoid factor test performed about 6 months ago and it was within normal limits but towards the high end. 

In frontal view, Jessica has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  There may be some slight asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 to 4 mm.  Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Maxillary midline is about 1 mm to the right.  Chin is about 2 mm to the right.  The right inferior border of the mandible is probably 3 to 4 mm higher on the right side as compared to the left side.  In profile view, the upper lip might be retruded by about 2 to 3 mm.  Chin appears AP deficient by 15 to 18 mm.  Chin-neckline is short.  Chin-neck angle is not well defined.  She has a slight head postured forward neck position.  Intraorally, Jessica has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  

JESSICA MYERS 				05/30/2007				Page 2

She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left side by probably about 3 mm.  She has a vertical overbite of about 1 mm.  She has an overjet of about 2 mm.   Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side at the cuspid area.  Intranasally, the septum may be deviated just slightly off to the left side at the base of the nose but not significantly.  Turbinates appear relatively normal to mildly enlarged.  Columella is wide and the nostrils may be a little bit narrow.  Her mother states that Jessica breathes through her mouth when she is sleeping.  She does have a history of mild snoring, some mild to moderate daytime somnolence but she is not aware of any sleep apnea difficulties.  She does have difficulties sleeping, however.  To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the TMJs, styloid areas and shoulders.  She has moderate pain over the masseters and relatively minimal discomfort over the right medial pterygoid.  She may have a little bit of crepitus in the left TMJ but the right side seems to function reasonably smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 33 mm.  Excursive movements are 6 mm in each direction.  Opening without significant discomfort was about 24 mm.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the presence of all 4 third molars that are impacted and unerupted.  The left condyles appear arthritic with the right one appearing to be extremely flat with loss of vertical volume.  Coronoid processes appear somewhat small in size.  The rest of the teeth are present.  
She has what appears to be a large septal spur off the septum into the right nasal airway.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Waters view shows septum is deviated off towards the right side in the bony area.  The left turbinate appears large compared to the right side.  Both sinuses appear a little bit cloudy towards the lateral aspect of the sinuses but the rest of the sinuses all appear clear.  Vertical height of the mandible on the right side seems to be shorter vertically as compared to the left side by probably 3 to 4 mm.  The right condyle can be seen and appears to be quite flattened.  The left condyle is more difficult to identify.  This could be related to the fact that the articular eminence is fairly well eliminated from the right TMJ.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic and appears to have lost some vertical volume.  Articular eminence is a little bit towards the shallow side of steepness.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite flattened across the top.  The articular eminence is pretty much resorbed away.  There appears to be decreased superior joint space.  On opening, there is restricted translation of both condyles but they do approach the posterior aspect of the articular eminence.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Jessica has some slight anterior vertical maxillary excess and probably some posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. The mandible is retruded anteroposteriorly.  There is a significant difference in the vertical height at the inferior border of the mandible with the right side being almost 7 to 8 mm shorter vertically as compared to the left side.  There are also double images at the occlusal plane level but not quite as extensive as at the inferior border.  
JESSICA MYERS 				05/30/2007				Page 3

The oropharyngeal airway appears significant constricted with an airway dimension of only about 4 mm at the base of the tongue.  At the soft palate level it appears to be a little bit greater but she may have been swallowing at the time as the soft palate appears quite short in length.  The airway dimension there appears to be closer to 7 to 8 mm.  She has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ psoriatic arthritis.
AP maxillary deficiency. 
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II end-on occlusal relationship.
High occlusal plane angle.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.
TMJ pain.
Headaches. 
 Myofascial pain. 
 Snoring.
 Sleep disorder.
 Rule out sleep apnea syndrome.
 Over angulation of lower incisors. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics. 
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract. 
CT scans of jaws and jaw joints.  
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction decreasing the occlusal plane angle.
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Consider anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the chin approximately 4 mm.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
