NICHOLAS NAEHRITZ								06-25-02

Nick is 15 years old and referred by Dr. Al Bishop.

Patient History

He does have fairly constant allergy problems, although he does not do much about it. He does have an inhaler of albuterol and uses that as needed. 

Patient Concerns

Primary concern that Nick has is that the teeth and jaws don’t fit together well.
Difficulties breathing through his nose.

Nick has previously worn orthodontic appliances for approximately two years. Dr. Gober performed the previous orthodontics.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Nick has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upepr lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. Maxillary dental midline may be about 1 mm to the left. Mandibular dental midline is fairly much on the facial midline. Chin may be just slightly off to the left side a couple of millimeters.

In profile view, Nick may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency but not probably more than 2 or 3 mm. Chin is retruded probably about 15 mm. Chin-neckline is very short, and chin-neck is not well-defined. 

Intraorally, Nick has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. He has some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch, he appears to have all of his teeth back through the second molars. Seems to have an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Some mild crowding, upper anterior arch. He has a slight Class III cuspid relationship by probably about 2 mm. He has an anterior open bite of a couple of millimeters. Tendency towards crossbite posteriorly particularly on the right side. Has an overjet of probably about 2 to 3 mm. Oropharynx appears fairly good. Tonsils not particularly enlarged.

Intranasally, the nasal septum is shifted significantly off towards the left side. The turbinate is moderately enlarged on that side but creates almost a total blockage of the left nasal airway. On the right side, the turbinate is moderately enlarged. Airway looks reasonable on that side, but if the septum were straight, it would probably significantly compromise the right nasal airway as well.

To palpation, Nick has no discomfort around the head and neck area. TMJs function smoothly.



Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that there may be some cloudiness in the sinuses but difficult to tell because our x-ray turned out so light. He does have four impacted third molars. Roots on the maxillary four incisors are quite short. Roots on the lower incisors are short but not to the significance of the upper incisors. Difficult to evaluate nasal airway on this view. Difficult to evaluate the condyles. There is significant pathology noted.

Waters view shows that the sinuses actually appear reasonably clear, although there may be a little mucocele or something in the left maxillary sinus. Left nasal airway appears totally blocked. Right side airway appears somewhat narrowed, but it is a little bit more prominent.

Left TMJ tomogram seems to show that the condyle may be a little bit narrow anteroposteriorly. Joint space, however, appears fairly good. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that likely appears somewhat narrow anteroposteriorly, although the joint space may be reasonably good. Articular eminences of both sides are fairly shallow. 

On open views, there is good translation of the condyles bilaterally. 

Cephalometrically, it appears that Nick has a Class II skeletal relationship. He has a high occlusal plane and mandibular plane angle facial morphology. Turbinates appear to extend beyond the posterior part of the had palate. Oropharyngeal airways appears somewhat constricted with an AP dimension from the base of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall of less than 6 mm. At the soft palate level, there is likewise about 6 to 7 mm. Has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch and an anterior open bite. 

Basic Diagnoses

Vertical maxillary excess.
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia.
Skeletal Class II relationship.
Slight Class III cuspid relationship.
Crossbite tendency on the right side.
High occlusal plane angulation.
Accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.
Anterior open bite of approximately 2 mm.
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars.
Deviated nasal septum.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Significant nasal airway obstruction.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Overangulation of maxillary and mandibular incisor teeth.
Mild crowding, upper and lower anterior arches.
Extremely short roots on the maxillary incisors.
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 1 mm.

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level maxillary arch. Place a step in the upper arch wire to align the four incisors at a slightly elevated position compared to the posterior teeth. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally.
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anteriors removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy and also for the excessive overtipping of the lower incisors.

Continue to monitor facial growth and development

Surgery
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly, correct any transverse problems that may be present, and level the occlusal plane.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Surgical removal of four bony impacted third molars.
Nasoseptoplasty.
Bilateral inferior turbinectomies.
HR implant to anterior mandible.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion