RICHARD NAGATOSHI								06/18/2007

Richard is 44 years old.  He is a policeman in California.  He has significant sleep apnea problems and has had a sleep study showing his severe apnea.  He cannot tolerate a CPAP machine.  He has chronic headaches.  He has some clicking in his jaw joints particularly on the right side.  It is unknown when this started and the etiology is unknown.  He says he has been hit around the jaws numerous times in the line of duty but never had anything broken.  He gets headaches 3 to 5 times per week predominately in the frontal areas where it is worse at about a level of 5 but can escalate to 10.  At times when it gets so bad, he cannot get out of bed.  The pain directly in the jaw joints he rates at 0, average daily pain at 3, jaw function 0, diet 0 and disability at 0.  On opening, he has a click in the right TMJ at about 20 mm of opening and about 15 mm of closing.  The left joint seems to function relatively smoothly.  To palpation, he has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Tricor 145 mg daily.
Lipitor 20 mg daily. 
Tylenol.
Motrin.

Clinical evaluation shows the upper lip length of 27 mm and he has 0 tooth-to-lip relationship.  Maxillary midline is off to the right side 1 mm.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are off to the left 1 mm.  In profile view, the maxilla is 4 to 5 mm AP deficient and chin is about 10 to 15 mm AP deficient.  Intranasally, the turbinates are of moderate size.  The septum appears relatively normal.  Columella appears a little bit wide and he could benefit from having some narrowing of that.  He has severe snoring and moderate daytime somnolence.  He says he is not aware of having problems where he holds his breath at night when sleeping although he does have sleep apnea syndrome.  Intraoral examination shows that it is very difficult to evaluate the soft palate and uvula but the uvula is hyperplastic.  The soft palate is excessively elongated.  The faucial pillars are severely constricted. 

The MRI shows that he has bilaterally displaced articular discs.  Discussed with him my recommendation including all the previous surgical procedures that we already outlined, he would benefit from the TMJ surgery.  It is likely that the TMJ pathology is contributing to his headache situation.  He understands and would like to have the joint pathology corrected at the same time as the rest of the procedures are being done. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows that all 4 third molars are absent but the rest of the teeth are present and there are appliances on all the teeth.  Sinuses appear clear.  Right nasal airway appears somewhat blocked.  Condyles appear a little bit flat on the anterior surfaces.  Articular eminences appear steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  A little bit of flattening on the posterior head.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be reasonably good joint space.
RICHARD NAGATOSHI			06/18/2007				Page 2

The left TMJ tomogram is a little bit more difficult to read.  There may be a decrease in the joint space superiorly and posteriorly.  Articular eminence appears a little bit steeper on this side than the opposite side.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are AP deficient.  There is a moderately high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway is only about 4 mm at the soft palate level and the base of the tongue is closer to about 10 mm.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
AP maxillary hypoplasia. 
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Hyperplastic and elongated soft palate and uvula.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Severe snoring. 
Sleep apnea syndrome. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it and downgraft it posteriorly. 
UPPP procedure. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. 

His H&P was performed today.  Consent form was reviewed and signed.  I did my examination and answered all the questions that he had at this time.  The potential risks and complications were discussed with him and he understands.  He is anxious to proceed on with the surgery in 2 days.  