TRACI NAHMIAS									08-02-02

Traci is 40 years old and referred by Dr. Bill Hang.

Patient History

She has had some previous surgery including an ectopic pregnancy, gum surgery, cervix laser treatment, rhinoplasty, and oral surgery. She has had some teeth extracted and some impacted teeth removed. She has some allergy problems. She gets some asthma problems when she gets sick. She has some arthritis that affects her hips and knees. She does get a stiff neck a lot, but she is not sure if that is in the muscles or in the bones.

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, but gets occasional vertigo. She has daytime and nocturnal clenching and bruxism. She gets headaches in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area two to three times a week that reach at about a level of 6. TMJ pain is a level of 8, overall pain at 8, jaw function and diet at 5, and disability at 2. 

Traci had orthodontics as a young teenager and then had to have it repeated a second time when she was a junior or senior in high school because the lower jaw grew. She was told that she needed surgery, but her parents opted to do a more conservative treatment. She had a lower incisor extracted and the lower teeth retracted to try to achieve some semblance of occlusion.

Current Medications

Traci takes the following medications:
Depakote 2500 mg q.d.
Restoril 15 mg q.h.s. 
Topamax 100 mg tablets 4 times a day.
Zoloft 250 mg q.d. 
Claritin.
Lipitor 10 mg tablets, 1 q.d. 
Levoxyl 0.137 mg 1 q.d. (thyroid medication).
Vioxx 25 mg tablets 1 q.d.
Soma 350 mg q.h.s. 
Aspirin 81 mg q.d.
Flonase.
Prilosec 20 mg p.r.n.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Traci demonstrates a little bit of asymmetry. Nasal tip is deviated off to the left side probably about 3 mm or so. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is off to the left probably about 3 mm. Chin is about 5 mm off to the left side. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is almost –3 mm. Has a minimal amount of vermilion showing.

In profile view, she may have some slight AP maxillary deficiency but probably not more than 2 to 3 mm at the very most. Lower lip is perhaps just slightly prominent. Chin appears a little bit AP deficient by maybe about 5 mm. Chin-neckline is somewhat shortened, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined.

Intraorally, she is missing a lower right central incisor but has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars. Some significant spacing around and through the embrasures of the lower teeth at the gingival margin area, though the crowns appear for the most part to be together.

In the upper arch, she is missing bilateral cuspids. She has the rest of her teeth, however, back through the second molars. She has a slightly increased curve of Wilson in the lower arch but not quite as extensive as the curve in the upper arch. If the upper first bicuspids are used as cuspids, she has almost a full Class III relationship on the right side and an end-on relationship on the left side, being probably 4-mm Class III on the left and 6 mm on the right. She has about a 1-mm overbite relationship. 

She gives a history of snoring. She also reports difficulties breathing through her nose. 

Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula is normal in length. Faucial pillars appear to be actually perhaps a little bit anteriorly positioned with what appears to be adequate distance from the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall area. 

Intranasally, turbinates look okay. There is a little bit of a spur on the right side of the septum. Turbinates don’t appear to be enlarged, at least the part that I can see up front. However, holding open the nostrils significantly improved her abilities to breather through her nose. She has some  significant constricture of the luminal valves bilaterally intranasally that is restricting some of her air flow. 

To palpation, Traci has severe pain over the right TMJ, styloid areas, high severe pain to palpation in the shoulders, left TMJ, more moderate pain to palpation in the temporalis muscles, medial pterygoids, SCMs, posterior neck area. 

On opening, she has an opening pop at about 20 mm in the left joint and a closing one at about 15 mm, quite painful for her after opening just a few times. Right joint seems to function a little bit more smoothly. Maximal incisor opening is about 43 mm, but opening without significant pain 21 mm. Excursive movements to the right and to the left about 9 mm in each direction. On opening, she does have perhaps some crepitus sounds in the right TMJ. On excursive movements, she has a definite click in the left joint, but on the right side, there is a little bit of noise also on excursive movements.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of maxillary cuspids, mandibular right central incisor, and all four third molars. There is a crown, mandibular right first molar, mandibular left second molar. She has a root canal in the maxillary right lateral incisor. A little periapical lesion at the tip, but just possibly could be scar tissue. She has had a root canal done on that maxillary right lateral incisor about a month ago, and it could be just a residual abscessed wall. 

Waters view shows that the nasal septum is reasonably clear with one spur in the right sinus area. Turbinates look moderately large. Airway appears is passable. Sinuses appear relatively clear. The asymmetry with the mandible being rotated off to the left side can be seen. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has reasonably good morphology although flattened quite significantly posteriorly. Joint space looks reasonably good superiorly and posteriorly. Articular eminence is rather shallow. Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some flattening on the superior aspect and appears a little bit more narrow anteroposteriorly. Posterior joint space appears okay. Vertical joint space seems somewhat decreased. Articular eminence is relatively shallow.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Cephalometrically, Traci has vertical maxillary deficiency with a negative tooth-to-lip relationship of –3 mm. Upper lip appears quite thin anteroposteriorly. Oropharyngeal airway actually looks fairly reasonable. Upper incisors appear over-angulated significantly. Transversely, the maxilla on the right side is about 3 mm lower than the maxilla on the left side in the first bicuspid area. There is a slight cant in the lower arch with the right side being a millimeter-and-a-half lower than the left side. Occlusally, the jaws appear to be fairly well aligned at least in the yaw dimension posteriorly.\

Other Systems

She has some problems with the bones in her neck, hips, and knees. In the past has had some urinary tract infections. She has nocturia x 1 to 2. No miscarriages, but she did have an ectopic pregnancy. She has two children, ages 9 and 12, both boys. She has had an abnormal Pap smear x 2 and has had laser treatment. Gets an occasional vaginal yeast infection primarily associated with taking antibiotics. She has had conjunctivitis x 2 in the past. She had a cystic lesion removed from her eyelid as a child. She gets occasional burning, itching, and dryness of her eyes. Does not wear contacts. Gets occasional sinus problems. Doesn’t smoke and never has. Does get occasional vertigo. Was diagnosed with asthma with an adult onset and did not have it as a child and is just occasional where she gets wheezing and so forth. She has problems with bronchitis and gets it at least on a yearly basis and used to get it more often a few years ago. She had pneumonia once about 15 years ago. Has occasional nausea and has irritable bowel syndrome. She gets occasional abdominal pain and cramping. Has a history of herpes. She has some chronic fatigue problems. She has thyroid problems and takes medication for it. Her thyroid problem was diagnosed about three years ago. She does have some problems with short-term memory loss. She has not been exposed to birds, cats, or hoofed animals. She had dogs growing up, and some of them did catch birds and eat birds. She had a gap of 15 years and recently has gotten a dog about a year-and-a-half ago. No implants.
Basic Diagnoses

Basic diagnoses for Traci would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations, being worse on the left side as compared to the right side.
Vertical maxillary deficiency.
Slight AP maxillary deficiency.
Transverse maxillary excess and a Class I occlusion position.
Mandibular prognathism.
Class III occlusal relationship.
Overangulation of maxillary incisors.
Missing maxillary cuspids.
Missing mandibular left central incisor.
Significant tooth-size discrepancy among the anterior six teeth in the upper and lower arch.
Significantly accentuated curve of Wilson in the upper arch.
Accentuated curve of Wilson in the lower arch.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism.
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3.5 mm if the lower right central incisor were present and was the same size as the left central incisor.
Constricture of the luminal valves creating nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Align and level the maxillary arch. Keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally.
Align and level mandibular arch. Open up space to replace the right central incisor. Strip the lower anterior incisors to help compensate for the significant tooth-size discrepancy (3.5 mm) and to make all four incisors smaller than the current size of each of the three existing incisors. Consider stripping the mesial and distal aspect of the cuspid as well to help make room in the lower arch. This will likely place Traci into an anterior crossbite.

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and downgraft it.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition it into the rest functional occlusal position.
Consider possible vertical reduction and slight AP augmentation of the chin.
Reconstruct the bilateral nasal luminal valves.

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

Dental reconstruction of lower anterior arch with possible placement of osseointegrated implant to replace the missing mandibular right central incisor