NICHOLAS “NICO” NAKAMURA						4/25/2011

Nico is 18 years old.  Birth date 05/29/1992.  Referred by Dr. Grant Johnson in South Lake, TX.  

Primary concerns that Nico has include the following:

Inadequate upper jaw projection.
Prominent chin.
Bite is off.

Nico has no problems with headaches except he may get them with allergy season such as in the springtime, but they are not on a routine basis.  He has no headaches otherwise.  He rates his TMJ pain at 0, facial pain and headaches at 0, jaw function, diet and disability all at 0.  He has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo but does have some hearing loss.  The only joints that bother him are his knees.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  

Nico was born with a complete cleft on one side and a partial on the other side.  He had a unilateral alveolar cleft and a cleft palate.  The lip was repaired at about 6 weeks and then the palate was repaired at the age of one.  The repairs were done by Dr. Steve Byrd.  He had a bone graft to the alveolar cleft about 3 or 4 years ago done by Dr. Steve Byrd.  The final stage of surgery was a rhinoplasty done by Dr. Steve Byrd approximately 3 years ago.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Nico has good left-to-right facial balance.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm in the midline.  The maxillary midline may be just slightly to the left about 1 mm.  The mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much on the facial midline.  Intraorally, Nico has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has a small maxillary left lateral incisors and a slightly elevated cuspid on that side as well.  The upper lateral incisor on the left is in a little bit lingual inclination.  He has a slight Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally being about 2 to 3 mm Class III.  He has an end-on incisor relationship.  He has a slight anterior cross bite tendency.  The excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  He has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch.  He has a pin in the anterior nasal spine area.  All four wisdom teeth are absent.  

Coronal view shows that he has some deviation of the nasal septum.  The turbinates appear quite large.  The sinuses may have a little bit of material in the lower portion.  Transverse width of the lateral nasal wall is fairly significant and may actually encroach into the maxillary sinuses.  
Axial view shows that the turbinates are fairly large.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  Sinuses in this view show a little bit of material anterior but the rest of the sinus is fairly clear. 

Left TMJ sagittal views show that there is a little sclerosis on the head of the condyle.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be reasonably good joint space.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of more regular morphology.  There appears to be reasonable joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately steep. 

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width.  There appears to be reasonable joint space, although slightly decreased at the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has a little irregularity at the lateral aspect.  The joint space for the most part looks fairly balanced.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves down 3 to 4 mm compared to only about 2 mm on the opposite side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a Class III skeletal relationship and a slight Class III occlusal relation.  He has a huge adenoid mass.  The soft palate appears short in length.  The adenoid mass almost impinges forward into the posterior nasal choanae area and probably is the reason for the nasal airway obstruction.  

Based on clinical, radiographic, and dental model analyses, Nico’s diagnoses are as follows:
 
Repaired cleft lip and palate.
Maxillary hyperplasia.
Slight Class III occlusal relationship.
End-on incisor relationship.  
Tooth size discrepancy primarily due to a small maxillary left lateral incisor. 
Extremely large hypertrophied nasopharyngeal adenoid. 
There does not appear to be any active TMJ pathology. 
Rule-out ankylosis of maxillary left cuspid. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up 1 mm on each side (mesial and 
                        distal) of the maxillary left lateral incisor.  Open up 0.5 mm of space 			between the maxillary right lateral and cuspid.  Consider placing a step-up 
                        in the arch wire between the left first bicuspid and cuspid if the cuspid is 
                        ankylosed, or just leave the left cuspid out of the arch wire because the 
                        ankylosed cuspid can be surgically repositioned as a single tooth segment.     		If the tooth is not ankylosed, then align it with the rest of the teeth.		b.	Align and level mandibular arch.
2.	Surgery.
	a.	Consider single tooth osteotomy around the maxillary left cuspid to get 			into occlusion. 
	b.	Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla about 3 mm and reestablish 			a vertical over bite relationship.  
	c.	Partial reduction adenoidectomy.
	d.	Bilateral partial reduction turbinectomies.
3.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion by making spacing the left lateral 	incisor.  
4.	Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors with bonding, 
            veneers, or crowns.  
