JENNIFER NANCE									01-15-03

Jennifer is a 23-year-old female referred by Dr. Al Bishop.

Patient History

She has had previous surgery to include removal of her wisdom teeth and surgery on her wrist. She otherwise is in fairly good health. She has some allergy problems and some sinus problems. She apparently has no other major medical problems except for those involving her jaws and jaw joints.

Jennifer believes that her TMJ problems and jaw problems began at about the age of 15, and it is not known if they were sports related but possibly could be as she was quite active in sports at that time. She had orthodontics from ages 15 to 17. She wore a night guard for about one to one-and-a-half years, and this was constructed by Dr. Boyd. She has previously had a brain MRI, and it was clear. She gets occasional earaches, rarely gets tinnitus, and occasionally gets vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her right shoulder, wrists, and knees. She has an allergy to PENICILLIN, CEPHALOSPORINS, apple juice, molds, and pollen. She has no known problems in wearing jewelry. She is aware of nocturnal clenching and bruxism. She gets headaches two to three times a week that register at about a level of 6 in the temporal areas bilaterally. She rates her TMJ pain at 4 with the right side worse than the left side. Overall pain on an average day is about 2. Jaw function is at 3, diet at 3, and disability at 0. 

Current Medications

Elavil 10 mg q.h.s. 
Zyrtec 10 mg q.d.

Primary Concerns

Headaches
TMJ pain (generally worse than the headaches)
Difficulties eating and chewing because of the pain

Clinical Examination

Incisal opening is 43 mm but only about 25 mm without significant pain and discomfort. Excursive movement to the right is 8.5 mm and to the left 7.5 mm. She has basically a Class I occlusal relationship with about a 2-mm overbite relationship. She is missing the maxillary and mandibular right second and third molars and maxillary and mandibular left third molars. 

She has crepitation in both joints on jaw function. To palpation, she has some mild to moderate pain over the TMJs and fairly minimal pain over the temporalis muscles, SCMs, and shoulders. 



Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates are moderately large. Condyles look reasonably good except maybe a little sclerotic on the left side. She is missing all four third molars and the maxillary and mandibular right second molars.

Waters view shows the sinuses appear relatively balanced and relatively clear. Turbinates appear large and appear to block a good part of the airway, particularly on the left side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa with decreased posterior joint space, although the superior joint space and anterior joint space look pretty good. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows flattening on the anterior head of the condyle and some slight anterior beaking. Joint space is a little bit more balanced on this side, although on the most posterior aspect, it may be slightly decreased. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

On opening, there is good translation of the condyles on both sides with appropriate joint spaces. On the open view, there appears to be a little bit of flattening on the anterior head of the condyle on the left side also. 

Cephalometrically, she appears to have a Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship. 

Oropharyngeal airway dimensions are about 5 to 6 mm at the base of the tongue and at the soft palate level. Jennifer gives no history of having snoring problems. The oropharynx appears clear. Nasal airway also appears clear. Columella is a little bit wide at the base, but holding the nostrils open did not significantly alter her abilities to breathe through her nose.

Basic Diagnoses

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs medially and anteriorly displaced
Mandibular hyperplasia
Headaches 
TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Class I occlusion 
Nocturnal clenching

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics
Apply appliances to the upper and lower arch with a light passive wire. These could be applied right before surgery

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain the occlusion but allow the condyles to move inferiorly and anteriorly to make room for the articular discs

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine the occlusion if necessary