ZOE NANCE										09/28/2010

Zoe is 41 years old and referred by Tony Tomarello.   In April 2010, Zoe was riding her bike and a 40 mile an hour gust of wind came up and blew her off the bike and she struck her lower jaw.  She sustained a left subcondylar fracture.  A closed reduction was performed on it by Dr. David Hunter, and she was wired together for about 2 months.  An open reduction was attempted, but could not be accomplished.  She takes hydrocodone periodically for pain.  She has no headaches, rates her TMJ pain an average between about 2 to 4, and at the worse it gets to be about a 9 only in the left joint.  Average daily pain may be around 2.  Jaw function is 1, diet is 3, disability is about 4.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, and no other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime.  She has a night guard that she has worn for about 10 to 15 years.  Primary concerns that Zoe has include the following:

Pain.
Bite is unstable.  
Periodic shifting of the left side of the lower jaw backwards that seems to initiate significant pain problems.

In frontal view, Zoe has fairly good facial symmetry.  The maxillary and mandibular dental as well as the chin midline all line up fairly well.  Upper lip length is about 14 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 2 mm.  In profile, it shows that the jaw structures are in reasonable proportion.  Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bids taken out for orthodontic reasons likely.  She has adequate attached gingiva, although thin around the central incisors.  In the upper arch, she is also missing bicuspids.  She is basically a Class I cuspid relationship with an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm.  As she opens, she deviates towards the left side at least 2 to 3 mm.  In trying to set her into a centric relation position, the mandibular dental midline shifts towards the left at least 4 to 5 mm, she goes into a cross bite on the left side, and into a Class II occlusal relationship.  To palpation, she has some moderate tenderness over the left masseter but nowhere else.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly, although she said earlier today there has been clicking most of the time in the left side when she opens.  The maximum opening is 52 mm, excursion movement to the right 7 mm, to the left 12 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably healthy.  Uvula is a little bit elongated, although extremely thin.  Tonsils are mild to moderate in size.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars as well as the first bicuspids.  The left condyle is positioned forward in the fossa.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  

Coronal view shows that there is a deviated nasal septum and in the mid portion it is off to the left side.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  Sinuses are relatively clear.  

Axial view shows that the turbinates are moderate in size.  Septum is reasonably straight and the sinuses are clear. 

Left TMJ coronal view shows that she has had a previous subcondylar fracture with the condyle tipped a little bit off towards the medial side.  There is some vertical overlap of the segments, but the segments appear well healed at this time.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 1 mm. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good morphology.  There is fairly good joint space.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  There appears to be decreased lateral joint space.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that is postured almost beneath the articular eminence with significant displacement down and forward from its normal position.  The condyle is likely about at 6 mm anterior to its normal position and inferiorly positioned at least 5 mm.  

Right TMJ shows a condyle that has a little sclerosis on it and a little bit of anterior beaking.  The joint space for the most part looks good. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are moderately intruded likely in part due to previous orthodontics.  However, the oropharyngeal airway looks very good.  Tonsils are prominent, but are not causing any airway obstruction.  

Basic diagnoses for Zoe would be as follows:

Left mandibular subcondylar fracture (sustained in April 2010).
Malunion of subcondylar fracture.  
TMJ pain. 
Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Surgery.
	a.	Left TMJ removal of hyperplastic soft tissues and repositioning of condyle and 			disc.
	b.	Left mandibular sagittal split osteotomy.
	c.	Application of arch bars. 
2.	Postsurgical TMJ rehabilitation as necessary.