CHELSEA NUNEZ									05/19/2008

Chelsea is 13 years old.  Birth date is 09/15/1994.  Referred by Dr. Thomas Czarnecki, 754 N. Carroll Avenue, South Lake, TX 76092.  Chelsea’s parents became aware that her lower jaw was out in front of her upper jaw about 3 years ago.  She has been in orthodontic treatment for 2 years now.  There has been no real plan as to Chelsea’s management.  To date, she has had a palatal expander to the expand the maxilla and that expander is still in place.  She has orthodontic appliances on.  
She does get some TMJ pain at about a level of 3 and that discomfort usually occurs on the right side. She rates her jaw function at 8, diet and disability at 5.  She has no problems with headaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.  She gets an occasional earache on the left side.  She has no other joints that bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  
CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Chelsea has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline and chin.  In profile, she has some maxillary deficiency of probably 3 mm or so.  Chin appears somewhat prominent by about 4 mm.  Chin neckline looks relatively normal in length.  The lower lip is a little bit prominent compared to the chin and particularly compared to the upper lip.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  The lower second bicuspids are tipped a little bit lingually.  She has an accentuated curve of Wilson on the posterior aspect.  She also has an accentuated curve of Spee anteriorly.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth erupted back through the first molar on the right side and left side.  She has a palatal expander.  She has a significantly increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch in the posterior teeth area.  Left cuspid is down in position, but the right cuspid is still elevated about 5 mm.  She has a full Class III cuspid relationship on the left side and a crossbite tendency.  She has a huge anterior crossbite of probably close to 10 mm.  On the right side, she has a posterior crossbite and has probably a full Class III cuspid relationship there as well.  She has an anterior open bite of probably about 4 mm.  Her lower arch is fairly level.  In the maxillary arch on the right side, the right lateral incisor may be slightly elevated compared to the left lateral incisor.  She does have a reverse overjet of about 9 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Tonsils are mildly to moderately enlarged.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderately enlarged, although she claims no difficulties breathing through her nose.  Columella is somewhat wide and nostrils are somewhat narrow.  Chelsea says that when she sleeps she postures her tongue between her front teeth.  To palpation, she has some mild to moderate discomfort over the masseter muscles, TMJs, and styloid areas, and minimal tenderness over the posterior neck and temporalis area.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Maximal opening is 52 mm.  Excursion movements are about 7 mm in each direction.  
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars and impacted maxillary second molars.  Maxillary right cuspid is not fully erupted.  The vertical height of the posterior mandible is quite short.  The condylar head and neck length are excessive.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  
Waters view shows that sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear fairly enlarged.  The bony septum appears reasonably straight.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle and condylar neck that are excessively long.  Joint space is thin.  There appears to be a little bit of anterior beaking on the condyle.  Articular eminence is quite shallow.    
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit small in size.  The condylar head and neck appear longer than normal.  Joint space is somewhat narrow.  Articular eminences are relatively shallow.  Condylar head and neck length is elongated.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she occludes only on the maxillary first molars and mandible second molars.  The reverse overjet is almost 10 mm.  The oropharyngeal airway dimensions are normal.  Chelsea’s speech is affected quite considerably because of the severity of the jaw and dental malalignment. 
Basic diagnoses for Chelsea would be as follows:
Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
Mandible prognathism.
AP maxillary hypoplasia. 
Transverse maxillary hyperplasia.
Class III occlusion. 
Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.
Decreased curve of Wilson in the lower arch including the bicuspids and molars.
Excessive curve of Wilson in the upper arch with significant buccal tipping of the teeth.
Retained maxillary palate expander appliance.
Anterior overbite. 
Occluding only on the maxillary first molars and mandibular second molars. 
Impacted third molars x4.
Bilateral maxillary unerupted second molars. 
Maxillary right cuspid positioned high and labially. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:	
 
Presurgical orthodontics.
Removal of maxillary palatal expander and removal of other appliances if a different orthodontic system is preferred.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Try to decrease the transverse intramolar and bicuspid dimension by trying to tip the crowns of the teeth lingually to decrease the curve of Wilson.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to tip the molars and bicuspids labially to expand the arch and decrease the excessive curve of Wilson.
Surgery.  
Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies to stop the accelerated growth process in the mandible.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and correct any transverse discrepancies.
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4. 
3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 