AUDREY NARDECCHIA								10/10/05

Audrey is 17-1/2 years old.  She has been under orthodontic treatment since about the age of 9.  Phase I was done at the age of 9 for about 2 to 3 years.  Then she had a break for a year and then began again with the second phase and then had orthodontic appliance with phase II beginning at the age of 12 to age 14.  At that time, her bite stayed stable for about a month following completion of orthodontics but then her bite started to shift and change and she started to get popping in her jaw joints.  She then had a bite plate made which she continues to wear today.  She has been in a bite splint for approximately 3 years now.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
Headaches.
Discomfort in the jaw joints.
Teeth do not fit.
Difficulty eating and chewing.  She has to wear a splint most of the time particularly to help with her headaches.
Speech is affected.
Difficulty breathing through the nose. 
Primarily a mouth breather. 

In frontal view, Audrey has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm on the left, 3.5 mm on the right.  The left eye is probably 1 to 2 mm higher than the right side.  Mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Maxillary midline is 1 mm off to the right side.  Chin is pretty much on the facial midline.  She has some slight AP maxillary deficiency probably about 3 to 4 mm.  The chin is AP deficient by probably 12 to 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is a little bit short but chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  Some fullness is present in the submental area.  She does have a cant in her occlusal plane with the right cuspid being probably 2.5 mm lower then the left cuspid.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present.  She has adequately attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch although it is somewhat thin in areas.  In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  In centric relation she occludes only on the right second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion.  She has probably about a 4 to 5 mm Class II occlusion on the left side and probably 2 to 3 mm Class II on the right side.  She has a 4 mm anterior open bite.  Oropharynx appears to have healthy tissues.  Uvula is normal in length.  The soft palate may be moderately elongated.  Faucial pillars appear relatively normal.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  There is a little septal spur off the right side of the septum.  Holding the nostrils open she can breathe a little bit more easily.  Could not see the posterior aspect of the nasal cavity.  Audrey does get some earaches but has no problems with tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She does clench and brux her teeth at nighttime.  She gets headaches 3 to 4 times per week at a level 4 predominately in the temple area.  She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily facial pain at 5, jaw function at 5, diet at 3, disability at 1.  To palpation, she has mild to moderate pain over the medial pterygoids, TMJs, SCMs and mild tenderness over the styloid areas and masseter muscles.  On opening, the joints seem to function reasonably smooth.  On excursive movements, she does get a pop on the right joint but the left one is functioning smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is about 44 mm and excursive movement is about 7 mm in each direction.  
AUDREY NARDECCHIA 			10/10/05				Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the presence of 4 impacted third molars.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  TMJs appear arthritic.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows the presence of significant loss of condylar volume in the left condyle.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There is a large pseudocyst in the condylar head.  Decreased posterior joint space but superior and anterior joint space looks relatively normal.  

Right TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle that has lost significant volume.  There appears to be a pseudocyst in the head of the condyle on this side as well.  Decreased posterior joint space although the superior and anterior joint spaces appear fairly large.  Articular eminence is moderately steep and a little bit longer on this side than the opposite side.  Good excursive movements in both joints of the condyles coming anterior to the articular eminence.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear and nasal septum is fairly straight.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged with not much visible airway in the lower part of the nasal cavity.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has an anterior open bite and AP mandibular deficiency.  Oropharyngeal airway is moderately compromised with an airway dimension of only about 4 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue it is about 6 to 7 mm.  Occlusal plane is a little bit steep but not too significant.  There appears to be a vertical difference in the vertical heights of the occlusal plane particularly in the posterior area where there is probably about a 2 to 3 mm vertical difference.  In the cuspid area, the right cuspid is 3 mm lower than the left cuspid.  Dental model analysis shows that Audrey has an increased curve of Spee in the upper arch of the 4 incisors elevated to the rest of the posterior teeth.  The second molars are also elevated.  There are signs of significant wear on those teeth.  In the lower arch, there is a slight reverse curve of Spee with the lower incisors being about 2 mm lower than the normal position.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption.
AP maxillary deficiency.
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Prognathia.
Class II occlusion being worse on the left side as compared to the right side.
Occludes only on the right second molars; all other teeth are out of occlusion.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Impacted mandibular third molars x4.
Hypertrophied turbinates.
Nasal airway obstruction. 
AUDREY NARDECCHIA			1/10/05				Page 3


Mouth breather. 
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm. 
Accentuated curve of occlusion of upper arch.
Reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Align the 4 incisors and elevate the occlusal plane level by placing a step in the archwire.  Tip the lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure to correct tooth size discrepancy.  Try and elevate the lower incisors 1 mm to help correct the slightly reverse curve of occlusion.
Surgery stage I.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and repair with Mitek anchors.
Continue with the presurgical orthodontics.
Surgery stage II.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance maxilla, level it transversely, and down graft the posterior aspect and correct the accentuated curve of Spee.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in counterclockwise direction
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
