DANIELLE NATIONS								08/22/2006

Danielle is 22 years old and is referred by Al Bishop.  She has had previous surgery on her nose including a deviated septum.  She has had her tonsils removed.  Danielle is in good health with no major medical problems that she is aware of.  Danielle has some TMJ problems.  The medication she currently takes is Lexapro.  She has had braces times two but had some relapse relative to her bite relationship.  Her objectives are to get rid of the TMJ problems and have a more rounded shorter face.

PRIMARY CONCERNS: 
Headaches.
Pain in the jaw joints.
Teeth and jaws do not fit together properly. 
Difficulties eating and chewing.
TMJ pain.

She gets headaches at about a level of 8 in the frontal and temple areas which are predominately in the temple areas.  She rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 8, diet at 7, disability at 4.  Danielle's problems began when she was about 15 years of age in about 1998 of unknown etiology.  She thinks that maybe the bite problem was too far out of alignment to be treated orthodontically.  

She does have problems breathing through her nose when she sleeps and does breathe through her mouth.  She does have some snoring when she sleeps and she talks in her sleep.  She has daytime tiredness.  She does not feel that she has problem with sleep apnea and she does not wake up unable to catch her breath.  She has had previous nasoseptal work done to try and improve her breathing.  In frontal view, Danielle has fairly good facial symmetry in middle and upper third face.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Nasal tip is deviated to the right about 2 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted to the right about 2 mm.  Chin is shifted to the right about 3 to 4 mm.  As Danielle shifts her mandible to the left about 2 mm it does improve her facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  In profile view she may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency maybe 2 to 3 mm.  In profile, the chin is actually in reasonably good AP position.  The lower third face may be just slightly elongated.  Chin-neckline is fairly well defined.  There is just some very slight fullness in the submental area.  Intraorally, Danielle has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  There is some mild crowding on the right side around the lateral incisor and cuspid.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, Danielle has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She appears to have small upper lateral incisors.  There is a little bit of crowding in the upper arch.  In centric relation, she has just a slight contact in the incisors with bilateral posterior open bites.  In centric occlusion, she has a full Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally.  She has an anterior crossbite and a reverse deep bite about 2 mm.  AP position of the mandibular cuspid is fairly symmetric.  Likewise, the upper arch appears fairly symmetric anteroposteriorly.  Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being probably 1 to 1.5 mm lower than the right side.  Oropharyngeal areas look healthy and uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all look normal.  Intranasally, the septum is deviated just slightly off to the left side.  
DANIELLE NATIONS				08/22/2006			Page 2


Turbinates are moderate size.  Slight decreased apparent airway on the left side with the right side appearing more open at least in the anterior aspect of the nose.  To palpation she has moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters, TMJs, styloids and shoulder areas.  On jaw function the joints function relatively smoothly except they do translate beyond the articular eminences creating a jump in the mandible as they make that maneuver.  Otherwise, the joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 60 mm.  Excursive movements are 9 mm to the right and 8 mm to the left.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  She has root canals on maxillary left lateral incisor and mandibular right first molar.  Condylar head and necks appear slightly large but not too significant.  Difficult to evaluate the sinuses.

Left TMJ tomograms shows a condyle that seems to have fairly good shape and morphology and the joint space seems fairly adequate.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that seems to have fairly good shape and articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be fairly good joint space.  On opening, there is almost excessive translation of the condyle as it comes well out beyond the articular eminence.  

Waters view shows that the turbinates are large posteriorly particularly on the left side though the bony septum is relatively straight.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there are bilateral posterior open bites and anterior premature contact.  Oropharyngeal airway space looks good.   She does have a tooth size discrepancy with a –3 mm tooth size discrepancy.   Placing her into a Class I cuspid relationship places her into a bilateral buckle crossbite position.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral condylar hyperplasia (probably arrested.)
Bilateral TMJ medial displacement of the articular discs. 
Mandibular prognathism with slight deviation to the right.
Anterior vertical mandibular excess. 
Transverse maxillary excess.
Anterior crossbite. 
Bilateral posterior crossbites when in centric relation.
Class III cuspid molar relationship.
Crowding of lower anterior arch.
10.  Headaches.
11.  TMJ pain.
12.  Myofascial pain.
13.  Reverse tooth size discrepancy of 2 to 3 mm excess in the upper arch.

DANIELLE NATIONS			08/22/2006				Page 3


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Be sure lateral incisor roots are tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Slenderize the left lateral incisor crown to make it a little bit more compatible with the size of the right lateral incisor.  
Align and level the mandibular arch.  Carefully and slowly expand the posterior mandibular arch to try to widen the transverse dental width of the mandible to become compatible with the width of the maxilla in the Class I cuspid molar relationship. 
Surgery. 
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and expand.
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to reduce the vertical height of the mandible.   
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
