BRENNA NAY									05//10/2006

SEE PREVIOUS HISTORY 


Clinical Evaluation
In frontal evaluation, Brenna has some proptosis.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about –5 to –6 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline.  Chin is fairly well aligned with the facial midlines.  In profile view, infraorbital rims are about 8 to 10 mm AP deficient.  Frontal likewise is AP deficient probably about the same amount.  The nasal dorsum likewise is about 8 to 10 mm AP deficient.  The maxilla is probably 6 to 8 mm AP deficient.  Chin is about 20 mm AP deficient.  The chin bone itself is posteriorly positioned to the symphysis of the mandible by probably 5 to 
6 mm.  Intraorally, she has unerupted mandibular left central incisor, right central lateral and cuspid.  She has the rest of her teeth erupted back through the first molars.  The second molars are unerupted.  In the maxillary arch she has unerupted left cuspid, second bicuspid, second molar and on the right side she has an unerupted lateral incisor cuspid, second bicuspid second molar.  She has a retained primary E present.  She is basically a skeletal Class III and occlusal Class III relationship.  She has a bilateral posterior crossbite and anterior cross bite.  She has an anterior open bite of about 3 mm.  Oropharyngeal airway is a little difficult to see but tissues appear to be reasonably healthy.  Flaps are present.  The oropharyngeal portals actually seem fairly patent.  Brenna can breathe in and out through her nose fairly easily.  Intranasally, she has relatively normal sized turbinates.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  I do not see any evidence of any significant nasal airway obstruction.  To palpation she has some minimal tenderness over the left styloid area but no other pain around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Incisal opening is 35 mm.  Maximal incisal opening is 
35 mm.  Excursive movements are about 3 to 4 mm in each direction.  Brenna does get headaches about four times a week that occur in the frontal, temple areas and up on the top of her head.  She is not aware of any specific TMJ pain.  Average daily pain when she has her headaches is about a level of 4, jaw function 1, diet 1, disability at 0.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows that the mandible is short in vertical height in the body and in the symphysis area.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  The septum looks relatively straight and turbinates look relatively minimal in size.  The condyles look reasonably good except the right one looks a little bit flat on the anterior edge.  In the mandible there are some interosseous wires and screws that may be responsible for the lack of eruption of the mandibular left central incisor, right central incisor, lateral incisor and cuspid.  The anterior bony segment mobilized for the chin procedure is seen with a clear line at the osteotomy site.  In the upper arch there are two bone plates present, one on each side.  Four screws in each bone plate.  Probably two screws above and two screws below the osteotomy site in each of these two bone plates.  In the upper arch, the left cuspid, second bicuspid second molar are unerupted and on the right side the lateral incisor cuspid, second bicuspid, second molar are unerupted.  Bone plates are directly over the right cuspid, second bicuspid and left cuspid second bicuspid.  


BRENNA NAY				05/10/2006				Page 2


It is possible that the bone screws may have incorporated the roots of the teeth to prevent the eruption or it could be just part of Brenna’s syndrome. 

Waters view shows that she has very small sinuses.  Orbital rims are also not well defined.  Septum looks reasonably straight and turbinates appear small in size with good nasal airway present.  In the neck, the cervical rods are evident.  Brenna has had rod placement and fusion of the vertebrae in her neck.  She says she has very limited side-to-side head and neck movement.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows evidence of the rods placed in the neck and attached to the posterior occipital area.  Joints are not very definable.  Articular eminences are very shallow.  It is difficult to tell much about these joints on these radiographs.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have some increased joint space vertically and anteriorly.  Articular eminence is relatively shallows.  It is difficult to identify the amount of joint space in either joint.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that pharyngeal flap has been done.  The flap is actually positioned fairly low along the nasopharynx.  She had a chin procedure, apparently appearance did look fairly good at one point but then relapsed significantly. The chin itself appears to be posterior to its original position.  There are a lot of interosseous wires and screws in the chin area.  She has a moderate high occlusal plane angle.  The posterior pharyngeal airway is somewhat obstructed with an airway dimension of only about 5 mm.  There is definite vertical maxillary deficiency and vertical and AP mandibular deficiency.  The orbits appear quite shallow.  She does have a BiPAP machine she requires just because of her central sleep apnea.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Hajdu-Cheney syndrome (acroosteolysis.)
Orbital proptosis. 
Frontal hypoplasia.
Nasal hypoplasia.
Infraorbital hypoplasia.
AP maxillary hypoplasia. 
Vertical maxillary hypoplasia. 
Transverse maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
AP microgenia.
Anterior open bite of 3 mm.  
Impacted mandibular left second molar, central incisor, right central incisor, lateral incisor, cuspid and second molar. 
Impacted maxillary left second molar, second bicuspid, first bicuspid and cuspid, right lateral incisor, cuspid, second bicuspid, second molar and a retained maxillary right primary E.
Developing maxillary left third molar.
BRENNA NAY 				05/10/2006				Page 3


Lateral posterior and anterior crossbites.
Residual velopharyngeal incompetency and hypernasal speech.
Upper and lower extremity deformation particularly in the forearms and hands.
Possible left TMJ articular disc dislocation without reduction.  
Decreased oral pharyngeal airway with AP dimension of 5 mm (normal dimension 11 mm.)
Sleep apnea including central and peripheral. (The patient is on BiPAP.)

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: 
MRI of left and right TMJs. 
Surgery stage I.
Remove bone plates in maxilla and the eight associated bone screws.
Remove bone plates and screws as well as interosseous wires from the mandible. 
Extract maxillary right retained primary E. 
Uncover unerupted teeth to include all four second bicuspids, maxillary left cuspid and second bicuspid, maxillary right lateral incisor cuspid and second bicuspid, mandibular central incisors and the right lateral incisor and cuspid.
Consider articular disc repositioning if it is confirmed that the articular disc(s) is dislocated and still salvageable.  
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch and try to extrude unerupted teeth into position.
Align and level mandibular arch and try to erupt the teeth into the occlusion. 
Evaluate for possible requirements of selective extraction of permanent teeth to make room for the remaining viable teeth.
Surgery stage II. 
Leforte III midface osteotomies for advancement and downgrafting. 
Consider frontal bone augmentation.  
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
Augmentation genioplasty with HTR implant.
Consider extracting maxillary right third molar.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
