AREN NEAL										12/01/2006

Aren takes the following medications:
Allegra.
Nuvarin (BCP.)
Tizamine.
Maxalt.

In the past she has had significant TMJ pain but currently she does not have as much pain in the joints.  She rates her headaches at a level of 8 that occur predominately in the left side in the frontal, temple and behind the eyes.  She rates her average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 4, diet at 0, disability at 2.  Aren's problems began in about 2000 when she was involved in an MVA.  She cannot remember having any appreciable problems before that with the joints.  In college she had pain in her jaw, neck and shoulders that was quite serious.  Previously she has had orthodontics beginning in the 4th grade through about the 7th or 8th. 

In frontal view Aren does demonstrate some asymmetry.  Upper lip length is about 21 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm on the left and 3 mm on the right.  The nasal tip is probably about 4 to 5 mm off towards the right side.  The left eye may be about 2 to 3 mm higher than the right eye.  Maxillary dental midline is off to the right side probably at 2 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is off to the right side probably 3 mm.  Chin is off to the right side probably about 2 mm.  At the angle of the mandible, the right side is about 8 to 10 mm lower than the left side near the chin area.  The chin on the right side is 1 to 2 mm lower than the left side.  In profile view, she has some problems with the nasal dorsum.  The upper lip may be retruded by about 3 mm and the chin may be retruded about 4 mm.  Chin-neckline actually looks good and the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.  The lower third face could be just slightly elongated.  Intraorally, Aren has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  The teeth on the right side have all been built up fairly significantly probably to close the open bite that is established on that side.  There is some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  The lower arch is fairly symmetric left to right side as far as AP position of the cuspids.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She also had the right maxillary teeth all built up vertically again to likely try to close the open bite on that side.  She is basically a Class I cuspid bilaterally.  She has an anterior open bite of about 1 mm on the left side and 2 mm on the right side.  She has transverse constricture of both the maxillary and mandibular arches.  Without the buildups in the teeth she would have probably about a 2 mm open bite in the cuspid area and probably about a 4 to 5 mm open bite in the molar area.  Intranasally, the septum may be deviated just a little off towards the right side.  The turbinates appears relatively normal in size but the transverse width of the nose is a little bit constricted and luminal valves are slightly constricted.  When I hold her nostrils open she can breathe a little bit better but did not note any significant improvement.  She is predominately a mouth breather particularly when she sleeps.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right cuspid being probably about 1 mm to 1.5 mm lower than the left side.  In the lower arch, the cuspid on the right side is 2 mm lower than the left side.  Without the buildup on the tooth it could be even slightly greater.  There is a yaw in the maxilla and mandible with the posterior aspect being about 2 mm to the left and the mandible being probably 3 mm to the left.  

AREN NEAL					12/01/2006				Page 2


The left side of the mandible at the angle area is probably 5 to 6 mm more prominent than the right side.  To palpation, she has some moderate discomfort over the styloid areas, left SCM and left posterior neck, left TMJ, bilateral shoulders and more minor discomfort over the temporalis and left maxillary.  There is a little crepitation in the right joint with the left side functioning reasonably smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is about 60 mm but about 32 with reasonable comfort.  Excursive movement to the right 8 mm, left 7 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  There may be a little root tip or a piece of enamel left in the right side.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The left one is a little bit more cloudy than the right one.  

Right condyle and neck appear larger and thicker than the left side.  The mandible is longer on the right side as compared to the left side.  The buildups in the teeth are evident in both the maxillary and mandibular right posterior teeth.  

Waters view shows that the bony nasal septum deviates significantly off towards the right side with a bony spur that is probably creating some significant airway obstruction on that side.  Turbinates appear quite large particularly towards the posterior aspect of the nose.  Right side is constricted but the left side is significantly constricted with probably an enlarged turbinate.  Sinuses, however, all appear clear.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Decreased superior joint space.  Articular eminence is fairly steep.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is enlarged and much larger than the opposite side.  Joint space, however, seems to be fairly well balanced.  There appears to be some anterior beaking that may be present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is good translation of both joints.  However, the right condyle is much lager than the left condyle.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there are significant vertical differences from the right side compared to the left side.  The angle of the mandible at the inferior border of the right angle is 15 mm lower than the left side.  In the chin area the difference is more around 2 mm.  At the occlusal area vertical difference of the second molars is about 5 to 6 mm on the right side compared to the left side.  Cuspids are about 2 mm vertical difference.   The left angle of the mandible is anteriorly positioned compared to the right side.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES: 
Right mandibular condylar osteochondroma.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
Right vertical mandibular hyperplasia.
Right maxillary hyperplasia and asymmetry.
Significant mandibular asymmetry.
AREN NEAL					12/01/2006				Page 3


TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Septal deviation with a septal spur.
 Bilateral inferior turbinate hyperplasia. 
 Nasal airway obstruction.
 Right mandibular open bite.  
 Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being lower than the left side.
 Accentuated curve of occlusion of upper arch.
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 to 3 mm.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.   
Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for significant tooth size discrepancy and to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward.
Remove bonding on the maxillary and mandibular teeth on the right that was placed to build the teeth up to achieve some semblance of occlusion.  
Consider slowly expanding the arches, perhaps with the Damon to try and improve arch width in both the maxillary and mandibular arches which will also aide in decreasing in the over angulation of the incisors. 
Surgery.
Right TMJ condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition the mandible.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the maxilla and correct the asymmetry. 
Right mandibular inferior border ostectomy.
Nasal septoplasty. 
Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Rhinoplasty.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
