RANDY NEASE									10/14/2005

Randy is 50-year-old and is a self referral.

PRIMARY CONCERNS 
Sleep apnea.
Daytime tiredness.
Snoring. 

Randy is on a CPAP machine and has been using it for about 6 years.  The joints that bother him include his knees and his right heel.  He has no TMJ problems or symptoms.  He has no problems with headaches, earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  

Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is -2 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin lines are pretty much on the facial midline.  The nasal tip is deviated off to the left side probably 2 to 3 mm.  In profile view, Randy has some AP maxillary deficiency, maybe 4 to 5 mm but difficult to assess because of mustache.  The chin actually has fairly good AP projection, slightly AP deficiency.  The chin-neckline has fairly good length and chin-neck angle is reasonably well defined although there is some fullness in the submental area.  Intraorally, Randy has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  Some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  He appears to have adequate attached gingiva around lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, Randy has all of his upper teeth back through the second molars.  He has increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch.  He has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.  He has about a 2 mm overbite relationship.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy, but the uvula is hyperplastic.  The soft palate may be a little bit elongated to a moderate degree.  Faucial pillars appear to have very significant constricture, moderate to severe.  Tonsils are moderate in size but do not appear to be inflamed or significantly hyperplastic.  Faucial pillars do approach the midline closing off probably at least half of the normal oropharyngeal transverse dimension.  Intranasally, the septum is a little bit deviated off towards the right side.  Turbinates are probably moderate in size.  The luminal valves are constricted and holding them open did improve the airway some.  He had better airway improvement holding the luminal valves open on the right side as compared to the left side.  Randy does report probably moderate snoring with a CPAP although it was much more severe prior to the CPAP.  Daytime somnolence is mild to moderate.  Sleep apnea is severe without the CPAP machine.  On the initial sleep study that Randy had, he had cessation of breathing 52 times during the night.  On opening, Randy is able to dislocate his mandibular condyles out beyond the articular eminences and there is a pop on opening and a pop on closing.  I do not feel it is related to disc displacement, however.  To palpation, Randy does not have any tenderness around the head and neck area.  He has no facial numbness.  Maximal incisal opening is about 56 mm.  Excursive movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  Randy does have some crenations on his tongue from probably pushing his tongue forward against his teeth.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars.  He has a root canal in the maxillary right first molar.  There is artifact on the film but it appears that the sinuses are relatively clear.  The condyles appear large.  
RANDY NEASE				10/14/2005				Page 2



Waters view shows the presence of what appears to be septal spurs on the septum coming off both sides and this may be causing some airway obstruction posteriorly.  The sinuses appear clear.  He essentially has no frontal sinuses.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears fairly large.  It is difficult to clearly identify all the structures.  Articular eminence appears fairly steep.  It appears there is adequate joint space around it.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears smaller in the sagittal view as compared to the Panorex.  There appears to be good space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening views, there is almost hypertranslation of both condyles with a little bit greater translation on the right side than the left side.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has excellent airway at the soft palate level and the base of the tongue.  Dimension at the soft palate level measures about 14 mm and at the base of the tongue almost 20 mm.  The soft palate appears elongated.  There could be some kind of a mass at the nasopharynx area.  Turbinate extends a little bit beyond the hard palate.  I do not believe that the anatomy of the oropharynx per se is causing any sleep apnea, however, the soft palate has significant constricture of faucial pillars and may be a major contributing factor as well as hypertrophic tonsils.  Although he does not claim nasal airway obstruction, he may have some septal spurs and deviation that may be blocking the airway. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES
Hyperplastic soft palate.
Hyperplastic uvula.
Significant transverse dimension between the faucial pillars.
Hypertrophied tonsils.
Sleep apnea.
Rule out mass in the nasopharynx.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
CT scan of nasal, maxillary sinus and oropharyngeal airways in axial, coronal and sagittal views. 
Surgery.
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty with lateral inversion flaps.
Tonsillectomy.
Consider nasoseptoplasty.
Consider turbinectomies if turbinates are hyperplastic and obstructive. 