BRENDA NELSON 									03/14/2007

Brenda is 50-year-old, referred by Drs. Arnie and Tom Pitts.  She has been diagnosed as having fibromyalgia.  Previous surgeries include a breast implant in 1994.  She has had no problems with those.  She smokes 1 pack of cigarettes per day and has done that for about 3 years.  She is in good health except for the jaw problems.  She has had an adverse reaction to sulfur. 

PRIMARY CONCERNS:
TMJ pain.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Pain down through the neck and shoulder area.
Sleep apnea. 

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:
Effexor.
Wellbutrin. 
Amitriptyline. 
Nexium.

She gets headaches in the frontal and temporal area at about a level of 5.  These occur about 2 times per week.  She rates her headaches at 7, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 6, diet at 5 and disability at 3.  The fibromyalgia is all through her body and not just confined to the head and neck area.  She does clench and brux at nighttime and also during the day.  

CURRENT HISTORY:  
Brenda just became aware of having significant joint problems in about 2006 that she relates to significant stress.  In the past year she has had Veneers placed on her teeth.  In the past she has had a mouthguard x2 to help keep her from clenching.  She put in a nightguard because she was bruxing significantly and her dentist identified this.  Brenda does not remember in the past when her joints would click and pop.  She has had chiropractic treatment.  She has also ART (active release therapy.)  In addition, she has had muscle massages intraorally which she found helpful to help decrease her pain and tension. 

In frontal view, Brenda has good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 0.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.  Nasal tip is just deviated a little bit off to the right side about 2 mm.  In profile view, Brenda has AP deficiency in the maxilla of about 6 to 8 mm.  She has retruded at least 20 mm.  Chin-neckline is extremely short and no significant definition of the chin-neck angle.  Brenda tends to posture her head in an upward and forward position.  Intraorally, Brenda has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars except she is missing mandibular left first molar and has a bridge replacing that tooth.  In the right side she may be missing the first molar and the second and third molars have drifted forward into the first and second molar position.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a full Class II malocclusion.  She has a reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy.  
BRENDA NELSON				03/14/2007				Page 2

Uvula looks relatively normal as does the soft palate but she has significant constricture of her faucial pillars and significant decrease of the transverse width of the oral airway.  Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  It does appear she has a passable airway.  The septum looks reasonably straight.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the left masseter, left styloid area and milder pain over the left TMJ.  On opening, she can hear some crepitus sounds in the left joint and on the right side I could palpate a glitch.  Maximal opening is about 37 mm.  Excursive movements are 8 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:
Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary third molars.  She is missing mandibular right first molar with the second and third molar drifted forward and on the left side it appears she is missing first molar and second molar with the third molar drifted forward supporting a bridge from the second bicuspid to the third molar with a molar replacement pontic.  She has a root canal in the maxillary right first molar.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  Condyles appear arthritic.  It is actually difficult to see the right one on this radiograph.  

Waters view shows that she has a deviated septum.  The turbinate on the right side appears somewhat enlarged.  Her hair clip was left in and sits over the left side of the nose.  Sinuses appear clear. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have lost some vertical volume.  There is some anterior beaking present.  Joint space actually looks reasonably good.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There could be slight posterior joint decrease but not too significant. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic.  It is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  There may be some decreased joint space vertically but not too significant.  On opening, there is moderate translation of the left TMJ.  It also appears that the right joint translates fairly good.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Brenda has a retruded maxilla and a more severely retruded mandible.  There is Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship.  She has a significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with a dimension of 3 mm at the most at the soft palate level and also at the base of the tongue.  She has a high occlusal plane angle facial morphology.  Reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch is about 2 to 3 mm.  Tooth size analysis reveals a Bolton's difference of 1.5 mm, although hand articulation shows that the discrepancy may be larger at least perhaps 3 or 4 mm.  She has Veneers on her anterior teeth and some of the teeth have built up considerably such as the left lateral incisor that probably has a labial lingual width at the incisor tip of almost 4 to 5 mm.  The right central incisor likewise has an increased thickness of the crown that measures a little bit better than 3 mm labial to lingual.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:
Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
Significant AP mandibular hypoplasia.
AP maxillary hypoplasia.
BRENDA NELSON				03/14/2007				Page 3

Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
Class II occlusion.
High occlusal plane angle.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway and AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 11 mm.)
Sleep apnea.
 TMJ pain.
 Headaches.
 Missing mandibular left first and second molars with the third molar in the second molar
       position and pontic in the first molar position. 
 Missing mandibular right first molar with the second and third molars drifted forward.
 Veneers in place that are over contoured on some of the teeth.
 Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1.5 or mm. 
 Reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch. 
 Slight increase curve of occlusion in the lower arch.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:
Remove Veneers where necessary to allow access for orthodontic treatment.
Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.  Open some spacing of at least 1 mm around each upper lateral incisor.  Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Consider slenderizing the lower anterior teeth removing about 1 or 2 mm of tooth structure at the most.
CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.  
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction and expand.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Bilateral coronoidectomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Dental treatment to provide whatever restorations are necessary. 