CODY NELSON									04/19/2010

Cody is 14 years 9 months of age.  Referred by Dr. Danny Dugan, Hurst, Texas.  Cody is in fairly good health.  He does have exercise induced asthma, but really has not had much difficulties with that recently.  His primary concerns are as follows:

Jaw growth.
Crookedness in the teeth in the lower jaw in a horizontal direction. 
Difficulties breathing through the nose at night.

Cody takes the following medications:

Allegra.
Singulair.

Cody reports no TMJ issues.  He has no TMJ pain or myofascial pain.  He gets headaches about one time a month in the temporal areas at about a level of 6.  He rates his jaw function, diet, and disability at 0.  He has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo nor hearing loss and has no other joint involvement.  He is aware of clenching at night, although his parents say when they go into his room he is breathing through his mouth, snoring, and with his jaws open.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Cody has fairly good left-to-right symmetry except the nose is tipped off towards the left side.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm on the left and 4 mm on the right.  The nasal tip is probably about 4 to 5 mm off towards the left side.  The maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to the right side.  The mandibular dental midline is pretty close to being on the facial midline as is the chin.  In profile view, Cody has some maxillary AP deficiency of probably about 5 to 6 mm.  The chin is retruded about 15 mm.  Intraorally, Cody has all of his teeth in the upper and lower arch back through the first molars.  The second and third molars have been previously extracted.  He has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior arch.  He has good attached gingiva.  He has just a slight Class II cuspid relationship being about 1 to 2 mm Class II.  He has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm.  He has a got 1-2 mm overjet.  He has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side.  He has had a gum graft performed on the lower anterior arch.  Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy with the tonsils mild to moderately enlarged.  Intranasally, the septum anteriorly is displaced off towards the left side and almost lateral to the columella.  The turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  He has a wide columella and narrow nostrils.  Nasal airway obstruction is probably mild to moderate.  Cody has no history of TMJ issues.  He has been in orthodontic treatment since the age of 7 on and off and is currently in maxillary appliances.  To palpation, he has some very minimal tenderness over the temporalis muscles, but no where else around the head and neck area. Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm.  The excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.    Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular second and third molars.  He has orthodontic appliances on from first bicuspid through first bicuspid in the upper arch and a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints in that view.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear.  Turbinates are moderate in size.  

Axial view shows that the nasal septum is deviated off towards the left side anteriorly.  The left turbinate is quite large compared to the right inferior turbinate.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that appears a little small in size.  There may be a little bit of anterior beaking in a couple of views.  The joint space appears fairly well balanced.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit better morphological shape to it.  The joint space looks reasonable.  The articular eminences in both joints have a moderate inclination.

Left TMJ coronal view shows significant downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa.  There appears to be decreased lateral joint space.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good width to it.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Cody has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  He has some adenoid tissue off the nasopharynx.  Airway space from the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall is about 5 mm, and, from the base of the tongue, the posterior pharyngeal wall is 10 mm.  

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
High occlusal plane angle.
Slight Class II occlusion by 2 mm.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Hypertrophied left nasal turbinate.
Deviated nasal septum.
External nasal deformity. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch. 
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch. 
2.	MRI of left and right TMJs to rule out TMJ pathology.
3.	Surgery (recommend performing at the age of 17).
	a.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward, down graft 			posteriorly, and level the occlusal plan anteroposteriorly as well as transversely.
	b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a 				counterclockwise direction approximately 11 mm. 
	c.	Augmentation genioplasty of 5 mm.
	d.	Left turbinectomy.
	e.	Nasal septoplasty. 
	f.	External rhinoplasty.
	g.	Consider TMJ surgery if MRI confirms joint pathology.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.


