KERRY NELSON								02/28/2011

Kerry is 39 years old, birth date 06/09/1971.  Referred by Dr. Timothy Shannon, 2214 W. Boyd Street, Norman, OK 73069 and also by Dr. Bill Blum, 700 24th Avenue, Norman, OK 73069.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Kerry has good left-to-right facial symmetry.  She has a brachiocephalic facial morphology.  Upper lip length is about 23 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about -1.  In profile view, she has fairly good facial balance with maybe just some slight very minimal AP mandibular deficiency.  Intraorally, Kerry has all of her lower teeth and upper teeth back through the second molars.  She is basically Class I occlusion with just perhaps a slight Class II tendency.  She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over most of the head and neck area but without any pain over the temporalis area or the retromandibular area.  The incisal opening is 35 mm.  The excursion movements are 4.5 mm to the right and 4 mm to the left.  She could open to about 22 mm without significant pain or discomfort.  Oropharyngeal tissues appear normal and healthy.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  There appears to be some anterior beaking and arthritis in the left joint.  The right joint looks a little bit better.  She may have a mucocele on the left maxillary sinus.  The turbinates appear moderate in size.  The septum appears reasonably straight.  

Coronal view shows that the septum appears reasonably straight.  The sinuses appear somewhat clear at this particular cut.  The turbinates are moderate in size.  

Axial view shows that the septum is straight.  The turbinates are moderate in size.  She does have a mucous retention cyst in the anterior aspect of the maxillary left sinus.  The right sinus is clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that the condyle does demonstrate some anterior beaking present.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  The joint space actually looks reasonably good vertically and posteriorly.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of anterior beaking.  The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.  The joint space actually looks fairly reasonable and actually appears decreased at the anterior aspect between the condyle and the articular eminence.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  There may be a slight decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint. 

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.  There is decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the fossa.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a skeletal Class I occlusal and skeletal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway may be slightly decreased in AP dimension, although she has no symptoms relative to sleep apnea.  

Basic diagnoses for Kerry would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and possible articular disc dislocations.
Clenching and bruxism at nighttime and also during the day.
TMJ pain, headaches, and myofascial pain.
Polyarthralgia indicating a systemic disorder or condition.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Medications.  Klonopin 1 mg tablets, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x3.
MRI of left and right TMJ.  
Treatment recommendations will be dependent on outcome of medication treatment and MRI evaluation.  
