DR. FREDERICK (“RICK”) NEWTON							05-21-04

He is 60 years old and a self-referral.

Patient History

He is currently under orthodontic management by Dr. Bill Schmohl with Invisalign orthodontic management. 

Patient Concerns

Doesn’t like his smile
Teeth are not aligned properly
Snoring
Sleep apnea symptoms 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, upper lip length is 26 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is -4 to -5 mm. 

In profile view, he has fairly good AP balance of his upper lip, cheeks, and nose. Chin is about 8 to 10 mm AP deficient. Vertical dimension is short. Chin-neckline is a little bit short. 

Intraorally, he has basically a Class I occlusion, but both maxillary and mandibular arches are require narrow transversely. He has some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. May have a reverse tooth-size discrepancy but will need to get models to evaluate that. Oropharynx appears clear. Turbinates appear moderate in size, and as best as I could tell, his nasal airway is fairly good. He claims to have no TMJ problems, has no headaches, earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or loss of hearing problems. 

Radiographic Evaluation


Basic Diagnoses:  Based on clinical and radiographic analyses, his diagnoses are as follows:

Vertical maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
Slight AP maxillary deficiency
AP microgenia
Crowding, lower anterior arch
Crowding, maxillary anterior arch
Slight reverse curve of occlusion, upper arch
Narrow transverse arch widths in both the maxilla and mandible
Decreased oropharyngeal airway of about 5 mm
Snoring
Sleep apnea symptoms 

Recommended Treatment:  Treatment options include the following:

Surgery, stage I
Placement of distraction osteogenesis device in the mandible
Vertical midline osteotomy
Latent period of 12 to 14 days
Initiate distraction at a rate of 0.5 mm per day

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch 

Surgery, stage II
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to downgraft the maxilla approximately 6 mm anteriorly and about 8 mm posteriorly
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
