ZACHARY NEWTON									05-21-04

Zach is 17 years old and referred by Dr. Bill Schmohl, San Rafael, CA.

Patient History

The primary concern that Zach has is that his teeth don’t fit together very well. Zach is not sure when his jaw problems began since he doesn’t really have any significant symptomatology. The etiology is unknown. He had a palatal expander about five or six years ago but no other orthodontic treatment. He takes no medications. No earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, hearing loss, and no other joint problems. He is aware that he does clench and brux when he sleeps and sometimes may do that even during the day. He rates his headaches at 0, TMJ at 0, pain around the head and neck area at 0, jaw function and diet at 1, disability at 0. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Zach has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 5 mm off to the left side. Chin is pretty much on the facial midline. Right side of the inferior border of the mandible appears to be elevated probably about 4 mm compared to the left side. 

In profile view, Zach has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about a good 4 mm at the incisal area. Has an obtuse nasolabial angle, and upper lip supralabrale is probably about 3 mm posterior to subnasale. Chin is approximately 18 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is short, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. Zach tends to posture his head in a neck postured forward head position with the head tipped upward.

Intraorally, Zach has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars erupted. Has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch. A lot of staining on his teeth. Hygiene could be significantly improved. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. Some moderate crowding, upper anterior arch and a slight Class II, division II occlusal relationship. Actually, on the right side he is Class II end-on by about 2 mm on the right side and about the same on the left side. In a centric relation, mandibular dental midline is shifted probably about 3 to 4 mm off to the left side. Has about a 2-mm anterior overbite. Has a crossbite posteriorly on the right side. No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly. Incisal opening is 53 mm. Excursive movement to the right 13 mm and to the left 10 mm. 

Oropharynx appears clear. Tonsils are present, although they appear noninflamed although a little bit large. The uvula is hyperplastic and quite long in length. Turbinates are moderate-sized intranasally. Septum is a little bit deviated but not too significantly. Appears to have a good functional nasal airway with a really wide intranasal dimension. He breathes well through both sides of his nose. 

Tooth-size analysis reveals a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm. 

Zach recalls now that a year or two ago he did have some clicking he believes that was in his right jaw joint. That clicking no longer exists, but he distinctly remembers it a couple of years ago.
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses look relatively clear though there are some septae in the sinuses. Third molars are impacted with the lowers being horizontal and the uppers being vertical. Nasal airway looks relatively good. Appears to have some significant arthritic changes in the right TMJ and to a lesser degree in the left TMJ. No other significant changes noted. 

Waters view shows that there appears to be some transverse asymmetry in the lower arch with the right side being higher than the left side both at the occlusal plane and also at the inferior border. Left turbinate appears to obliterate the nasal airway and appears to be some septal spurring. Right turbinate appears small in size. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be arthritic and appears to be smaller in size than normal. Anterior beaking is present. Condyle is displaced posteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Superior joint space is slightly increased perhaps. 

Left TMJ shows a condyle with some flattening of the anterior head and a little sclerosis there. Some anterior beaking is present. Slightly decreased posterior joint space. 

Opening tomograms show good translation of both condyles.

Cephalometrically, Zach has a Class II skeletal relationship and a high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway surprisingly is good with the dimension at the soft palate area being about 9 mm and at the base of the tongue almost 14 mm. 

Basic Diagnoses

AP maxillary deficiency
Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
Transverse maxillary deficiency
AP mandibular deficiency
AP microgenia
Class II end-on division II malocclusion
Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with the right side being worse than the left side with probable evidence of condylar resorption on the right side
Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars
Significant crowding, lower anterior arch
Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm

Recommended Treatment

MRI of bilateral TMJs

Presurgical orthodontics 
Align and level maxillary arch 
Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 to 3 mm of tooth structure to compensate for the significant tooth-size discrepancy and help minimize forward flaring of the lower incisors
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors (if MRI confirms disc displacements)
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, expand it, and downgraft it posteriorly to level the occlusal plane
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
HTR implant to anterior mandible
Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
