KATIE NIELSEN									     03-16-05

Katie is 20 years old, date of birth 12/22/84, and referred by Dr. Michael Parsons, an oral and maxillofacial surgeon.

Patient Concerns

Constant dull aching and pain in her TMJs
Severe headaches
Difficulties eating and chewing
Pain down through the face and neck area

Patient History

Katie had orthodontic treatment from about the age of 13 and the appliances removed when she was about 14 or 15. At about the age of 16, she began developing occasional clicking and popping in her jaw joints. About one year ago, her problems got significantly worse where she started to click more consistently and developed a significant headache and TMJ pain problems. The etiology is unknown. Since then she has tried splint therapy, chiropractic treatment, acupuncture, and electrical stimulation. She is on an extremely soft diet at this time. The splint treatment made her pain and headaches much worse probably because it initiated clenching which aggravated her situation. 

The only medication she currently takes is Advil and lots of it. She has no problems with earaches, vertigo, or hearing loss but does get tinnitus at night when she lies down. No other joints bother her. She has no allergies and no difficulties wearing earrings. She doesn’t feel that she clenches or bruxes her teeth except when she wears a splint. 

She has a Class I occlusion with an anterior deep bite of about 5 mm. She gets headaches 3 to 4 times per week in the temporal and the frontal area at a level of 8. She rates her average TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain levels around the head and neck area at 7, jaw function at 8, diet at 7, and disability at 7. To self-palpation, she has high moderate to low severe pain around the temporalis muscles, moderate pain over the masseter muscles, mild pain over the SCMs, posterior neck, and low severe pain to palpation over the TMJs bilaterally. 

Basic Diagnoses
Based on my conversation with her and her MRI, her diagnoses would be as follows:

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations  
Relative mandibular hyperplasia
Class I deep bite occlusion
Severe headaches
Severe TMJ pain
Myofascial pain
Masticatory dysfunction

Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics 
Place appliances on maxillary and mandibular teeth

Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies 

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 


Katie has had previous orthodontics. More recently she has been to see Dr. James Willbrand (314-928-8286) whom she would prefer to go to for the required orthodontic management. I will do a detailed treatment plan to Dr. Willbrand. Discussed with Katie and her mother, Barb, the diagnoses, indicated treatment, and potential risks and complications including bleeding, nerve damage, infection, etc. They understand. They also understand that the surgery may not fix the problems, although I feel based on the information I have to date that she would have about a 90% chance of doing well. They are to call my office if they have any questions.
